A CONCISE AND IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION TO WHICH IS
PREFIXED, A GENERAL HISTORY OF NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA. TOGETHER WITH An
ACCOUNT of the DISCOVERY and SETTLEMENT of NORTH AMERICA, and a VIEW of the
PROGRESS, CHARACTER, and POLITICAL STATE of the COLONIES previous to the
REVOLUTION. FROM THE BEST AUTHORITIES.

BY JOHN LENDRUM.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, (PROPRIETORS OF THE WORK)
FAUST'S STATUE, No. 45, NEWBURY STREET. 1795.

PREFACE.
IT is of great importance to every citizen of the United States, in whatever
station of life, to be acquainted with the history of his own country, and, in
a secondary degree, with that of America in general.

The requisite expense and time, however, for acquiring this information, are
neither within the reach of every purse, nor the leisure of every reader. And
there are many whom neither of these obstacles need deter, who, nevertheless,
look upon a large book, as a feeble traveller ^oes upon a long journey, to be a
task beyond their patience and perseverance to get through.

To obviate these difficulties, the compiler of ^he following work has been at
great pains to ^omprise in small bulk and at a low price, from ^he best
authorities, a general history of America, and an account of the United States
from ^he discovery of North America, till the establishment of the federal
government.

In that part of the work which regards the ^^ate and character of the colonies
before the ^^^^e war, the authorities are quoted. This, the ^^ature of the
subject, and the remoteness of the ^eriod, seemed to demand. But in the
remainder of the work, it was thought unnecessary to swell it with quotations.

The Compiler has endeavored to unite brevity with perspicuity; and has
accordingly abridged the matter from his authorities, as he judged necessary.
He has likewise frequently used the words as well as the ideas of the writers,
without particularly apprizing the reader of it.

The Annual Register, Dr. Goldsmith's History of England, and the Continuation
of Hume's History, have been used in describing foreign occurrences, connected
with the Revolution. The writings of Dr. Belknap, Dr. Ramsay, Dr. Gordon, and
Dr. Morse, have been freely made use of in what regarded American affairs. I^
remains with the public to decide, whether the work is executed with judgment
and impartiality. And the candor of the learned will, it is expected, excuse
any inaccuracies which may have possibly ^rept in.

BOSTON, April 21, 1795.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.
CHAP. I. Extent and boundaries of America -- Grand objects which it presents
to view -- Its mountains -- Rivers -- Lakes -- Its excessive luxuriance of
vegetation. Page 13 CHAP. II. General description of the natives -- Their
peculiarities of ^rnament and dress -- Remarkable insensibility to pain, and to
the inclemencies of the weather -- Terrible trials undergone by their chiefs.
Page 15 CHAP. III. Customs and manners of the ^^origines of North America, more
particularly -- Their p^^siveness and taciturnity -- form of government --
Public assemblies -- Wampu^^^, or belts. Page 24 CHAP. IV. Customs, etc. of the
natives, continued -- Their wars -- Ceremonies at setting out -- Ensigns --
Military habits -- Quickness of their senses -- Vigilance and circumspection --
Manner of sighting -- Treatment of prisoners -- Tortures -- Constancy of the
sufferers -- Surprising contrast in the American character. Page 28 CHAP. V.
Customs, etc. of the natives, continued -- Treatment of their dead friends --
Superstitions -- Condition of their women -- Ardent love of liberty -- Crimes
and punishments -- Peculiar manners of different nations -- Longevity. Page 38
CHAP. VI. Other pictures of the native Americans -- Anecdote of an Algonquin
woman -- Reproached with pu^illanimity -- Perfidy -- Weakness of understanding
-- Indolence and stupidity -- Vanity and conceit -- Their eloquence disparaged.
Page 46 CHAP. VII. All the charges in the foregoing chapter partial, and not
free from misrepresentation -- Buffon and M. de Pa^w's descriptions refuted --
Errors as to their want of beard -- Form and aspect -- Constitution and
corpor^al abilities -- Labor and industry -- Mental qualities -- M. de Pa^w's
proofs of their cowardice refuted -- Instances of courage, fortitude and
^^^quence -- Representations of COLUMBUS -- Conclusions concerning their
capacities -- Ingenuity -- Tokens of science -- Specimen of their morality.
Page 54 CHAP. VIII. M. Buffon's n^tions concerning the degeneracy of the
inhabitants of the new world, refuted by Mr. Jefferson -- Their seeming
coldness to the (...) accounted for -- Why they have few children -- Their
sensibility, etc. -- Their courage -- Story of Logan -- Specimen of Indian
eloquence -- Other anecdotes -- Their polit^ness and civility -- Their
hospitality. Page 70 CHAP. IX. Of the peopling of America -- Old and new
continents supposed to have been formerly joined -- At present separated only
by a narrow strait -- Conjectures concerning the first migrations into the new
continent -- Mr. Pennant's opinion -- Customs, etc. common to the eastern
Asiatics and the Ameriicans -- Brute creation migrated by the same route. Page
81 CHAP. X. Remains of antiquity in America. Page 96 CHAP. XI. The ancients
supposed to have had some imperfect notion of a new world -- (...) of the Welsh
to the discovery of America -- Those of the Norwegians (...) -- Projects of
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS -- His voyage -- Astonishment occasioned by observing the
variation of the compass -- His perilous situation -- His crew ready to mutiny
-- Their joy on descrying land -- They land on one of the islands of the new
world -- The conti^^^^ afterward discovered -- The new world derives its name
from AMERICUS VE^^^CIUS -- Divisions of America -- Its productions -- Its
different possessors. Page 99 CHAP. XII. Discovery of North America, and the
attempts made to form settlements in it, till king James I. established the
London and Plymouth companies. Page 114 CHAP. XIII. Account of the settlement,
progress, and political state of the British colonies, within the present
limits of the United States. Page 122 CHAP. XIV. A summary view of the state
and character of the British colonies, within the present limits of the United
States. Page 219 CHAP. XV. The capture of Louisbourg -- French territories in
North America after the peace in 1748 -- Colonel Washington's first exploits --
Congress held at Albany -- Their proceedings -- War with France -- Extent of
the British dominions in North America at the peace in 1763 -- State of the
colonies at that period. Page 2^7 CHAP. XVI. Causes of the disturbances --
Proceedings in the colonies -- Committee of correspondence chosen in Boston --
Congress meet at New York -- Their address to the king, etc. -- The stamp (...)
repealed -- Proceedings in the colonies, previous to the commencement of
hostilities. Page 255 CHAP. XVII. A brief account of the political disputes
which convulsed Gr^^ Britain, from the beginning of the reign of George III.
(...) the commencement of hostilities in America. Page 2^^ CHAP. XVIII. The
East India company e^powered to export their own tea^ -- The tea thrown into
the sea at Boston -- Proceedings of the British parliament -- Boston port bill
-- Massachusetts Bay (...) -- Bill for the administration of justice -- Quebec
bill -- Chief j^^tice Oliver -- General Gage arrives in Boston -- Solemn leag^^
and covenant -- Measures for holding a general Congres^^ Boston ^^ck fortified
-- Inhabitants of Boston reduced to gr^distress -- Preparations in the colonies
for resistance -- Proceedings of congress -- Petition to the king, etc. --
Proceedings o^ parliament -- Violent debates on American affairs -- Concilia^^
motion by lord Chatham, rejected -- Coercive measures resol^^ on -- Lord
North's conciliatory plan, called his olive branch -- Other conciliatory plans
rejected -- Petitions against the obnoni^^ acts -- Extent and importance of the
American trade -- ^^morial from the assembly of New York, rejected -- Dr.
Fra^^lin's fruitless endeavors to promote a conciliation -- He return to
America. Page 29^
THE HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
GENERAL HISTORY OF AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
Extent and Boundaries of America -- Grand Objects which it presents t^ View --
its Mountains -- Rivers -- Lakes -- its excessive Luxuriance of Vegetation.

BEFORE we proceed to describe the gradual step^ by which America finally
obtained her independence, we shall lay before the reader a general history of
America; and an account of the settlement and political state of the colonies.

America is one of the four quarters of the world, probably, the largest of the
whole, and is, from its late discovery, frequently denominated the New World,
or New Hemisphere.

This vast country extends from the 80th degree of north, to the 56th degree of
south, latitude; and, where its breadth is known, from the 35th to the 136th
degree west longitude from London; stretching between 8000 and 9000 miles in
length, and in its greatest breadth 3690. It sees both hemispheres, has two
summers and a double winter, and enjoys almost all the variety of climates
which the earth affords. It is washed by the two great oceans. To the eastward,
it has the Atlantic, which divides it from Europe and Africa; to the west, it
has the Pacific or Great South Sea, by which it is separated from Asia. By
these seas it may, and does, carry on a direct commerce with the other three
parts of the world.

America is not of equal breadth throughout its whole extent; but is divided
into two great continents, called North, and South, America, by an isthmus 1500
miles long, and which, at Darien, about Lat. 9 N. is only 60 miles over. This
isthmus forms, with the northern and southern continents, a vast gulf, in
which lie a great number of islands, called the West Indies, in
contradistinction to the eastern parts of Asia, which are called the
East Indies.

Next to the extent of the New World, the grandeur of the objects which it
presents to view, is most apt to strike the eye of an observer. Nature seems
here to have carried on her operations upon a larger scale and with a bolder
hand, and to have distinguished the features of this country by a peculiar
magnificence. The mountains of America are much superior in height to those in
the other divisions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may be
considered as the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above the sea than the
top of the Pyrenees. The most elevated point of the Andes, according to Don
Ulloa, is twenty thousand, two hundred, and eighty feet, which is, at least,
seven thousand, one hundred, and two feet above the Peak of Teneriffe, which is
the highest known mountain in the ancient continent.

From the lofty and extensive mountains of America, descend rivers with which
the streams of Europe, of Asia, or of Africa, are not to be compared, either
for length of course, or for the vast volumes of water which they pour into the
oceans. The Danube, the Indus the Ganges, or the Nile, in the Ancient
Hemisphere, are not of equal magnitude with the St. Lawrence, the Missouri, or
the Mississippi, in North America; or the Maragnon, the Oroonoko, or the Plata,
in South America. The rivers in the latter of these American continents are
like vast arms of the sea.

The lakes of the New World are no less conspicuous for grandeur than its
mountains and rivers. There is nothing in other parts of the globe which
resembles the prodigious chain of lakes in North America. They may be properly
^ermed inland seas of fresh water; and even those of the second or third class
of magnitude, are of larger circuit (the Caspian sea excepted) than the
greatest lake of the ancient continent.

The luxuriance of the vegetable creation in the New World is extremely great.
In the southern provinces, where the moisture of the climate is aided by the
warmth of the sun, the woods are almost impervious, and the surface of the
ground is hid from the eye, under a thick covering of shrubs, of herbs, and
weeds. In the northern provinces, although the forests are not encumbered with
the same wild luxuriance of vegetation, the trees of various species are
generally more lofty, and often much larger, than are to be seen in any other
parts of the world.

CHAP. II.
General Description of the Natives -- their Peculiarities of Ornament and
Dress -- remarkable Insensibility to Pain, and to the Inclemencies of the
Weather -- terrible Trials undergone by their Chiefs.

WE will now turn our attention to the Aborigines, or natives of the New World.
At the time when his great continent was made more generally known to the
Europeans by the discoveries of Christopher Columbus, and of the illustrious
navigators who imbibed the spirit and enthusiasm of that great man, it was
found inhabited by various tribes and nations of men, who differed, in many
respects, from most of the people in the three other quarters of the world. In
their physical history, however, the greatest peculiarity in the Americans is
their complexion, and the little difference which is observed, in this respect,
throughout the whole extent of the American continent.

The inhabitants of the inland parts of South America, where that continent is
widest, and consequently, the influence of the sun most powerful, have never
been accurately compared with those of Canada, or more northerly parts, at
least as far as we know. Yet this ought to have been done, and that in many
instances too, before it could be asserted so positively, as most authors do,
that there is not the least difference of complexion among the natives of
America. Indeed, so many systems have been formed concerning these singular
people, that it is very difficult to obtain a true knowledge of the most simple
facts, even from the best and most unprejudiced writers. -- If we may believe
the Abbe Raynal, the Californians are swarthier than the Mexicans; and so
positive is he in this opinion, that he gives a reason for it. "This difference
of color," says he, "proves, that the civilized life of society subverts, or
totally changes, the order and laws of nature, since we find, under the
temperate zone, a savage people that are blacker than the civilized nations of
the torrid zone." -- On the other hand, Dr. Robertson classes all the
inhabitants of Spanish America together with regard to color, whether they are
civilized or uncivilized; and when he speaks of Californa, takes no notice of
any peculiarity in their color more than others. -- The general appearance of
the indigenous Americans in various districts, is thu^ described by the
chevalier P^^to: "They are all of (...) copper color, with some diversity of
shade, not in proportion to their distance from the equator, but according to
the degree of elevation of the territory in which they reside. Those who live
in a high country are fairer than those in the marshy low lands on the coast.
Their face is round; farther removed, perhaps, than that of any people from an
oval shape. Their forehead is small; the extremity of their ears far from the
face; their lips thick; their nose flat; their eyes black, or of a chestnut
color, small, but capable of discerning objects at a great distance. Their
hair is always thick and sleek, and without any tendency to curl. At the first
aspect, a South American appears to be mild and innocent; but, on a more
attentive view, one discovers in his countenance something wild, distrustful
and fullen."

The following account of the native Americans is given by Don Antonio Ulloa,
in his late work, entitled Memoires philosophiques, historiques, et phisiques,
concernant la decouverte de l'Amerique.

The American Indians are naturally of a color bo^dering upon red. Their
frequent exposure to the sun and wind changes it to their ordinary dusky hue.
The temperature of the air appears to have little or no influence in this
respect. There is no perceptible difference in complexion between the
inhabitants of the high and those of the low parts of Peru; yet the climates
are of an extreme difference. Nay, the Indians who live as far as 40 degrees
and upwards south or north of the equator, are not to be distinguished, in
point of color, from those immediately under it.

There is, also, a general conformation of features and person, which, more or
less characterizeth them all. Their chief distinctions, in these respects, are
a small forehead, partly covered with hair almost to the eyebrows, little eyes,
the nose thin, pointed, and bent toward the upper lip; a broad face, large
ears, black, thick, and lank hair; the legs well formed, the feet small, the
body thick and muscular; little or no beard on the face, and that little never
extended beyond a small part of the chin and upper lip. It may easily be
supposed that this general description cannot apply, in all its parts, to every
individual; but all of them partake so much of it, that they may be easily
distinguished even from the mulattoes, who come nearest to them in point of
color.

The resemblance among all the American tribes is not less remarkable in
respect to their genius, character, manners, and particular customs. The most
distant tribes are, in these respects, as similar as though they formed but one
nation.

All the Indian nations have a peculiar pleasure in painting their bodies of a
red color, with a certainspecies of earth. The mine of Guancavelica was
formerly of no other use than to supply them with this material for dyeing
their bodies; and the cinnabar extracted from it was applied entirely to this
purpose. The tribes in Louisiana and in Canada have the same passion; hence
minium is the commodity most in demand there.

It may, perhaps, seem singular, that these nations, whose natural color is
red, should affect the same color as an artificial ornament. But, it may be
observed they do nothing in this respect but what corresponds to the practice
of Europeans, who also study to heighten and display to advantage the natural
red and white of their complexions. The Indians of Peru have now, indeed,
abandoned the custom of painting their bodies: but it was common among them
before they were conquered by the Spaniards; and it still remains the custom of
all those tribes who have preserved their liberty. The northern nations of
America, besides the red color which is predominant, employ also black, white,
blue, and green, in painting their bodies.

The adjustment of these colors is a matter of as great consideration with the
Indians of Louisiana and the vast regions extending to the north, as the
ornaments of dress among the most polished nations. The business itself they
call Mactaher, and they do not fail to apply all their talents and assiduity to
accomplish it in the most finished manner. No lady of the greatest fashion ever
consulted her mirror with more anxiety, than the Indians do while painting
their bodies. The colors are applied with the utmost accuracy and address.
Upon the eye lids, precisely at the root of the eye lashes, they draw two
lines, as fine as the smallest thread; the same upon the lips, the openings of
the nostrils, the eyebrows, and the ears; of which last they even follow all
the inflexions and sinuosities. As to the rest of the face, they distribute
various figures, in all which the red predominates, and the other colors are
assorted so as to throw it out to the best advantage. The neck also receives
its proper ornaments; a thick coat of vermillion commonly distinguishes the
cheeks. Five or six hours are requisite for accomplishing all this with the
nicety which they affect. As their first attempts do not always succeed to
their wish, they efface them, and begin anew upon a better plan. No coquette
is more fastidious in her choice of ornament, none more vain when the important
adjustment is finished. Their delight and self-satisfaction are then so great,
that the mirror is hardly ever laid down. An Indian mactached to his mind, is
the vainest of all the human species. The other parts of the body are left in
their natural state, and, excepting what is called a cachecul, they go entirely
^aked.

Such of them as have made themselves eminent for ^ravery, or other
qualifications, are distinguished by figures painted on their bodies. They
introduce the co^ours by making punctures on their skin, and the extent of
surface which this ornament covers is proportioned ^o the exploits they have
performed. Some paint only their arms, others both their arms and legs; others
again, their thighs, while those who have attained the ^ummit of warlike renown
have their bodies painted from the waist upwards. This is the heraldry of the
Indians; the devices of which are, probably, more exactly adjusted to the
merits of the persons who bear them, than those of more civilized countries.

Besides these ornaments, the warriors also carry plumes of feathers on their
heads, their arms, and ancles. These, likewise, are tokens of valo^^, and none
but such as have been thus distinguished may wear them.

The propensity to indolence is equal among all the tribes of Indians,
civilized, or savage. The only employment of those who have preserved their
independence is hunting and fishing. In some districts, the women exercise a
little agriculture, in raising Indian corn, and pompions, of which they form a
species of aliment, by bruising them together: they, also, prepare the ordinary
beverage among them, taking care, at the same time, of the children, of whom
the fathers take no charge.

The female Indians of all the conquered regions of South America practice what
is called the ur^u (a word which among them signifies elevation.) It consists
in throwing forward the hair from the crown of the head, upon the brow, and
cutting it round from the ears to above the eye; so that the forehead and eye
brows are entirely covered. The same custom takes place in the Northern
countries. The female inhabitants of both regions tie the rest of their hair
behind so exactly in the same fashion, that it might be supposed the effect of
mutual imitation. This, however, being impossible, from the vast distance that
separates them, is thought to countenance the supposition of the whole of
America being originally planted with one race of people.

This custom does not take place among the males. Those of the higher parts of
Peru wear long and flowing hair, which they reckon a great ornament. In the
lower parts of the same country they cut it short, on account of the heat of
the climate; a circumstance i^ which they imitate the Spaniards. The
inhabitants of Louisiana pl^ck out their hair by the roots, from the crown of
the head forwards, in order to obtain a large forehead, otherwise denied them
by nature. The rest of their hair they cut as short as possible, to prevent
their enemies from seizing them by it in battle, and also to prevent them from
easily getting their scalp, should they fall into their hands as prisoners.

According to Don Ulloa, the whole race of the American Indians is
distinguished by an uncommon thickness of skin, and by an hardness of their
fibers; which circumstances, in the opinion of this learnned Spanish writer,
contribute to that insensibility to bodily pain, for which these singular
people are so remarkable. Our author adduces an instance, in support of this
insensibility, in the Americans, in the case of an Indian, who was under the
necessity of submitting to be ^ut for the stone. This operation, it is well
known, seldom lasts above four, or five, minutes. Unfavourable circumstances,
in his case, prolonged it to the uncommon period of 27 minutes. Yet, all this
time, the patient gave no tokens of the extreme pain, commonly attending this
operation: he complained only as a person does who feels some slight
uneasiness. At last, the stone was extracted. Two days after, he expressed a
desire for food, and on the eighth day from the operation he quitted his bed,
free from pain, although the wound was not yet thoroughly closed. The same want
of sensibility, he says, is observed in cases of fractures, wounds, and other
accidents, of a similar nature. In all these cases the cure is easily effected,
and they seem ^o suffer less present pain than any other race of men. The
skulls, which have been taken up in their ancient ^urying grounds, are of a
greater thickness than that ^ompages of bones is commonly found to be; being
from six to seven lines from the outer to the inner superficies.

It is natural to infer from hence, says Ulloa, that their comparative
insensibility to pain is owing to coarser and stronger organization, than that
of other nations. The ease with which they endure the severities of climate is,
he thinks, another proof of this, The inhabitants of the higher parts of Peru
live amidst perpetual frost and snow. Although their clothing i^ very slight,
they support this inclement temperature, without the least inconvenience.
Habit, it is to be confessed, may contribute a good deal to this, but much also
is to be ascribed to the compact texture of their ski^^ which defends them from
the impression of cold through their pores. We must confess, however,
notwithstanding the assertions and conjectures of an author so respectable as
Don Ulloa, that we are not very confident, that either the skins, or the skulls
of the Americans are thicker than the skins and skulls of many other nations of
mankind. But we do not wish, in this place, to expatiate on this subject, which
can only be reduced to certainty by the investigations of the anatomist or
naturalist.

The northern Indians resemble them in this respect* The utmost rigours of the
winter season do not prevent them from following the chase almost naked. It is
true, they wear a kind of woollen cloak, or sometimes the skin of a wild beast,
upon their shoulders; but, besides that it covers only a small part of their
body, it would appear that they use it rather for ornament than warmth. In
fact, they wear it indiscriminately, in the severities of winter, and in the
sultriest heats of summer, when neither Europeans nor Negroes can suffer any
but the slightest clothing. They even frequently throw aside this cloak when
they go a hunting, that it may not embarrass them, in traversing their forests,
where, they say, the thorns and undergrowth would take hold of it; while, on
the contrary, they slide smoothly over the surface of their naked bodies. At
all times they go with their heads uncovered, without suffering the least
inconvenience, either from the cold, or from those coups de soleil, which in
Louisiana are so often fatal to the inhabitants of other climates.

The Indians of South America distinguish themselves by modern dresses, in
which they affect various tastes. Those of the high country, and of the valleys
in Peru, dress partly in the Spanish fashion. Instead of hats they wear bonnets
of coarse double cloth, the weight of which neither seems to incommode them
when they go to warmer climates, nor does the accidental want of them seem to
be felt in situations where the most piercing cold reigns. Their legs and feet
are always bare, if we except a sort of sandals made of the skins of oxen. The
inhabitants of South America, compared with those of North America, are
described as generally more feeble in their frame; less vigorous in the efforts
of the mind; of gentler dispositions, more addicted to pleasure, and sunk in
indolence. -- This, however, is not universally the case. Many of their nations
are as intrepid and enterprising as any others on the whole continent. Among
the tribes on the banks of the Oroonoko, if a warrior aspires to the post of
captain, his probation begins with a long fast, more rigid than any ever
observed by the most abstemious hermit. At the close of this the chiefs
assemble; and each gives him three lashes with a large whip, applied so
vigorously, that his body is almost flayed. If he be^rays the least symptom of
impatience, or even of sensibility, he is disgraced, for ever, and is rejected
as unworthy of the honor. After some interval, his constancy is proved by a
more excruciating trial. He is said in his hammock with his hands bound fast;
and ^n innumerable multitude of venomous ants, whose bite occasions a violent
pain and inflammation, are thrown upon him. The judges of his merit stand
around the ^ammock; and while these cruel insects fasten upon ^he most sensible
parts of his body, a sigh, a groan, or ^n involuntary motion, expressive of
what he suffers, would exclude him from the dignity of which he is ambitious.
Even after this evidence, his fortitude (...) not deemed to be sufficiently
ascertained, till he (...) stood another test, more severe, if possible, than
the former. He is again suspended in his hammock, a^^ covered with the leaves
of the palmetto. A fire (...) stinking herbs is kindled underneath, so as he
may f^^ its heat, and be involved in smoke. Though scorch^^ and almost
suffocated, he must continue to endure the with the same patient insensibility.
Many perish (...) this essay of their firmness and courage; but such (...) go
through it with applause, receive the ensigns of the new dignity with much
solemnity, and are ever af^^^ regarded as leaders of approved resolution, whose
behavior, in the most trying situations, will do hon^^ to their countrty. In
North America, the previous t^^al of a warrior is neither so formal, nor so
seven though, even there, before a youth is permitted to b^^ arms, his patience
and fortitude are proved by blow^ by fire, and by insults, more intolerable to
a haugh^ spirit than either.

CHAP. III.
Customs and Manners of the Aborigines of North America, more particularly --
their Pensiveness and T^^turnity -- Form of Government -- Public Assemblies
Wampums, or Belts.

OF all the manners and customs of the North Americans more particularly, the
following the most consistent account that can be collected fr^^ the best
informed and most impartial writers.

When the Europeans first arrived in America, the found the Indians quite
naked, except those parts whi^^ even the most uncultivated people usually con^^
Since that time, however, they generally use a coarse blanket, which they buy
of the neighboring planters

Their huts, or cabins, are made of stakes of wood driven into the ground, and
covered with branches of trees or reeds. They lie on the floor, either on mats,
or the skins of wild beasts. Their dishes are of timber, but their spoons are
made of the skulls of wild oxen, and their knives of flint. A kettle and a
large plate constitute almost the whole utensils of the family. -- Their diet
consists chiefly in what they procure by hunting; and sagamite, or pottage, is
likewise one of their most common kinds of food. The most honorable furniture
amongst them is a collection of the scalps of their enemies; with these they
ornament their huts, which are esteemed in proportion to the number of this
sort of spoils.

The character of the Indians is altogether founded upon their circumstances
and way of life. A people who are constantly employed in procuring the means of
a precarious subsistence, who live by hunting the wild animals, and who are
generally engaged in war with their neighbors, cannot be supposed to enjoy
much gaiety of temper or a high flow of spirits. The Indians, therefore, are in
general grave, even to sadness: they have nothing of that giddy vivacity
peculiar to some nations of Europe, and they despise it. Their behavior to
those about them is regular, modest, and respectful. Ignorant of the arts of
amusement, of which that of saying trifles agreeably is one of the most
considerable, they seldom speak but when they have something important to
observe; and all their actions, words, and even looks, are attended with some
meaning. This is extremely natural to men who are almost continually engaged in
pursuits, which to them are of the highest importance. Their subsistence
depends entirely only on what they procure with their hands; and, their lives,
their honor, and every thing dear to them, may be lost by the smallest
inattention to the designs of their enemies. As they have no particular object
(...) attach them to one place rather than another, they (...) wherever they
expect to find the necessaries of li^^ in greatest abundance. Cities, which are
the effects (...) agriculture and arts, they have none. The different tribes,
or nations, are, for the same reason, extreme^^ small, when compared with
civilized societies, in which industry, arts, agriculture, and commerce, have
united a vast number of individuals, whom a complicated lu^ury renders useful
to one another. These small tribe live at an immense distance; they are
separated by a desert frontier, and hid in the bosom of impenetrable and almost
boundless forests.

There is established in each society a certain speci^ of government, which
prevails over the whole continent of America, with exceeding little variation;
because over the whole of this continent the manners and way of life are nearly
similar and uniform. Without art^ riches, or luxury, the great instruments of
subjection in polished societies, an American has no method by which he can
render himself considerable among (...) companions but by a superiority in
personal qualities (...) body or mind. But, as Nature has not been very lavi^^
in her personal distinctions, where all enjoy the same education, all are
pretty much upon an equality, and wi^^ desire to remain so. Liberty, therefore,
is the prevailing passion of the Americans; and their government, under the
influence of this sentiment, is, perhaps, bett^^ secured than by the wisest
political regulations. They are very far, however, from despising all sort of
authority: they are attentive to the voice of wisdom, which experience has
conferred on the aged, and they en^^^ under the banners of the chief in whose
valor and military address they have learned to repose a just a^^ merited
considence. In every society, therefore, the^ is to be considered the power of
the chiefs and of the elders. Among those tribes which are most engaged (...)
war, the power of the chief, is, naturally, predominance because the idea of
having a military leader was the first source of his superiority, and the
continual exigencies of the state, requiring such a leader, will continue to
support, and even to enhance it. His power, however, is rather persuasive than
coercive; he is reverenced as a father, rather than feared as a monarch. He has
no guards, no prisons, no officers of justice, and one act of ill judged
violence would pull him from his humble throne. The elders in the other form of
govvernment, which may be considered as a mild and nominal aristocracy, have no
more power. In most countries, therefore, age alone is sufficient for acquiring
respect, influence, and authority. It is age which teaches experience, and
experience is the only source of knowledge among a savage people. Among those
persons business is conducted with the utmost simplicity, and which may recall,
to those who are acquainted with ^ntiquity, a picture of the most early ages.
The heads of families meet together in a house or cabin appointed for the
purpose. Here business is discussed; and here those of the nation,
distinguished for their eloquence or wisdom, have an opportunity of displaying
those talents. Their orators, like those of Homer, express themselves in a bold
figurative style, stronger than refined, or rather softened, nations can well
bear, and with gestures equally violent, but often extremely natural and
expressive. When the business is over, and they happen to be well provided with
food, they appoint a feast upon the occasion, of which almost the whole nation
partakes. The feast is accompanied with (...) song, in which the real or
fabulous exploits of their ^^refathers are celebrated. They have dances too,
though, like those of the Greeks and Romans, they are ^hiefly of the military
kind; and their music and danc^^g accompany every feast.

To assist their memory, they have belts of small shells, (...) beads, of
different colors, each representing a par^cular object, which is marked by
their color and arrangement. At the conclusion of every subject on which they
discourse, when they treat with a foreign state, they deliver one of those
belts; for if this ceremony should be omitted, all that they have said passer
for nothing. Those belts are carefully deposited (...) each town, as the public
records of the nation; and to them they occasionally have recourse, when any
public contest happens with a neighboring tribe. Of late, as the materials of
which those belts are made, have become scarce, they often give some skin in
place of the wampum (the name of the beads), and receive, in return, (...) of a
more valuable kind from the commission (...) they never consider a treaty as of
any weight (...) article in it be ratified by such a grati^^^^^^.

(...), that those different tribes or (...) as they are at an immense distance
fr^^ (...), meet in their excursions after prey.(...) no animosity between
them, which seldom (...), they behave in the most friendly and co^^ (...)
manner; but if they happen to be in a state (...), or if there has been no
previous intercourse ^^tween them, all who are not friends are deemed enemies,
and they fight with the most savage fury.

CHAP. IV.
Customs, etc. of the Natives, continued. -- Their Wars-Ceremonies at setting
out -- Ensigns -- Military Habits-Quickness of their Senses -- Vigilance and
Circums^tion -- Manner of fighting -- Treatment of Prisoners Tortures --
Constancy of the Sufferers -- Surprising C^trast in the American Character.

IF we except hunting and fishing, war is the princi^ employment of the Indian
men: almost every oth^^ concern, but in particular the little agriculture wh^^
they enjoy, is consigned to the women. The most common motive of the Americans
for entering into war, when it does not arise from an accidental rencounter, or
interference, is either to revenge themselves for the death of some lost
friends, or to acquire prisoners, who may assist them in hunting, and whom they
adopt into their society. These wars are either undertaken by some private
adventurers, or at the instance of the whole community. In the latter case all
the young men who are disposed to go out to battle (for no one is compelled
contrary to his inclination), give a bit of wood to the chief, as a token of
their design to accompany him; for every thing among these people is transacted
with a great deal of ceremony and with many forms. The chief, who is to conduct
them, fasts several days, during which time he converses with no one, and is
particularly careful to observe his dreams; which the presumption natural to
savages generally renders as favorable as he could desire. A variety of other
superstitions and ceremonies are observed. One of the most hideous is setting
the war kettle on the fire, as an emblem that they are going out to devour
their enemies; which, among these nations, it is probable, was formerly the
case, since they still continue to express it in clear terms, and use an emblem
significant of the ancient usage. Then they dispatch a porcelane, or large
shell, to their allies, inviting them to come along, and drink the blood of
their enemies. For with the Americans, as with the Greeks of old, "A generous
friendship no cold medium knows;
"But with one love, with one resentment glows".
They think that those in their alliance must not only adopt their enmities,
but that they must also have their resentment wound up to the same pitch with
themselves. And, indeed, no people carry their friendships or their resentments
so far as they do; and this is what should be expected from their peculiar
circumstances: that principle in human nature which is the spring of the social
affections, acts with so much the greater force (...) more it is restrained.
The Americans, who live (...) small societies, who see few objects and few
perso^^ become wonderfully attached to those objects and persons, and cannot be
deprived of them without feeli^^ themselves miserable. Their ideas are too
confined (...) enable them to entertain just sentiments of humanity or
universal benevolence. But this very circumstance while it makes them cruel and
savage to an incredi^^ degree, toward those with whom they are at war, a^^ new
force to their particular friendships, and to the common tie which unites the
members of the same tribe, (...) those different tribes which are in alliance
with (...) another. Without attending to this reflection, so^^ facts we are
going to relate would excite our wond^^ without informing our reason, and we
would be (...) wildered in a number of particulars, seemingly oppo^^ to one
another, without being sensible of the gener^^ cause from which they proceed.

Having finished all the ceremonies previous to the war, and the day appointed
for their setting out on the expedition being arrived, they take leave of their
friend and exchange their clothes, or whatever movables the have, in token of
mutual friendship; after which the proceed from the town, their wives and
female relation walking before, and attending them to some distan^^ The
warriors march all dressed in their finest appa^^ and most showy ornaments,
without any order. T^^ chief walks slowly before them, singing the war so^^
while the rest observe the most profound silen^^ When they come up to their
women, they deliver the^ all their finery, and putting on their worst clothes,
p^^ceed on their expedition.

Every nation has its peculiar ensign or standa^^ which is generally a
representation of some beast, bi^^ or fish. Those among the Five Nations are
the bea^ otter, wolf, tortoise, and eagle; and by those na^^ the tribes are
usually distinguished. They have (...) figures of those animals pricked and
printed on several parts of their bodies; and when they march through the
woods, they commonly, at every encampment, cut the representation of their
ensign on trees, especially after a successful campaign: marking at the same
time the number of scalps or prisoners they have taken. Their military dress is
extremely singular. They cut off, or pull out, all their hair, except a spot
about the breadth of two English crown pieces, near the top of their heads, and
entirely destroy their eye brows. The lock left upon their heads is divided
into several parcels, each of which is stiffened and adorned with wampum,
beads, and feathers of various kinds, the whole being twisted into a form much
resembling the modern pompoon. Their heads are painted red down to the eye
brows, and painted over with white down. The gristles of their ears are split
almost quite round, and distended with wires or splimters, so as to meet and
tie together on the nape of the neck. These are, also, hung with ornaments,
and, generally, bear the representation of some bird, or beast. Their noses are
likewise bored and hung with trinkets of beads, and their faces painted, with
various colors, so as to make an awful appearance. Their breasts are adorned
with a gorge^, or medal, of brass, copper, or some other metal; and that
dreadful weapon the scalping knife hangs by a string from the neck.

The great qualities of an Indian war are vigilance and attention, to give and
avoid a surprise; and, indeed, in these they are superior to all nations in the
world. Accustomed to continual wandering in the forests; having their
perceptions sharpened by keen necessity, and living, in every respect,
according to nature, their external senses have a degree of acuteness which, at
first view, appears incredible. They can trace out their enemies, at an immense
distance, by the smoke of their fires, which they smell, and by the tracks of
their feet upon the ground, imperceptible to an European eye, but which they
can count and distinguish, with the (...) most facility. It is said they can
even distinguish (...) different nations with wh^m they are acquainted, (...)
can determine the precise time when they passed, wh^^ an European could not,
with all his glasses, distinguish footsteps at all. These circumstances,
however, (...) of less importance, because their savage enemies (...) equally
well acquainted with them. When they (...) out, therefore, they take care to
avoid making use of (...) thing by which they might run the danger of a
dis^^^^ry. They light no sire, to warm themselves, or to (...) pare their
victuals: they lie close to the ground all (...) and travel only in the night;
and marching along (...) files, he that closes the rear, diligently covers with
le^^^ the tracks of his own feet and of theirs who prece^^ him. When they halt
to refresh themselves, scouts (...) sent out to reconnoitre the country and
beat up e^^^ place where they suspect an enemy to lie conceal^^^^ In this
manner they enter unawares the villages of (...) foes; and while the flower of
the nation are enga^ in hunting, massacre all the children, women, and (...)
less old men, or make prisoners of as many as they (...) manage, or have
strength enough to be useful to the nation. But when the enemy is apprised of
their (...) sign, and coming on in arms against them, they th^^ themselves flat
on the ground among the withered (...) and leaves, which their faces are
painted to resem^^ They then allow a part to pass unmolested, when, (...) at
once, with a tremendous shout, rising up from the ambush, they pour a storm of
musket bullets on the foes. The party attacked returns the same cry. Ev^^ one
shelters himself with a tree, and returns the fire (...) the adverse party, as
soon as they raise themselves fr^^ the ground to give the second fire. Thus
does (...) battle continue until the one party is so much weake^^ as to be
incapable of farther resistance. But if (...) force on each side continues
nearly equal, the fierce (...) it of the savages, inflamed by the loss of their
friend can no longer be restrained. They abandon their distant war, they rush
upon one another with clubs and hatchets in their hands, magnifying their own
courage, and insulting their enemies with the bitterest reproaches. A cruel
combat ensues, death appears in a thousand hideous forms, which would congeal
the blood of civilized nations to behold, but which rouses the fury of savages.
They trample, they insult, over the dead bodies, and te^^ the scalp from the
head. The flame rages on till it meets with no resistance; then the prisoners
are secured, those unhappy men, whose fate is a thousand times more dreadful
than theirs who have died in the field. The conquerors set up a hideous
howling, to lament the friends they have lost. They approach, i^ a melancholy
and severe gloom, to their own village; a messenger is sent to announce their
arrival, and the women with frightful shrieks, come out to mourn their dead
brothers, or their hushands. When they are arrived, the chief relates in a low
voice, to the elders, a circumstantial account of every particular of the
expedition. The orator proclaims aloud this account to the people; and as he
mentions the names of those who have fallen, the shrieks of the women are
redoubled. The men, too, join in these cries, according as each is most
connected with the deceased by blood, o^ friendship. The last ceremony is the
proclamation of the victory; each individual then forgets his private
misfortunes, and joins in the triumph of his nation; all tears are wiped from
their eyes, and, by an unaccountable transition, they pass, in a moment, from
the bitterness of sorrow to an extravagance of joy. But the treatment of the
prisoners, whose fate remains all this time undecided, is what chiefly
characterizes the savages.

We have already mentioned the strength of their affections, or resentments.
United, as they are, in small societies, connected, within themselves, by the
firmest ^ties, their friendly affections, which glow with the most intense
warmth within the walls of their own vilage, seldom extend beyond them. They
feel nothing for the enemies of their nation; and their resentment is easily
extended, from the individual who has injured them, to all ^^hers of the same
tribe. The prisoners, who have themselves the same feelings, know the
intentions of their conquerors, and are prepared for them. The person who has
taken the captive attends him to the cottage, where, according to the
distribution made by the elders, he is to be delivered to supply the loss of a
citizen. If those who receive him have their family weakened by war or other
accidents, they adopt the captive into the family, of which he becomes a
member. But if they have no occasion for him, or their resentment for the loss
of their friends be too high to endure the sight of any connected with those
who were concerned in it, they sentence him to death. All those who have met
with the same severe sentence being collected, the whole nation is assembled at
the execution, as for some great solemnity. A scaffold is erected, and the
prisoners are tied to the stake, where they commence their death song, and
prepare for the ensuing scene of cruelty with the most undaunted courage. Their
enemies, on the other side, are determined to put it to the proof, by the most
refined and exquisite tortures. They begin at the extremity of his body, and
gradually approach the more vital parts. One plucks out his nails by the roots,
one by one; another takes a singer into his mouth, and tears off the flesh with
his teeth; a third thrusts the finger, mangled as it is, into the bowl of a
pipe made red hot, which he smokes like tobacco; then they pound his toes and
fingers to pieces between two stones; they cut circles about his joints, and
gashes in the fleshy parts of his limbs, which they sear immediately with red
hot irons, cutting, burning, and pinching them, alternately; they pull off his
flesh, thus mangled and roasted, bit by bit, devouring it with greediness, and
smearing their faces with the blood, in an enthusiasm of horror and sury. When
they have thus torn off the flesh, they twist the bare nerves and tendons about
an iron, tearing and snapping them, whilst others are employed in pulling and
extending his limbs in every way that can increase the torment. This continues,
often, five or six hours; and sometimes, such is the strength of the savages,
days together. Then they frequently unbind him, to give a breathing to their
fury, to think what new torments they shall inflict, and to refresh the
strength of the suffere^, who, wearied out with such a variety of unheard of
torments, often falls into so profound a sleep, that they are obliged to apply
the fire to awake him, and renew his sufferings. He is again fastened to the
stake, and again they renew their cruelty; they stick him all over with small
matches of wood that easily takes fire, but burns slowly; they continually run
sharp reeds into every part of his body; they drag out his teeth with pincers,
and thrust out his eyes; and, lastly, after having ^urned his flesh from the
bones with slow fires; after having so mangled the body that it is all but one
wound; after having mutilated his face in such a manner as to carry nothing
human in it; after having peeled the skin from the head, and poured a heap of
red hot coals or boiling water on the naked s^^ll -- they once more unbind the
wretch, who, blind, and staggering with pain and weakness, assaulted and perted
on every side with clubs and stones, now up, now down, falling into their fires
at every step, runs hither and thither, until one of the chiefs, either out of
compassion or weary of cruelty, puts an end to his life with a club or dagger.
The body is then put into a kettle, and this barbarous employment is succeeded
by a feast as barbarous.

The women, forgetting the human as well as the female nature, and transformed
into something worse than furies, are said to surpass even the men in this
scene of horror; while the principal persons of the country sit round the
stake, smoking and looking on, without the least emotion. What is most
extraordinary, the sufferer himself, in the little intervals of his torments,
smokes too, appears unconcerned, and converses with his torturers about
indifferent matters. Indeed, during the whole time of his execution, there
seems a contest which shall exceed, they in inflicting the most horrid pains,
or he in enduring them with a firmne^^ (...) ^^nstancy almost above human: Not
a groan, not (...) sigh, not a distortion of countenance, escapes him; he
possesses his mind entirely in the midst of his torments; he recounts his own
exploits; he informs the^ what cruelties he has inflicted upon their
countryme^; and threatens them with the revenge that will attend his death;
and, though his repreaches exasperate the^ to a perfect madness of rage and
^ury, he continues (...) insults even of their ignorance of the art of
tormenti^^ pointing out himself more exquisite methods, and mo^^ sensible parts
of the body to be afflicted. The women ha^^ this part of courage as well as the
men; and it is as (...) for an Indian to behave otherwise, as it would be for
(...) European to suffer as an Indian. Such is the wonderful power of an early
institution, and a ferocious thi^^^ of glory! "I am brave and intrepid
(exclaims the sa^age in the face of his tormentors) I do not fear dea^^ nor any
kind of tortures; those who fear them (...) cowards; they are less than women;
life is nothing (...) those that have courage. May my enemies be co^^ founded
with despair and rage! Oh! that I could ^^vour them and drink their blood to
the last drop."

But neither the intrepidity, on one side, nor the (...) flexibility, on the
other, are among themselves mat^^ of astonishment; for vengeance and fortitude,
in (...) midst of torment, are duties which they consider as ^^^cred; they are
the effects of their earliest education, (...) depend upon principles instilled
into them from th^^ infancy. On all other occasions they are humane (...)
compassionate. Nothing can exceed the warmth (...) their affection toward
their friends, who consist of all those who live in the same village, or are in
alliance with it; among these all things are common; and this, though it may in
part, and among some of the tribes, arise from their not possessing very
distinct notions of separate property, is chiefly to be attributed to the
strength of their attachment; because, in every thing else, with their lives as
well as their fortunes, they are ready to serve their friends. Their houses,
their provision, even their young women, are not enough to oblige a guest. Has
any one of these succeeded ill in his hunting? Has his harvest failed? or is
his house berned? He feels no other effect of his misfortunes, than that it
gives him an opportunity to experience the benevolence and regard of his fellow
citizens. On the other hand, to the enemies of his country, or to those who
have privately offended, the American is implacable. He conceals his
sentiments; he appears reconciled, until by some treachery or surprise he has
an opportunity of executing a horrible revenge. No length of time is sufficient
to allay his resentment; no distance of place great enough to protect the
object; he crosses the steepest mountains; he pierces the most impracticable
forests, and traverses the most hideous bogs and deserts, for several hundreds
of miles; bearing the inclemency of the season, the fatigue of the expedition,
the extremes of hunger and thirst, with patience and cheerfulness, in hopes of
surprising his enemy, on whom ^he exercises the most shocking barbarities, even
to the eating of his flesh. To such extremes do the Indians push their
friendship or their enmity; and such indeed, in general, is the character of
all strong and uncultivated minds.

CHAP. V.
Customs, etc. of the Natives, continued -- Treatment ^f their dead Friends --
Superstitions -- Condition of th^^ Women -- Ardent Love of Liberty -- Crimes
and Pu^ishments -- Peculiar Manners of different Nations -- Longevity.

BUT what we have said respecting the Indi^^ would be a faint picture, did we
omit observ^^ the force of their friendship, which principally app^^^ by the
treatment of their dead. When any one of ^^society is cut off, he is lamented
by the whole: On the occasion a variety of ceremonies are practiced, denoti^^
the most lively sorrow. No business is transacted, how ever pressing, till all
the pious ceremonies due to (...) dead are performed. The body is washed,
anoin^^^ and painted. Then, the women lament the loss wi^^ hideous howlings,
intermixed with songs which celebra^^ the great actions of the deceased and his
ancesto^^ The men mourn also, though in a less extravagant manner. The whole
village is present at the interment, (...) the corpse is habited in their most
sumptuous or^^ments. Close to the body of the defunct are plac^ his bows and
arrows, with whatever he valued most (...) his life, and a quantity of
provisions for his subsistence (...) the journey which he is supposed to take.
This solem^ity, like every other, is attended with feasting. The ^^neral being
ended, the relations of the deceased confi^^ themselves to their huts, for a
considerable time, to ^^dulge their grief. After an interval of some weeks,
th^^ visit the grave, repeat their sorrow, new clothe the ^^mains of the body,
and act over again all the solem^ties of the funeral.

Among the various tokens of their regard for the deceased friends, the most
remarkable is the ceremo^^ which they call the feast of the dead, or the feast
of so^^ The day for this ceremony is appointed in the council (...) their
chiefs, who give orders for every thing which may enable them to celebrate it
with pomp and magnificence; and the neighboring nations are invited to partake
of the entertainment. At this time, all who have died since the preceding feast
of the kind, are taken out of their graves. Even those who have been interred
at the greatest distance from the villages, are diligently sought for, and
conducted to this rendezvous of the dead, which exhibits a scene of horror
beyond the power of description. When the feast is concluded, the bodies are
dressed in the finest skins which can be procured, and after being exposed for
some time in this pomp, are again committed to the earth, with great solemnity,
which is succeeded by funeral games.

Their taste for war, which forms the chief ingredient in their character,
gives a strong bias to their religion. Areskoui, or the god of battle, is
revered as the great god of the Indians. Him they invoke before they go into
the field; and according as his disposition is more or less favorable to them,
they conclude they will be more or less successful. Some nations seem to do a
kind of ^omage to the sun, as a symbol or minister of the benefi^ence and power
of the Great Spirit: Others pay a similar homage to the moon and planets; among
others, there is a number of traditions, relative to the creation of the world
and the history of the gods: Traditions which resemble the Grecian fables, but
which are ^till more absurd and inconsistent. But religion is not ^he
prevailing character of the Indians; and except when they have some immediate
occasion for the assist^nce of their gods, they pay them no sort of worship.
Like all rude nations, however, they are strongly addicted to superstition.
They believe in the existence of a ^umber of good and bad genii, or spirits,
who inter^ere in the affairs of mortals, and produce all our hap^iness, or
misery. It is from the evil genii, in particular, that our diseases, they
imagine, proceed; and it is ^o the good genii, we are indebted for a cure. The
ministers of the genii are the jugglers, who are also (...) chief physicians
among the savages. These jugg^^^ are supposed to be inspired by the good genii,
m^^^ commonly in their dreams, with the knowledge of (...) ture events: they
are called in to the assistance of (...) sick, and are supposed to be informed
by the g^^ whether they will get over the disease, and in what (...) they must
be treated. But these spirits are extrem^^ simple in their system of physic,
and in almost ev^^^ disease, direct the juggler to the same remedy. T^^ patient
is enclosed in a narrow cabin, in the midst (...) which is a stone red hot; on
this they throw wa^^^ until he is well soaked with the warm vapor and (...)
own sweat. Then they hurry him from his bagnio, (...) plunge him suddenly into
the next river. This (...) method, which costs many their lives, often perfor^
very extraordinary cures. "Some of their remedies ^^^ever, which are almost
entirely derived from the veg^table kingdom, are certainly very powerful and
eff^^^cious in their operation. The principal of these a^^ species of
stillingia (perhaps a croton) several specied ^^iris, particularly the
versicolor, and the verna; the ^^nonia crucigera, etc." -- These are
principally employ^ by the jugglers, and old women; but most of the sav^^^ are
more or less dexterous in curing wounds, and (...) eases. But the power of
their remedies is generally ^tributed by the savages to the magical ceremonies
(...) which they are administered.

Although the Indian women generally bear the ^^borious part of the domestic
economy, their condit^^^ at least among many of the tribes, is far from being
wretched, so slavish, and depressed, as has been re^^sented by Dr. Robertson,
and by many other wri^^^ We do not mean, in this place, to engage in an in^^ry
concerning the comparative respectability and ^^portance of the female
character in the various stage^ society and improvement; an inquiry this which
(...) employed the pens of some of the most learned and eloquent writers of the
presentage, and concerning which there are still various, and very opposite,
opinions. This, however, we think, we may, confidently and safely, assert, that
the condition of the women among many of the American tribes is as respectable
and as important as it was among the Germans, in the days of Tacitus; or as it
is among any other nations, with whom we are acquainted, in a similar stage of
improvement. "Their business, or employment," says the ingenious Mr. William
Bartram, "is chiefly in their houses, except at those seasons when their crops
of maize, etc. are growing, at which times they generally turn out with their
husbands and parents; but they are by no means compelled to do this, and one
seldom see^ a third as many females as males at work, in their plantations."
"You may depend on my assertion," (says the same gentleman, who had ample
opportunities of studying the customs and manners of the southern Indians, of
whom he is speaking, in this place) "that there are no people, any where, who
love their women more than these Indians do, or men of better understanding in
distinguishing the merits of the opposite sex; -- or men more faithful in
rendering suitable compensation. They are courteous and polite to their women
-- gentle, tender and fondling, even to an appearance of effeminacy. An Indian
man seldom attempts to use a woman, of any description, with indelicacy, either
of action, or of language.

"In the bunting seasons, that is, in autumn, and in winter, when the men are
generally out in the forest^, the whole care of the house or family devolves on
the women: at these times they are obliged to undergo a great deal of labor
and fatigue, such as cutting wood, etc. But this labor is, in part alleviated
by the assistance of the old men, who are past their hunting days, or who are
no longer capable of serving in war." But nothing more clearly shows the
importance and respectability of the women among the Indians than this
ci^cumstance, circumstance, that, among some of the tribes, they (...)
permitted to preside in the councils of their country; to this we may add, that
several of the Florida nation^ have, at different times, been governed by the
wisdom and the prudence of female caciques.

Polygamy is practiced by some nations, but it is n^^ general. In most they
content themselves with (...) wife; but a divorce is admitted of in case of
adultery. No nation of the Americans is without a regular ma^^riage, in which
there are many ceremonies; the pri^cipal of which is, the bride's presenting
the bridegroo^ with a plate of their corn. The women, though (...) fore
incontinent, are remarkable for chastity after marriage.

Liberty, in its full extent, being the darling passion (...) the Indians,
their education is directed in such a (...)ner as to cherish this disposition
to the utmost. Hen^^ children are never upon any account chastised with blows,
and they are seldom even reprimanded. Reason, they say, will guide their
children when they com^ to the use of it, and before that time their faults
cannot be very great; but blows might damp their free an^ martial spirit, by
the habit of a slavish motive to action. When grown up, they experience nothing
like command, dependence or subordination; even strong pe^suasion is
industriously withheld by those who have influence among them. -- No man is
held in great estee^^ unless he has increased the strength of his country with
a captive, or adorned his but with a scalp of one of his enemies.

Controversies among the Indians are few, and quickly decided. When any
criminal matter is so flagrant as to become a national concern, it is brought
under the jurisdiction of the great council; but in ordina^^ cases, the crime
is either revenged or compromised by the parties concerned. If a murder be
committed, the family which has lost a relation prepares to retaliate (...)
that of the offender. They often kill the murderer; and when this happens, the
kindred of the last person slain, look upon themselves to be as much injured,
and to have the same right to vengeance, as the other party. In general,
however, the offender absents himself; the friends send compliments of
condolence to those of the person who has been murdered. The head of the
family, at length, appears with a number of presents, the delivery of which he
accompanies with a formal speech. The whole ends, as usual, in mutual
feastings, in songs, and in dances. If the murder is committed by one of the
same family, or cabin, that cabin has the full right of judgment within itself,
either to punish the guilty with death, or to pardon him, or to oblige him to
give some recompense to the wife or children of the slain. Instances of such a
crime, however, very seldom happen; for their attachment to those of the same
family is remarkably strong, and is said to produce such friendships as may vie
with the most celebrated in fabu^ous antiquity.

Such, in general, are the manners and customs of the Indian nations; but
almost every tribe has something peculiar to itself. Among the Hurons, and the
Natches, the dignity of the chief is said to be hereditary, and the right of
succession in the female line. When this happens to be extinct, the most
respectable matron of the tribe, we are informed, makes choice of whom she
pleases to succeed.

The Cheerake are governed by several sachems, or chiefs, elected by the
different villages; as are also the Creeks, and the Chactaws. The two latter
punish adultery in a woman by cutting off her hair, which they will not suffer
to grow till the corn is ripe, the next season; but the Illinois, for the same
crime, cut off the woman's nose and ears.

The Indians on the Lakes are formed into a sort of em^ire; and the emperor is
elected from the eldest tribe, which is that of the Ottawawas. This authority
is very considerable. A few years ago, the person who held this rank formed a
design of uniting all the Indian nations, under his sovereignty; but he
miscarried in the bold attempt.

Little is yet known of the interior parts of North America. In 1792, a Mr.
Stuart, said to be in the employ of the British Court, returned from four years
tr^^els through the hitherto unexplored regions to the we^^ward. Taking his
course west southwesterly from the posts on the lakes, he penetrated to the
head of the Missouri, and from: thence due west, to within 500 mi^^ of the
shores of the Pacific ocean. He joined the i^cerior Indians in several battles
against the shore In^^ans, all which coming short of his object, the procuring
a peace, so that he might explore the continent from sea to sea, after some
stay, he returned nearly by (...) same route, he had pursued in going out.
Beyond the Missouri, Mr. Stuart met with many powerful nations of s^^ges, in
general bospitable and courteous. The Indian ^^tions he visited westward
appeared to be a polished and ci^^ized people, having town regularly built,
and being instate of society not say removed from the Europeans, (...) only
wanting the use of iron and steel to be perfectly (...) They are always (...)
in (...), cut in an elegant manner, and in many respects preferable to the
garments (...) use among the whites. Adjacent to these nations (...) vast ridge
of mountains, which may be called the (...) legany of the western parts of
America, and serves (...) a barrier against the too frequent incursions of
(...) coast Indians; who entertain a mortal antipathy to (...) nations and
tribes inhabitating the country eastward beyond the mountains. American Museum,
Vol. XI. p. 216.


The newly discovered American Indians about M^^ka Sound, disguise themselves
after the mannner of (...) ancient Scythians, in dresses made of the skins
(...) wolves and other wild beasts, and wear even the (...) sitted to their
own. These habits they use in the else to circumvent the animals of the field.

Concerning the religion of the Indians much has been said, and much that has
no foundation. In general it may be observed that they all have an idea of a
Supreme Being, whom they worship under different names, and with a great
variety of superstitious rites and ceremonies. See Morse's American Universal
Geography.


In general, the American Indians live to a great age, although it is not easy
to know from themselves the exact number of their years. It was asked of an
Indian, who appeared to be extremely old, what age he was of? I am above
twenty, was his reply. Upon putting the question in a different form, by
reminding him of certain circumstances, in former times, my machu, said he,
spoke to me, when I was young, of the Ineas; and he had seen these princes.
According to this reply, there must have elapsed, from the date of his machu's
(his grandfather's) remembrance to that time, a period of, at least, 232 years.
The man who made this reply, appeared to be 120 years of age: for, besides the
whiteness of his hair and beard, his body was almost bent to the ground;
without, however, showing any other marks of debility, or suffering. This
happened in 1764. This longevity, attended in general with uninterrupted
health, is thought, by some writers, to be the cousequence in part of their
vacancy from all serious thought and employment, joined also with the robust
texture and conformation of their bodily organs. If the Indians did not destroy
one another, in their almost perpetual wars, and if their habits of
intoxication were not so universal and incurable, they would be, of all the
races of men who inhabit the globe, the most likely to extend, not only the
bounds, but the enjoyments, of animal life to their utmost duration.

CHAP. VI.
Other Pictures of the Native Americans -- Ancedote of (...) Algonquin Woman.
-- Reproached with Pufillanimity (...) Perfidy -- Weakness of Understanding --
Indolence (...) Stupidity -- Vanity and Conceit -- their Eloquence disparaged.

LET us now attend to other pictures which (...) been given of the aboriginal
inhabitants of America. The vices and defects of the American Indi^^ have been,
by several writers, most unaccountably (...) gravated, and every virtue and
good quality deni^^ them. Their cruelties have been already described, (...)
accounted for. The following anecdote of an Alg^^quin woman we find adduced as
a remarkable proof (...) their innate thirst of blood. That nation being at
(...) with the Iroquois, she happened to be taken prison^ and was carried to
one of the villages belonging to th^^ Here she was stripped naked, and her
hands and (...) bound, with ropes, in one of their cabins. In this c^^dition
she remained ten days, the savages sleeping ro^^ her every night. The eleventh
night, while they wa^ asleep, she found means to disengage one of her hand with
which she immediately freed herself from (...) ropes, and went to the door.
Though she had now (...) opportunity of escaping unperceived, her revenge
temper could not let slip so favorable an opportunity killing one of her
enemies. The attempt was manifest at the hazard of her own life; yet, snatching
up hatchet, she killed the savage that lay next her: And springing out of the
cabin, concealed herself in a (...) low tree, which she had observed the day
before. (...) groans of the dying person soon alarmed the other (...) vages,
and the young ones immediately set out in pursuit of her. Perceiving, from her
tree, that they (...) directed their course one way, and that no savage (...)
near her, she left her sanctuary, and flying by an (...) ^^posi^^ opposite
direction, ran into a forest without being perceived. The second day after this
happened, her footsteps were discovered; and they pursued her with such
expedition, that the third day she discovered her enemies at her heels. Upon
this, she threw herself into a pond of water; and diving among some weeds and
bulrushes, she could just breathe above water without being perceived. Her
pursuers, after making the most diligent search, were forced to return. -- For
35 days this woman held on her course through woods and defarts, without any
other sustenance than that which roots and wild berries afforded her. When she
came to the river St. Lawrence, she made, with her own hands, a kind of a
wicker raft, on which she crossed (...). As she went by the French for Trois
Riviers, without well knowing where she was, she perceived a ^anoe ^uil of
savages; and fearing they might be Iro^uois, ran again into the woods, where
she remained (...) sunset. -- Continuing her course soon after, she faw ^rois
Riviers; and was then discovered by a party whom she knew to be Hurens, a
nation in alliance with he Algonquine. She then squatted down, behind a bush,
^alling out to them that she was not in a condition to be ^een, because she was
naked. They immediately threw ^er a blanket, and then conducted her to a fort,
where ^he recounted her story.

Personal courage has been denied them. In proof of their pufillanimity, the
following incidents are quoted from Charlevoix, by lord Kames, in his Sketches
of the History of Man. "The fort de Vercheres, in Cana^^, belonging to the
French, was, in the year 1690, ^tacked by the Iroquois. They approached
silently, reparing to scale the palisade, when some musket shot ^ade them
retire. Advancing a second time, they were gain repulsed, wondering that they
could discover none ^ut a woman, who was seen every where. This was ^adame de
Vercheres, who appeared as resolute as if ^pported by a numerous garrison. The
hopes of storming a place without men to defend it, occasion reiterated
attacks. After two days siege they retir^ fearing to be intereepted in their
retreat. Two (...) after, a party of the same nation appeared before (...) fort
so unexpectedly, that a girl of fourteen, daugh^^ of the pro^rietor, had but
time to shut the gate. (...) the young woman there was not a soul but one raw
^^^dier. She showed herself, with her assistant, sometime in one place, and
sometimes in another; changing (...) dress frequently, in order to give some
appearance (...) garrison; and always firing opportunely. The fa^^^ hearted
Iroquois decamped without success."

There is no instance, it is said, either of a single Indian facing an
individual, of any other nation, in (...) and open combat, or of their jointly
venturing to try (...) fate of battle with an equal number of any foes. (...)
with the greatest superiority of numbers, they dare (...) meet an open attack.
Yet, notwithstanding this (...) of courage, they are still formidable; nay, it
has (...) known, that a small party of them has routed a (...) superior body of
regular troops: but this can (...) happen when they have surprised them in the
fastne^^ of their forests, where the covert of the wood (...) conceal them
until they take their aim with the ut^^ certainty. After one such discharge
they immedia^^ retreat, without leaving the smallest trace of their rou^^ It
may easily be supposed, that an onset of this (...) must produce confusion even
among the steadiest troop when they can neither know the number of their
^^^mies, nor perceive the place where they lie in amb^^^

Perfidy combined with cruelty has been also made (...) part of their
character. Don Ulloa relates, That the ^^dians called Natches, in Louisiana,
laid a plot of (...) sacring, in one night, every individual belonging (...)
the French colony established there. This plot (...) actually executed,
notwithstanding the seeming (...) understanding that subsisted between them and
(...) European neighbors. Such was the secrecy which they observed, that no
person had the least suspicion of their design until the blow was struck. One
Frenchman alone escaped, by favor of the darkness, to relate the disaster of
his countrymen. The compassion of a female Indian contributed also, in some
measure, to his exemption from the general massacre. The tribe of Natches had
invited the Indians of other countries, even to a considerable distance, to
join in the same conspiracy. The day, or rather the night, was fixed, on which
they were to make an united attack on the French colonists. It was intimated by
sending a parcel of rods, more or less numerous according to the local distance
of each tribe, with an injunction to abstract one rod daily; the day on which
the last fell to be taken away being that fixed for the execution of their
plan. The women were partners of the bloody secret. The parcels of rods being
thus distributed, that belonging to the tribe of Natches happened to remain in
the custody of a female. This woman, either moved by her own feelings of
compassion, or by the commiseration expressed by her female acquaintances, in
the view of the proposed scene of bloodshed, abstracted one day three or four
of the rods, and thus anticipated the term of her tribe's proceeding to the
execution of the general conspiracy. The consequence of this was, that the
Natches were the only actors in this carnage; their distant associates having
still several rods remaining at the time when the former made the attack. An
opportunity was, thereby, given to the colonists, in those quarters, to take
measures for their defense, and for preventing a more extensive execution of
the design.

It was by conspiracies similar to this that the Indians of the province of
Macas, in the kingdom of Quito, destroyed the opulent city of Logrogno, the
colony of Guambaya, and its capital Sevilla del Oro; and that so completely,
that it is no longer known in what place these settlements existed, or where
that abundance of gold was found from which the last mentioned city took the
addition to its name. Similar ravages have been committed upon l'Imperia^, in
Chisi, the colonies of the Missions of Chuncas, those of Darien, in Term (...),
and many other places, which have afforded seenes (...) this barbarous
ferocity. These conspiracies are alway^ carried on in the same manner. The
secret is inviol^bly kept; the actors assemble at the precise hour appointed,
and every individual is animated with the same sanguinary purposes. The males
who fall into their hands are put to death, with every shocking circumstance
that can be suggested by a cool and determine^ cruelty. The females are carried
off and preserved, (...) monuments of their victory, to be employed as their
occasions require.

Nor can this odious cruelty and treachery, it is sai^ be justly ascribed to
their subjection to a foreign (...) seeing the same character belongs equally
to all the original inhabitants of this vast continent, even (...) those who
have preserved their independence most completely. Certain it is, continues
Ulloa, that these people with the most limited capacities for every thing else
display an astonishing degree of penetration and subu^ty, with respect to every
object that involves treachery, bloodshed, and rapine. As to these, they fee^
to have been all educated at one school; and a secret referring to any such
plan, no consideration on ear^ can extort from them.

Their understandings also have been represented (...) not less contemptible
than their manners are gross an^ brutal. Many nations, it has been said, are
neither capable of forming an arrangement for futurity, nor do^^ their
solicitude or foresight extend so far. They set (...) value upon those things
of which they are not in some immediate want. In the evening, says father Lab^^
when a Carib is going to rest, no consideration (...) tempt him to sell his
hammock; but in the morning he will part with it for the slightest trifle. At
the close of winter, a North American, mindful of wh^^ ^e has suffered from the
cold, sets himself with vigor ^o prepare materials for erecting a comfortable
hut to protect him against the inclemency of the succeeding ^eason: But as soon
as the weather becomes mild, he handous his work, and never thinks of it more
till ^he return of the cold compels him to resume it. -- In ^hort, to be free
from labor seems to be the utmost wish of an American. They will continue,
whole days, ^retched in their hammocks, or seated on the earth, without
changing their posture, raising their eyes, or ^tering a single word. They
cannot compute the succession of days, nor of weeks. The different aspects of
^e moon alone engage their attention, as a measure of me. Of the year they have
no other conception than that is suggested to them by the alternate heat of
sum^er, and by the cold of winter; nor have they the least ^ea of applying to
this period the obvious computation (...) the months which it contains. When it
is asked of (...) old man, in Peru, even the most civilized, what (...) he is
of? the only answer he can give is the number of caciques he has seen. It often
happens, too, that ^ey only recollect the most distant of these princes, in
^ose time certain circumstances had happened peculi^y memorable, while of those
who lived in a more ^ent period they have lost all remembrance.

The same gross stupidity is alleged to be observable those Indians who have
retained their original liber^^*

They are never known to fix the dates of any ^nts in their minds, or to trace
the succession of circumstances that have arisen from such events. Their
^gination takes in only the present, and in that only at intimately concerns
themselves. Nor can dis^fine or instruction overcome this natural defect of
^rehension. In fact, the subjected Indians in Peru, (...) have a continual
intercourse with the Spaniards, (...) are furnished with curates perpetually
occupied in (...) them lessons of religion and morality, and (...) mix with all
ranks of the civilized society established among them, are almost as stupid and
barbarous as their countrymen who have had no such advantages. The Peruvians,
while they lived under the government of their Incas, preserved the records of
certain remarkable events. They had also a kind of regular government described
by the historians of the conquest of Peru. This government originated entirely
from the attention and abilities of their princes, and from the regulations
enacted by them for directing the conduct of their subjects. This ancient
degree of civilization among them gives ground to presume that their
legislatures sprung from some race more enlightened than the other tribes of
Indians; a race of which no individual seems to remain in the present times.

Vanity and conceit are said to be blended with their ignorance, and treachery.
Notwithstanding all they suffer from Europeans, they still, it is said,
consider themselves as a race of men far superior to their conquerors. This
proud belief, arising from their perverted ideas of excellence, is universal
over the whole known continent of America. They do not think it possible that
any people can be so intelligent as themselves. When they are detected in any
of their plots, it is their common observation, that the Spaniards, or
Virochocas, want to be as knowing as they are. Those of Louisiana and the
countries adjacent, are equally vain of their superior understanding;
confounding that quality with the cunning which they themselves constantly
practice. The whole object of their transactions is to over reach those with
whom they deal. Yet though faithless themselves, they never forgive the breach
of promise on the part of others. While the Europeans seek their amity by
presents, they give themselves no concern to secure a reciprocal friendship.
Hence, probably, arises their idea, that they must be a superior race of men,
in ability and intelligence, to those who are at such pains to court their
alliance, and avert their enmity.

Their natural eloquence has also been decried. The free tribes of savages who
enter into conventions with the Europeans, it is observed, are accustomed to
make long, pompous, and, according to their own notions, sublime harangues, but
without any method, or connection. The whole is a collection of disjointed
metaphors and comparisons. The light, heat, and course of the sun, form the
principal topic of their discourse; and these unintelligible reasonings are
always accompanied with violent and ridiculous gestures. Numberless repetitions
prolong the oration, which, if not interrupted, would last whole days: At the
same time, they meditate very accurately, beforehand, in order to avoid
mentioning any thing but what they are desirous to obtain. This pompous faculty
of making speeches is also one of the grounds on which they conceive themselves
to be superior to the nations of Europe; they imagine that it is their
eloquence that procures them the favors they ask. The subjected Indians
converse precisely in the same style. Prolix and tedious, they never know when
to stop; so that, excepting by the difference in language, it would be
impossible, in this respect, to distinguish a civilized Peruvian from an
inhabitant of the most savage districts to the northward.

CHAP. VII.
All the Charges in the foregoing Chapter partial, and (...) free from
misrepresentation -- Buffon and M. de Pauw's Descriptions refuted -- Errors as
to their Want of Beard -- Form and Aspect -- Constitution and Corporal
Abilities -- Labor and Industry -- Mental Qualities. -- M. de Pauw's Proofs of
their Cowardice refuted -- Instances of Courage, Fortitude and Eloquence --
Representations of COLUMBUS -- Conclusions concerning their Capacities --
Ingenuity. -- Tokens of Science. -- Specimen of their Morality.

BUT such partial and detarched views, as the above, were they even free from
misrepresentation, am not the just ground upon which to form an estimate of the
character of the aboriginal inhabitants of the New World. Their qualities, good
and bad, (for they certainly possess both) their way of life, the state of
society among them, with all the circumstances of their conditions, ought to be
considered in connenion, and in regard to their mutual influence. Such a view
has been given in the preceding part of this Book: From which, it is hoped,
their real character may be easily deduced.

Many of the disagreeable traits exhibited in the anecdotes just quoted, are,
indeed, extracted from Do^ Ulloa; an author of credit and reputation; but a
Spaniard, and evidently biassed, in some degree, by a defire to palliate the
enormities of his countrymen in that quarter of the globe. And, with regard to
the worst and least equivocal parts of the American character, cruelty and
revenge; it may be fairly questioned, whether the instances of these, either in
respect of their cause or their atrocity, be at all comparable to those
exhibited in European history, and staining the annals of Christendom: -- to
those, for instance, of the Spaniards themselves, at their first discovery of
America; to those indicated by the engines found on board their mighty Armada,
in 1588; to those which, in cold blood, were perpetrated by the Dutch at
Amboyna; to the dragoonings of the French; to their religious massacres: Or,
even to the tender mercies of the Inquisition!

Still harsher, however, are the descriptions given by Buffon and de Pauw, of
the natives of this whole continent, in which the most mortifying degeneracy of
the human race, as well as of all the inferior animals, is asserted to be
conspicuous. Against these philosophers, or rather theorists, however, the
Americans have found an able advocate in the Abbe Clavigero; an historian, who,
not only from his being a native of America, but also from his situation, and
long residence in Mexico, has been enabled to obtain the best means of
information, and who, though himself a subject of Spain, appears superior to
prejudice, and disdains in his description the glosses of policy.

Concerning the stature of the Americans, M. de Pauw says, that although, in
general, it is not equal to the stature of the Castilians, there is but little
difference between them. But the Abbe Clavigero evinces, that the Indians who
inhabit those countries lying between 9 and 40 degrees of north latitude, which
are the limits of the discoveries of the Spaniards, are more than five Parisian
feet in height, and that those who do not reach that stature are as few in
number amongst the Indians as they are amongst the Spaniards. It is besides
certain, that many of the American nations, such as the Apaches, the Hiaquese,
the Pimese, and Cochimies, are at least as tall as the tallest Europeans; and
that, in all the vast extent of the New World, no race of people has been
found, except the Esquimaux, in the north, and west, and the Yacana-cunnees,
and Pesserais, etc. in the south, so diminutive in stature as the Laplanders,
the Samojeds, and Tartars, in the north of the Old Continent. In this respect,
therefore, the inhabitants of the two Continents are upon an equality.

Of the shape and character of the Mexican Indian the Abbe gives a most
advantageous description; which he asserts, no one who reads it, in America,
will contradict, unless he views them with the eye of a prejudicial mind. It is
true, that Ulloa says, in speaking of the Indians of Quito, he had observed
that "imperfect people abounded among them; that they were either irregularly
diminutive, or monstrous in some other to respect; that they became either
insensible, dumb, (...) blind; or wanted some limb of their body." Having,
therefore, made some inquiry respecting this singularity of the Quitans, the
Abbe found, that such defect were neither caused by what he calls bad humors,
not by the climate, but by the mistaken and blind humanity of their parents,
who, in order to free their children from the hardships and toils to which the
healthy Indians are subjected by the Spaniards, fix some deformity or weakness
upon them, that they may become useless; a circumstance of misery which does
not happen in other countries of America, nor in those places of the same
kingdom of Quito, where the Indians are under no such oppression. M. de Pauw,
and in agreement with him, Dr. Robertson, says, that no deformed persons are to
be found among the savages of America; because, like the ancient Lacedaemonians,
they put to death those children which are born hunch backed, blind, or
defective in any limb; but that the those countries where they are formed into
societies and where the vigilance of their rulers prevents the murder of such
infants, the number of their deformed individuals is greater th^^ it is in any
country of Europe. This would make an exceedingly good solution of the
difficulty if it were true: But if, possibly, then has been in America a tribe
of savages who have imitated the barbarous example of the celebrated
Lacedaemonians, it is certain that those authors have no ground to impute such
inhumanity to the rest of the Americans: and it has not been the practice, at
least with the far greater part of those nations, as may be demonstrated from
the attestations of authors who are the best acquainted with their customs.

No argument against the New World can be drawn from the color of the
Americans; for their color is less distant from the white of the Europeans
than it is from the black of the Africans, and a great part of the Afraties.
The hair of the Mexicans, and of the greater part of the Indians, is, as we
have already said, coarse and thick; on their faces they appear to have little,
and in general none on their arms and legs: But it is an error to say, as M. de
Pauw does, that they are entirely destitute of hair in all the other parts of
their body. This is one of the many passages in the Philosophical Researches,
at which the Mexicans, and all the other nations, must smile, to find an
European philosopher so eager to divest them of the dress they had from nature.
Don Ulloa, indeed, in the description which he gives of the Indians of Quito,
says, that hair neither grows upon the men nor upon the women when they arrive
at puberty, as it does on the rest of mankind; but whatever singularity may
attend the Quitans, or occasion this circumstance, there is no doubt that among
the Americans in general, the period of puberty is accompanied with the same
symptoms as it is among other nations of the world. In fact, with the North
Americans, it is disgraceful to be hairy on the body. They say, it likens them
to hogs. They, therefore, pluck the hair as fast as it appears. But the traders
who marry their women, and prevail on them to discontinue this practice, say,
that nature is the fame with them as with the whites. As to the beards of the
men, had Buffon, or de Pauw, known the pains and trouble it costs them to pluck
out by the roots the hair that grows on their faces, they would have seen that
nature had not been deficient in that respect. Every nation has its customs. "I
have seen an Indian beau, with a looking glass in his hand (says Mr. Jefferson)
examining his face, for hours together, and plucking out, by the roots, every
hair he could discover, with a kind of tweezer made of a piece of fine brass
wire, that had been twisted round a stick, and which he used with great
dexterity."

The very aspect of an Angolan, a Mandingan, or a Congan, would have shocked M.
de Pauw, and made him recall the censure which he passes on the color, the
make, and the hair of the Americans. What can be imagined more contrary to the
idea we have of beauty, and the perfection of the human frame, than a man,
whose skin is black as ink, whose head and face are covered with black wool,
instead of hair, whose eyes are yellow and bloody, whose lips are thick and
blackish, and whose nose is flat? Such are the inhabitants of a very large
portion of Africa, and of many islands of Asia. What men can be more imperfect
than those who measure no more than four feet in stature, whose faces are long
and flat, the nose compressed, the iris yellowish black, the eyelids turned
back toward the temples, the cheeks extraordinarily elevated, their mouths
monstrously large, their lips thick and prominent, and the lower part of their
visages extremely narrow? Such, according to Count de Buffon, are the
Laplanders, the Zemblans, the Borandines, the Samojeds, and the Tartars, in the
East. What objects more deformed than men whose faces are too long and wrinkled
even in their youth, their noses thick: and compressed, their eyes small and
sunk, their cheeks very much raised, the upper jaw low, their teeth long and
disunited, eyebrows so thick that they shade their eyes, the eyelids thick,
some bristles on their faces instead of beard, large thighs and small legs?
Such is the picture Count de Buffon gives of the Tartars; that is, of those
people who, as he says, inhabit a tract of land in Asia, 1200 leagues long and
upwards, and more than 750 broad. Amongst these, the Calmucks are the most
remarkable for their deformity; which is so great, that, according to
Tavernier, they are the most brutal men of all the universe. Their faces are so
broad that there is a space of five, or six, inches between their eyes, as
Count de Buffon himself affirms. In Calicut, in Ceylon, and in other countries
of India, there is, say Pyrard, and other writers, on those regions a race of
men who have one, or both, of their legs as thick as the body of a man; and
that this deformity among them is almost hereditary.

If we were, in like manner, to go through the nations of Asia and Africa, we
should hardly find any extensive country where the color of men is not darker,
where there are not stronger irregularities observed, and grosser defects to be
found in them, than even the penetrating eye of de Pauw could discover in the
Americans. The color of the latter is a good deal clearer than that of almost
all the Africans and the inhabitants of south Asia. Even their alleged
scantiness of beard is common to the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands, and
of all the Indian Archipelago, to the famous Chinese, Japanese, Tartars, and
many other nations of the Old Continent. The imperfections of the Americans,
however great they may be represented to be, are, certainly, not comparable
with the defects of that immense people, whose character we have sketched, and
others whom we omit.

M. de Pauw represents the Americans to be a feeble and diseased set of
nations; and, in order to demonstrate the weakness and disorder of their
physical constitution, adduces several proofs equally ridiculous and ill
founded, and which it will not be expected we should enumerate. He alleges,
among other particulars, that they were overcome in wrestling by all the
Europeans, and that they sunk under a moderate burden; that by a computation
made, 200,000 Americans were found to have perished, in one year, from carrying
of baggage. With respect to the first point, the Abbe Clavigero observes, it
would be necessary that the experiment (...) wrestling was made between many
individuals of each continent, and that the victory should be attested by the
Americans, as well as by the Europeans. It is not however, meant to insist,
that the Americans are stronger than the Europeans. They may be less strong,
without the human species having degenerated in them. The Swiss are stronger
than the Italians; and still we do (...) believe the Italians are degenerated,
nor do we tax the climate of Italy. The instance of 200,000 Americans having
died, in one year, under the weight of baggage, were it true, would not
convince us so much of the weakness of the Americans, as of the inhumanity of
the Europeans. In the same manner that these 200,000 Americans perished,
200,000 Prussians would also have perished, had they been obliged to make a
journey (...) between 300 and 400 miles, with 100 pounds of burden upon their
backs; if they had collars of iron about their necks, and were obliged to carry
that load over rocks and mountains; if those who became exhausted with fatigue,
or wounded in their feet, so as to impede their progress, had their heads out
off that they might not retard the pace of the rest; and if they were not
allowed but a small morsel of bread to enable them (...) support so severe a
toil. Las Casas, from whom M. de Pauw got the account of the 200,000 Americans,
w^^^ died under the fatigue of carrying baggage, rela^^ also, all the above
mentioned circumstances. If the author, therefore, is to be credited in the
last, he is (...) to be credited in the first. But, a philosopher (...) vaunts
the physical and moral qualities of European over those of the Americans, would
have done be^^ we think, to have suppressed facts so opprobrious to (...)
Europeans themselves.

Nothing, in fact, demonstrates so clearly the rob^^ness of the Americans, as
those various, and lasting, fatigues in which they are continually engaged. M.
Pauw says, that when the new world was discovered, nothing was to be seen but
thick woods; that, at present, there are some lands cultivated, not by the
Americans, however, but by the Africans, and Europeans; and that the soil in
cultivation is to the soil which is uncultivated as 2000 to 2,000,000. These
three assertions the Abbe Clavigero demonstrates to be precisely so many
errors. Since the conquest, the Americans alone have been the people who have
supported all the fatigues of agriculture in all the vast countries of the
continent of South America, and in the greater part of those of North America
subject to the crown of Spain. No European is ever to be seen employed in the
labors of the field. The Moors who, in comparison of the Americans, are very
few in number in the kingdom of New Spain, are charged with the culture of the
sugar cane, and tobacco, and the making of fugar; but the soil destined for the
cultivation of those plants is not with respect to all the cultivated land of
that country, in the proportion of one to two thousand. The Americans are the
people who labor on the soil. They are the tillers, the sowers, the weeders,
and the reapers of the wheat, of the maize, of the rice, of the beans, and
other kinds of grain or pulse, of the cocoa, of the vanilla, of the cotton, of
the indigo, and all other plants useful to the sustenance, the clothing, and
commerce of those provinces; and without them so little can be done, that in
the year 1762, the harvest of wheat was abandoned, in many places, on account
of a sickness which prevailed, and prevented the Indians from reaping it. But
this is not all; the Americans are they who cut and transport all the necessary
timber from the woods; who cut, transport, and work the stones; who make lime,
plaster, and tiles; who construct all the buildings of that kingdom, except a
few places where none of them inhabit; who open and repair all the roads, who
make the canals and sluices, and clean the cities. They work in many mines of
gold, of silver, of copper, etc. they are the shepherds, herdsmen, weavers,
potters, basket makers, bakers, couriers, day laborers, etc. In a word, they
are the persons who bear all the ^^^den of public labors. These, says our
justly indign^^ author, are the employments of the weak, dastard^ and useless
Americans; while the vigorous M. de Pan^, and other indefatigable Europeans,
are occupied in writing invectives against them.

These labors, in which the Indians are continuall^ employed, certainly,
attest their healthiness and streng^^ for if they are able to undergo such
fatigues, they cannot be diseased, nor have an exhausted stream of bloo^ in
their veins, as M. de Pauw insinuates. In order to make it believed that their
constitutions are vitiated he copies whatever he finds written by historians of
(...) merica, whether true or false, respecting the disease which reign in some
particular countries of that gre^ continent. It is not to be denied, that in
some countries in the wide compass of America, men are exposed more than
elsewhere, to the distempers which are occasioned by the intemperature of the
air, or the per^^cious quality of the aliments; but it is certain, according to
the assertion of many respectable authors acquainted with the New World, that
the Americans countries are, for the most part, healthy; and if (...) Americans
were disposed to retaliate on M. de Pau^ and other European authors, who write
as he does, they would have abundant subject of materials to throw discredit on
the clime of the Old Continent, and the constitution of its inhabitants in the
endemic distemp^^^ which prevail there.

Lastly, the supposed feebleness and unfound bodi^^ habit of the Americans do
not correspond with (...) length of their lives. Among those Americans (...)
great fatigues and excessive toils do not anticipate th^^^ death, there are not
a few who reach the age of (...) 90, and 100, or more, years, as formerly
mentioned^ and, what is more, without there being observed in (...) that decay
which time commonly produces in the hair, in the teeth, in the skin, and in the
muscles of the human body. This phenomenon, so much admired by the Spaniards,
who reside in Mexico, cannot be ascribed to any other cause than the vigor of
their constitutions, the temperance of their diet, and the salubrity of their
clime. Historians, and other persons who have sojourned there for many years,
report the same thing of other countries of the New World.

As to the mental qualities of the Americans, M. de Pauw has not been able to
discover any other characters than a memory so feeble, that to day they do not
remember what they did yesterday; a capacity so blunt, that they are incapable
of thinking or putting their ideas in order; a disposition so cold, that they
feel no excitement of love; a dastardly spirit, and a genius that is torpid,
and indolent. Many other Europeans, indeed, and what is still more wonderful,
many of those children or descendants of Europeans who are born in America,
think as M. de Pauw does; some from ignorance, some from want of reflection,
and others from hereditary prejudice and prepossession. But all this, and much
more, would not be sufficient to invalidate the testimonies of other Europeans
whose authority has a great deal more weight, both because they were men of
great judgment, learning, and knowledge, of these countries, and because they
give their testimony in favor of strangers, against their own countrymen. In
particular, Acosta, whose Natural and Moral History even de Pauw commends, as
an excellent work, employs the whole sixth book in demonstrating the good sense
of the Americans, by an explanation of their ancient government, their laws,
their histories in paintings and knots, calendars, etc. M. de Pauw thinks the
Americans are bestial; Acosta, on the other hand, reputes those persons weak
and presumptuous who think them so. M. de Pauw says, that the most acute
Americans were inferior in industry and sagacity to the rudest nations of the
Old Continent: Acosta extols the civil government of the Mexicans above many
republics of Europe. M. de Pauw finds, in the moral and political conduct of
the Americans, nothing but barbarity, extravagance, and brutrlity; and Acosta
finds there, laws which are admirable and worthy of being preserved forever.

M. de Pauw denies them courage, and alleges the conquest of Mexico as a proof
of their cowardice. "Cortes (says he) conquered the empire of Mexico with 450
vagabonds, and 15 horses, badly armed; his miserable artillery consisted of six
falconets, which would not at the present day be capable of exciting the fears
of a fortress defended by invalids. During his absence, the capital was held in
awe by the half of his troops. What men! what events! -- It is confirmed by the
depositions of all historians, that the Spaniards entered, the first time, into
Mexico without making one single discharge of their artillery. If the title of
hero is applicable to him who has the disgrace to occasion the death of a great
number of rational animals, Ferdinand Cortes might pretend to it; otherwise I
do not see what true glory he has acquired by the overthrow of a tottering
monarchy, which might have been destroyed, in the same manner, by any other
assassin of our continent." These passages indicate either M. de Pauw's
ignorance of the history of the conquest of Mexico, or a wilful suppression of
what would openly contradict his system; since all who have read that history
know well, that the conquest of Mexico was not made with 450 men, but with more
than 200,000. Cortes himself, to whom it was of more importance than to M. de
Pauw to make his bravery conspicuous, and his conquest appear glorious,
confesses the excessive number of the allies who were under his command, at the
siege of the capital, and combated with more fury against the Mexicans than the
Spaniards themselves. According to the account which Cortes gave to the emperor
Charles V. the siege, of Mexico began with 87 horses, 848 Spanish infantry,
armed with guns, cross bows, swords, and lances, and upwards of 75,000 allies,
of Tlascala, Huexotzinco, Cholula, and Chalco, equipped with various sorts of
arms; with three large pieces of cannon of iron, 15 small of copper, and 13
brigantines. In the course of the siege were assembled the numerous nations of
the Otomies, the Cohuixcas, and Matlazincas, and the troops of the populous
cities of the lakes; so that he army of the besiegers not only exceeded
200,000, but amounted to 400,000, according to the letter from Cortes; and
besides these, 3000 boats and canoes came to their assistance. Did it betray
cowardice to have sustained, for full 75 days, the siege of an open city,
engaging daily, with an army so large, and in part provided with arms so
superior, and at the same time having to withstand the ravages of famine? Can
they merit the charge of cowardice, who, after having lost seven of the eight
parts of their city, and about 50,000 citizens, part cut off by the sword, part
by famine and sickness, continued to defend themselves until they were
furiously assaulted in the last hold which was left them?

The following instances of courage, fortitude and cloquence, will show how
unjustly their character has been defamed. "The Mexicans, fearing that the city
would be taken, and perceiving that there must soon be a total want of
provisions, turned their attention to the preservation of their emperor,
Gautimosin. He consented to attempt his of cape, with a view of maintaining the
war in the northern part of his dominions. To facilitate his retreat, a party
of his soldiers generously devoted themselves to death, by diverting the
attention of the besiegers: But the canoe, in which this generous and
unfortunate monarch had embarked, was taken on the lake by a brigantine. An
officer of the Spanish revenue suspecting that he had treasures con^ealed,
ordered him to be extended upon red hot coals, to extort a confession. One of
his officers, who underwent the same torture, complaining to him of his
sufferings, the emperor said, "Am I on a bed of roses?" An expression equal to
any of those which history has recorded, (...) worthy the admiration of
mankind."

According to M. de Pauw, "The Americans at (...) were not believed to be men,
but rather satyrs, (...) large apes, which might be murdered, without remorse,
or reproach."

But, if, at first, the Americans were esteemed saty^^ nobody can better prove
it than Christopher Columb^^ their discoverer. Let us hear, therefore, how that
c^lebrated admiral speaks, in his account to Ferdinand and Isabella, of the
first satyrs he saw in the island of Haiti, or Hispaniola. "I swear," he says,
"to you^ majesty's, that there is not a better people in the world than these,
more affectionate, affable, or mild. The^ love their neighbors as themselves;
their language (...) the sweetest, the softest, and the most cheerful; for they
always speak smiling; and although they go naked, let your majesty's believe
me, their customs are very becoming; and their king, who is served with great
majesty, has such engaging manners, that it gives great pleasure to see him,
and also to consider the great retentive faculty of that people, and their
desire of knowledge, which incites them to ask the causes and the effects of
things."

"We have had intimate commerce with the Americans (continues the Abbe) have
lived, for some years, in a seminary destined for their instruction; saw the
erection and progress of the royal college of Guad^loupe founded, in Mexico, by
a Mexican Jesuit, for the education of Indian children; had, afterward, some
Indians among our pupils; had particular knowledge of many American rectors,
many nobles, and numerous artists; attentively, observed their character, their
genius, their disposition, and manner of thinking; and have examined, besides,
with the utmost diligence, their ancient history, their religion, their
government, their laws, and their customs. After such long experience and study
of them, from which we imagine ourselves enabled to decide, without danger of
erring, we declare to M. de Pauw, and to all Europe, that the mental qualities
of the Americans are not in the least inferior to those of the Europeans; that
they are capable of all, (...) he most abstract, sciences; and that if equal
care (...) taken of their education, if they were brought up (...) childhood in
seminaries, under good masters, were protected and stimulated by rewards, we
should see rise among the Americans, philosophers, mathematicians, and divines,
who would rival the first in Europe."

But, although we should suppose, that, in the torrid climates of the New
World, as well as in those of the Old, especially under the additional
depression of slavery, there was an inferiority of the mental powers; the
Chilese, and the North Americans, have discovered higher rudiments of human
excellence and ingenuity than have, perhaps, ever been known among tribes in a
similar state of society, in any part of the world.

M. de Pauw affirms, that the Americans were unacquainted with the use of
money, and quotes the following well known passage from Montesquieu: "Imagine
to yourself that, by some accident, you are placed in an unknown country; if
you find money there, do not doubt that you are arrived among a polished
people." But, if by money we are to understand a piece of metal with the stamp
of the prince, or of the public, the want of it in a nation is no token of
barbarity. The Athenians employed oxen for money, as the Romans did sheep. The
Romans had no coined money till the time of Servius Tullius, nor had the
Persians until the reign of Darius Hystapses. But, if by money is understood a
sign representing the value of merchandise, the Mexicans, and other nations of
Anahuac, employed money in their commerce. The cacao, of which they made
constant use in the market to purchase whatever they wanted, was employed for
this purpose, as salt is in Abyssinia.

It has been affirmed, that stone bridges were unknow^ in America, when it was
first discovered; and that the natives did not know how to form arches. But,
these assertions are erroneous. The remains of the ancient palaces of Tezcuco,
and, still more, their vapor ba^^^, show the ancient use of arches and of
vaults among the Mexicans. But the ignorance of this art would have been no
proof of barbarity. Neither the Egyptians nor Babylonians understood the
construction of arches.

M. de Pauw affirms, that the palace of Montezum^ was nothing else than a hut.
But, it is certain, from the affirmation of all the historians of Mexico, that
the army under Cortes, consisting of 6,400 men, were all lodged in the palace;
and there remained still sufficient room for Montezuma and his attendants.

The advances which the Mexicans had made in the noble science of astronomy,
is, perhaps, the most surprising proof of their attention and sagacity; for it
appears from Abbe Clavigero's History, that they not only counted 365 days to
the year, but also knew of the excess of about six hours in the solar over the
civil year, and remedied the difference, by means of intercalary days.

Of American morality, the following exhortation of a Mexican to his son may
serve as a specimen. "My son, who art come into the light from the womb of thy
mother like a chicken from the egg, and, like it, art preparing to fly through
the world, we know not how long Heaven will grant to us the enjoyment of that
precious gem which we possess in thee; but however short the period, endeavor
to live exactly, praying God continually to assist thee. He created thee: thou
art his property. He is thy father, and loves thee still more than I do: Repose
in him thy thoughts, and day and night direct thy sighs to him. Reverence and
salute thy elders, and hold no one in contempt. To the poor and distressed be
not dumb, but rather use words of comfort. Honor all persons, particularly thy
p^rents, to whom thou owe obedience, respect, and service. Guard against
imitating the example of those wicked sons, who, like brutes that are deprived
of reason, neither reverence their parents, listen to their instruction, nor
submit to their correction; because whoever follows their steps will have on
unhappy end, will die in a desperate or sudden manner, or will be killed, and
devoured, by wild beasts.

"Mock not, my son, the aged, or the imperfect. Scorn not him whom you see fall
into some folly, or transgression, nor make him reproaches; but restrain
thyself, and beware lest thou fall into the same error which offends thee in
another. Go not where thou art not called, nor interfere in that which does not
concern thee. Endeavor to manifest thy good breeding, in all thy words and
actions. In conversation, do not lay thy hands upon another, nor speak too
much, nor interrupt or disturb another's discourse. When any one discourses
with thee, hear him attentively, and hold thyself in an easy attitude, neither
playing with thy feet, nor putting thy mantle to thy mouth, nor spitting too
often, nor looking about you here and there, nor rising up frequently if thou
art sitting; for such actions are indications of levity and low breeding." --
The father proceeds to mention several particular vices which are to be
avoided, and concludes -- "Steal not, nor give thyself to gaming; otherwise
thou will be a disgrace to thy parents, whom thou ought rather to honor for
the education they have given thee. If thou will be virtuous, thy example will
put the wicked to shame. No more my son; enough has been said in discharge of
the duties of a father. With these counsels I wish to fortify thy mind. Refuse
them not, nor act in contradiction to them; for on them thy life, and all thy
happiness, depend."

CHAP. VIII.
M. Buffon's Notions concerning the Degeneracy of the Inhabitants of the New
World, refuted by Mr. Jeffer^^ -- Their seeming Coldness to the Sex accounted
for -- Why they have few Children -- Their Sensibility, etc. -- Their Courage
-- Story of Logan -- Specimen of Indian Eloquence. -- Other Anecdotes -- Their
Politeness and Civility -- Their Hospitality.

AS ranging on the same side with the Abbe Clavigero, our countryman Mr.
Jefferson deserves particular attention. This gentleman, in his Notes on the
State of Virginia, etc. has taken occasion to com^^^ the opinions of Buffon;
and seems, in many instanc^^ to have fully refuted them, both by argument and
by facts.

Of the inhabitants of America, the French philosophe^ gives the following
description: "Though the American savage be nearly of the same stature with men
(...) polished societies; yet this is not a sufficient exception to the general
contraction of animated Nature throughout the whole continent. In the savage,
the organs of generation are small and feeble. He has no hair, no beard, no
ardour for the female. Though nimble^ than the European, because more
accustomed to running, his strength is not so great. His sensations are le^^
acute; and yet he is more timid and cowardly. He has no vivacity, no activity
of mind. The activity of his body is not so much an exercise or spontaneous
motion, as a necessary action produced by want. Destroy his appetite for
victuals and drink, and you will, at once, annihilate the active principle of
all his movements: he remains in stupid repose, on his limbs, or couch, for
whole days. It is easy to discover the cause of the scattered life of savages,
and of their estrangement from society. They have been refused the most
precious spark of Nature's fire: They have no ardour for women, and of course,
no love to mankind. Unacquainted with the most lively and the most tender of
all attachments, their other sensations of this nature are cold and languid.
Their love to parents and children is extremely weak. The bonds of the most
intimate of all societies, that of the same family, are feeble; and one family
has no attachment to another. Hence no union, no republic, no social state can
take place amongst them. The physical cause of love gives rise to the morality
of their manners. Their heart is frozen, their society cold, and their empire
cruel. They regard their families as servants destined to labor, or as beasts
of burden, whom they load unmercifully with the produce of their hunting, and
oblige, without pity or gratitude, to perform labors which often exceed their
strength. They have few children, and pay little attention to them. Every thing
must be referred to the first cause: They are indifferent because they are
weak; and this indifference to the sex is the original stain which disgraces
Nature; prevents her from expanding, and by destroying the germs of life, cuts
the root of society. Hence, man makes no exception to what has been advanced.
Nature, by denying him the faculty of love, has abused and contracted him more
than any other animal."

An humiliating picture, indeed! but than which, Mr. Jefferson assures us,
never was one more unlike the original. M. Buffon grants, that their stature is
the same as that of the men of Europe, and he might have admitted, that the
Iroquois were larger, and the Lenopi, or Delawares, taller, than people in
Europe generally are. But, he says, their organs of generation are smaller and
weaker than those of Europeans; which is not known, at least, to be a fact. And
as to their want of beard, this error has been already noticed.

"They have no ardour for their females." It is true, they do not indulge those
excesses, nor discover that fondness, which are customary in Europe; but this
is not owing to a defect in nature, but to manners. The soul of the Indian is
wholly bent upon war. This is what procures him glory amongst the men, and
makes him the admiration of the women. To this he is educated, from his
earliest youth. When he pursues game with ardour, when he bears the fatigues of
the chase, when he sustains and suffers patiently hunger and cold; it is not so
much for the sake of the game he pursues, as to convince his parents and the
council of the nation, that he is fit to be enrolled in the number of the
warriors. The songs of the women, the dance of the warriors, the sage counsel
of the chiefs, the tales of the old, the triumphant entry of the warriors
returning, with success, from battle, and the respect paid to those who
distinguish themselves in battle, and in subduing their enemies; in short,
every thing he sees or hears tends to inspire the Indian with an ardent desire
for military fame. If a young man were to discover a fondness for women before
he has been to war, he would become the contempt of the men, and the scorn and
ridicule of the women; or were he to indulge himself with a captive taken in
war, and much more were he to offer violence in order to gratify his lust, he
would incur indelible disgrace. The seeming frigidity of the American,
therefore, is the effect of manners, and not a defect of nature. He is neither
more defective in ardour, nor impotent with the female, than a white man
reduced to the same diet and exercise.

"They raise few children." -- They, indeed, raise fewer children than we do;
the causes of which are to be found, not in a difference of nature, but of
circumstance. The women very frequently attending the men in their parties of
war and of hunting, child bea^ing becomes extremely inconvenient to them. It is
said, therefore, that they have learned the practice of procuring abortion by
the use of certain vegetables; and that they even tend to prevent conception
for a considerable time after. During these parties, they are exposed to
numerous hazards, to excessive exertions, to the greatest extremities of
hunger. Even at their homes the nation depends for food, through a certain part
of every year, on the gleanings of the forest; that is, they experience a
famine once in every year. With all animals, if the female be badly fed, or not
fed at all, her young perish: and if both male and female be reduced to like
want, generation becomes less active, less productive. To the obstacles, then,
of want and hazard, which nature has opposed to the multiplication of wild
animals for the purpose of restraining their numbers within certain bounds,
those of labor and of voluntary abortion are added with the Indian. No wonder,
then, if they multiply less than we do. Where food is regularly supplied, a
single farm will show more of cattle than a whole country of forests can of
buffaloes. The same Indian women, when married to white traders, who feed them
and their children plentifully and regularly, who exempt them from excessive
drudgery, who keep them stationary and unexposed to accidents, produce, and
raise, as many children as the white women. Instances are known, under these
circumstances, of their rearing a dozen children.

Neither do they seem to be "deficient in natural affection." On the contrary
their sensibility is keen, even the warriors weeping most bitterly on the loss
of their children, though, in general, they endeavor to appear superior to
human events.

Their friendships are strong, and faithful to the uttermost extremity. A
remarkable instance of this appeared in the case of the late Col. Byrd of
Virginia, who was sent to the Cheerakee nation to transact some business with
them. It happened that some of our disorderly people had just killed one or two
of that nation. It was, therefore, proposed in the council of the Cheerakee,
that Col. Byrd should be put to death in revenge for the loss of their
countrymen. Amongst them was a chief called Silouee, who on some former
occasion, had contracted an acquaintance and friendship with Col. Byrd. He came
to him every night, in his tent, and told him not to be afraid, they should not
kill him. After many days deliberation, however, the determination was,
contrary to Silouee's expectation, that Byrd should be put to death, and some
warriors were dispatched a^ executioners. Silouee attended them; and when they
entered the tent, he threw himself between them and Byrd, and said to the
warriors, "This man is my friend; before you get at him, you must kill me." On
which they returned; and the council respected the principle so much as to
recede from their determination.

That "they are timorous and cowardly" is a character with which there is
little reason to charge them, when we recollect the manner in which the
Iroquois met Mons. --, who marched into their country; in which the old men,
who scorned to fly or to survive the capture of their town, braved death, like
the old Romans, in the time of the Gauls, and in which they soon after revenged
themselves by sacking and destroying Montreal. In short, the Indian is brave,
when an enterprise depends on bravery; education with him making the point of
honor to consist in the destruction of an enemy by stratagem, and in the
preservation (...) his own person free from injury: or, perhaps, this is
nature, while it is education which teaches us to honor force more than
finesse. He will defend himself against an host of enemies, always choosing to
be killed rather than to surrender, though it be to the whites, who, he knows,
will treat him well. In other situations, also, he meets death with more
deliberation; and endures tortures with a firmness unknown almost to religious
enthusiasm amongst us.

Much less are they to be characterized as a people of no vivacity, and who are
excited to action or motion only by the calls of hunger and thirst. Their
dances, in which they so much delight, and which to a European would be the
most severe exercise, fully contradict this; not to mention their fatiguing
marches, and the toil they voluntarily and cheerfully undergo in their military
expeditions. It is true, that when at home they do not employ themselves in
labor or the culture of the soil: But this, again, is the effect of customs
and manners which have assigned that to the province of the women. But it is
said, "They are averse to society and a social life." Can any thing be more
inapplicable than this, to a people who always live in towns, or in clans? Or
can they be said to have no republique, who conduct all their affairs in
national councils; who pride themselves in their national character; who
consider an insult or injury, done to an individual by a stranger, as done to
the whole, and resent it, accordingly?

To form a just estimate of their genius and mental powers, Mr. Jefferson
observes, more facts are wanting, and great allowance is to be made for those
circumstances of their situation which call for a display of particular talents
only. This done, we shall, probably, find that the Americans are formed, in
mind as well as in body, on the same model with the homo sapiens Europaeus. The
principles of their society forbidding all compulsion, they are to be led to
duty and to enterprise by personal influence and persuasion. Hence eloquence in
council, bravery and address in war, become the foundations of all consequence
with them. To these acquirements all their faculties are directed. Of their
bravery and address in war we have multiplied proofs, because we have been the
subjects on which they were exercised. Of their eminence in oratory we have
fewer examples, because it is displayed chiefly in their own councils. Some,
however, we have of very superior luster. We may challenge the whole orations
of Demosthenes and Cicero, and of any more eminent orator, if Europe has
furnished more eminent, to produce a single passage superior to the speech of
Logan, a Mingo chief, to Lord Dummore, when governor of Virginia. The story is
as follows; of which, and of the speech, the authenticity is unquestionable. In
the spring of the year 1774, a robbery and murder were committed on an
inhabitant of the frontiers of Virginia, by two Indians, of the Shawanae tribe.
The neighboring whites, according to their custom, undertook to punish this
outrage in a summary way. Colonel Cresap, a man infamous for the many murders
(...) had committed on those much injured people, colle^^ed a party, and
proceeded down the Kanhaway, (...) quest of vengeance. Unfortunately, a canoe
of wom^^ and children, with one man only, was seen coming from the opposite
shore, unarmed, and unsuspecting any hostile attack from the whites. Cresap and
his party concealed themselves on the bank of the rive^; and the moment the
canoe reached the shore, singled out their objects, and, at one fire, killed
every person (...) it. This happened to be the family of Logan, who had long
been distinguished as a friend of the white^. This unworthy return provoked his
vengeance. He accordingly signalized himself in the war which ensue^. In the
autumn of the same year, a decisive battle was fought at the mouth of the Great
Kanhaway, between the collected forces of the Shawanaes, Mingoes, and
Delawares, and a detachment of the Virginia militia. The Indians were defeated,
and sued for peace. Loga^ however, disdained to be seen among the suppliants;
but, lest the sincerity of a treaty should be distrusted from which so
distinguished a chief absented himself, he sent, by a messenger, the following
speech, to be delivered to Lord Dunmore: -- "I appeal to any white man to say
if ever he entered Logan's cabin hungry, and he gave him not meat; if ever he
came cold and naked, and he clothed him not. During the course of the last long
and bloody war, Logan remained idle in his cabin, an advocate for peace. Such
was my love for the whites, that my countrymen pointed (...) they passed, and
said, Logan is the friend of white men. I had even thought to have lived with
you, but for the injuries of one man. Colonel Cresap, the last spring, in cold
blood, and unprovoked, murdered all the relations of Logan, not sparing even my
women and children. There runs not a drop of my blood in the veins of any
living creature. This called on me for revenge. I have sought it; I have killed
many; I have fully glutted my vengeance. For my country, I rejoice at the beams
of peace; but do not harbor a thought that mine is the joy of fear. Logan
never felt fear. He will not turn on his heel to save his life. Who is there to
mourn for Logan? Not one."

To the preceding anecdotes, in favor of the American character, may be added
the following, by Dr. Benjamin Franklin. -- The Indian men, when young, are
hunters and warriors; when old, counselors; for all their government is by the
counsel or advice of the sages. Hence, they generally study oratory; the best
speakers having the most influence. The Indian women till the ground, dress the
food, nurse and bring up the children, and preserve and hand down to posterity
the memory of public transactions. These employments of men and women are
accounted natural and honorable. Having few artificial wants, they have
abundance of leisure for improvement by conversation. Our laborious manner of
life, compared with theirs, they esteem slavish and base; and the learning on
which we value ourselves, they regard as frivolous and useless.

Having frequent occasions to hold public councils, they have acquired great
order and decency in conducting them. The old men sit in the foremost rank, the
warriors in the next, and the women and children in the hindmost. The business
of the women is to take exact notice of what passes; imprint it in their
memories, for they have no writing, and communicate it to their children. They
are the records of the council, and they preserve tradition of the stipulations
in treaties a hundred years back; which, when we compare with our writings, we
always find exact. He that would speak, rises. The rest observe a profound
silence. When he has finished, and sits down, they leave him five or six
minutes to recollect, that if he has omitted any thing he intended to say, or
has any thing to add* he may rise again and deliver it. To interrupt another
even in common conversation, is reckoned highly indecent.

The politeness of these savages in conversation (...) indeed, carried to
excess; since it does not permit them to contradict, or deny, the truth of what
is asserted in their presence. By these means they, indeed, avoid disputes; but
then it becomes difficult to know their minds, or what impression you make upon
them. The missionaries, who have attempted to convert them to christianity, all
complain of this, as one of the great difficulties of their mission. The
Indians hear, with patience, the truths of the gospel explained to them, and
give their usual tokens of assent and approbation; but this by no means implies
conviction; it is mere civility.

When any of them come into our towns, our people are apt to crowd round them,
gaze upon them, and incommode them when they desire to be private; this they
esteem great rudeness, and the effect of the want of instruction in the rules
of civility, and good manners. "We have," say they, "as much curiosity as you;
and when you come into our towns, we wish for opportunities of looking at you;
but for this purpose we hide ourselves behind bushes where you are to pass, and
never intrude ourselves into your company."

Their manner of entering one another's villages has likewise its rules. It is
reckoned uncivil in traveling strangers to enter a village abruptly, without
giving notice of their approach. Therefore, as soon as the^ arrive within
hearing, they stop and hollow, remaining there till invited to enter. Two old
men usually come out to them, and lead them in. There is in every village a
vacant dwelling, called the stranger's house. Here they are placed, while the
old men go round from hut to hut, acquainting the inhabitants that strangers
are arrived, who are, probably, hungry and weary; and every one sends them what
he can spare of victuals, and skins to repose on. When the strangers are
refreshed, pipes and tobacco are brought; and then, but not before,
conversation begins, with inquiries who they are, whither bound, what news,
etc. and it usually ends with offers of service; if the strangers have occasion
for guides, or any necessaries, for continuing their journey; and nothing is
exacted for the entertainment.

The same hospitality, esteemed among them as a principal virtue, is practiced
by private persons; of which Conrad Weiser, a celebrated interpreter of the
Indian languages, gave Dr. Franklin the following instance. He had been
naturalized among the Six Nations, and spoke well the Mohawk language. In going
through the Indian country, to carry a message from our governor to the
council at Onondaga, he called at the habitation of Canassetego, an old
acquaintance, who embraced him, spread furs for him to sit on, placed before
him some boiled beans and venison, and mixed some rum and water for his drink.
When he was well refreshed, and had lit his pipe, Canassetego began to converse
with him; asked how he had fared the many years since they had seen each other,
whence he then came, what had occasioned the journey, etc. Conrad answered all
his questions; and when the discourse began to flag, the Indian, to continue
it, said, "Conrad, you have lived long among the white people, and know
something of their customs; I have been sometimes at Albany, and have observed
that once in seven days they shut up their shops, and assemble all in the great
house; tell me what it is for? -- What do they do there? "They meet there,"
says Conrad, "to hear and learn good things." "I do not doubt," says the
Indian, "that they tell you so; they have told me the same; but I doubt the
truth of what they say, and I will tell you my reasons. I went lately to Albany
to sell my skins, and buy blankets, knives, powder, ru^, etc. You know I
generally used to deal with Ha^^ Hanson; but I was a little inclined, this
time, to try some other merchants. However, I called first upon Hans, and asked
him what he would give for beave^. He said he could not give more than 4 s. a
pound; but (says he) I cannot talk on business now; this is the day when we
meet together to learn good things, and I am going to the meeting. So I thought
to myself, since I cannot do any business today, I may as well go to the
meeting too; and I went with him. -- There stood up a man in black, and began
to talk to the people, very angrily. I did not understand what he said; but
perceiving that he looked much at me and at Hanson, I imagined he was angry at
seeing me there; so I went out, sat down near the house, struck fire, and lit
my pipe, waiting till the meeting should break up. I thought, too, that the man
had mentioned something of beaver, and I suspected that it might be the subject
of their meeting. So when they came out, I accosted my merchant. -- Well, Hans,
(says I) I hope you have agreed to give more than 4 s. a pound?" "No, (says he)
I cannot give so much, I cannot give more than 3 s. 6 d." "I then spoke to
several other dealers, but they all sung the same song, three and six pence,
three and six pence. This made it clear to me that my suspicion was right; and
that whatever they pretended of meeting to learn good things, the real purpose
was, to consult how to cheat Indians in the price of beaver. Consider but a
little, Conrad, and you must be of my opinion. If they met so often to learn
good things, they certainly would have learned some before this time. But they
are still ignorant. You know our practice. If a white man, in traveling
through our country, enters one of our cabins, we all treat him as I treat you;
we dry him if he is wet, we warm him if he is cold, and give him meat and
drink, that he may allay his thirst and hunger; and we spread soft furs for him
to rest and sleep on: We demand nothing in return. But if I go into a white
man's house at Albany, and ask for victuals and drink, they say, where is your
money? And if I have none, they say, get out, you Indian dog. You see they have
not yet learned those little good things that we need no meeting to be
instructed in; because our mothers taught them to us when we were children;
and, therefore, it is impossible their meetings should be, as they say, for any
such purpose, or have any such effect; they are only to contrive the cheating
of Indians in the price of beaver."

CHAP. IX.
Of the Peopling of America -- Old and New Continents supposed to have been
formerly joined -- At present separated only by a narrow Strait -- Conjectures
concerning the first Migrations into the New Continent -- Mr Pennant's Opinion
-- Customs, etc. common to the eastern Asiatics and the Americans -- Brute
Creation migrated by the same Route.

THE questions which now present themselves to our notice are, From what part
of the Old World America has, most probably, been peopled? -- And how was this
peopling accomplished? --

Few questions in the history of mankind have been more agitated than these. --
Philosophers, and men of learning and ingenuity, have been speculating upon
them, ever since the discovery of the American Islands, by Christopher
Columbus. -- But notwithstanding all the labors of Acosta, of Grotius, and of
many other writers of eminence, the subject still affords an ample field for
the researches of the man of science, and for the fancies of the theorist.

Discoveries, long ago made, inform us, that an intercourse between the Old
Continent and America might be carried on, with facility, from the north west
extremities of Europe and the northeast boundaries of As^. In the ninth century
the Norwegians discovered Greenland, and planted a colony there. The
communication with that country was renewed in the last century by Moravian
missionaries, in order to propagate their doctrines in that bleak and
uncultivated region. By then we are informed that the north west coast of
Greenland is separated from America by a very narrow strait; that at the bottom
of the bay it is highly probable that they are united; that the Esquimaux of
America perfectly resemble the Greenlanders, in their aspect, dress, and mode
of living; and that a Moravian missionary, well acquainted with the language of
Greenland, having visited the country of the Esquimaux, found, to his
astonishment, that they spoke the same language with the Greenlanders, and
were, in every respect, the same people. The same species of animals, too, are
found in the contiguous regions. The bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare, the
deer, the roebuck, the elk, frequent the forests of North America, as well as
those in the north of Europe.

Other discoveries have proved, that if the two continents of Asia and America
be separated at all, it is only by a narrow strait. From this part of the Old
Continent, also, inhabitants may have passed into the New; and the resemblance
between the Indians of America and the eastern inhabitants of Asia, would
induce us to conjecture that they have a common origin. This is the opinion
adopted by Dr. Robertson, in his History of America, where we find it
accompanied with the following narrative.

"While those immense regions which stretched eastward from the river Oby to
the sea of Kamtschatka were unknown, or imperfectly explored, the north east
extremities of our hemisphere were supposed to be so far distant from any part
of the New World, that it was not easy to conceive how any communication should
have been carried on between them. But the Russians, having subjected the
western part of Siberia to their empire, gradually extended their knowledge of
that vast country, by advancing toward the east into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in their excursions after game, or by soldiers
employed in levying the taxes; and the court of Moscow estimated the importance
of those countries only by the small addition which they made to its revenue.
At length, Peter the Great ascended the Russian throne; His enlightened,
comprehensive mind, intent upon every circumstance that could aggrandize his
empire, or render his reign illustrious, discerned consequences of those
discoveries, which had escaped (...) observation of his ignorant predecessors.
He perceived, that, in proportion as the regions of Asia extended toward the
east, they must approach nearer to America; that the communication between the
two continents which had long been searched for in vain, would probably be
found in this quarter; and that, by opening this intercourse, some part of the
wealth and commerce of the western world might be made to flow into his
dominions by (...) new channel. Such an object suited a genius that delighted
in grand schemes. Peter drew up instructions with his own hand for prosecuting
this design, and gave orders for carrying it into execution.

"His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued his plan. The officers whom the
Russian court employed in this service, had to struggle with so many
difficulties, that their progress was extremely slow. Encouraged by some faint
traditions among the people of Siberia concerning a successful voyage in the
year 1648 round the north east promontory of Asia, they attempted to follow the
same course. Vessels were fitted out, with this view, at different time, from
the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen ocean, which nature seem^ not to
have destined for navigation, they were exposed to many disasters, without
being able to accomplish their purpose. No vessel fitted out by the Russian
court ever doubled this formidable cape; we are indebted for what is known of
those extreme regions of Asia, to the discoveries made in excursions by land.
In all th^se provinces, an opinion prevails, that countries of great extent and
fertility lie at no considerable distance from their own coasts. These the
Russians imagined to be part of America; and several circumstances concurred
not only in confirming them in this belief, but in persuading them that some
portion of that continent could not be very remote. Trees of various kinds,
unknown in those naked regions of Asia, are driven upon the coast by an
easterly wind. By the same wind, floating ice is brought thither in a few days;
flights of birds arrive annually from the same quarter; and a tradition obtains
among the inhabitants, of an intercourse formerly carried on with some
countries situated to the east.

"After weighing all these particulars, and comparing the position of the
countries in Asia which they had discovered, with such parts in the north west
of America as were already known; the Russian court formed a plan, which would
have hardly occurred to any nation less accustomed to engage in arduous
undertakings, and to contend with great difficulties. Orders were issued to
build two vessels at Ochotz, in the sea of Kamtschatka, to sail on a voyage of
discovery* Though that dreary uncultivated region furnished nothing that could
be of use in constructing them but some larch trees; though not only the iron,
the cordage^ the sails, and all the numerous articles requisite for their
equipment, but the provisions for victualling them, were to be carried through
the immense des^^^ of Siberia, along rivers of difficult navigation, and roads
almost impassable, the mandate of the sovereign, and the perseverance of the
people, at last surmounted every obstacle. Two vessels were finished; and,
under the command of captains Behring and Tschirikow, sailed from Kamtschatka
in quest of the New World, in a quarter where it had never been approached.
They shaped their course toward the east; and though a storm soon separated
the vessels, which never rejoined, and many disasters befell them, the
expectations from the voyage were not altogether frustrated. Each of the
commanders discovered land, which to them appeared to be part of the American
continent; and, according to their observations, it seems to be situated within
a few degrees of the north west coast of California. Each set some of his
people ashore: but in one place the inhabitants fled as the Russians
approached; in another, they carried off those who landed, and destroyed their
boats. The violence of the weather, and the distress of their crews, obliged
both to quit this inhospitable coast. In their return they touched at several
islands, which stretch in a chain from east to west between the country which
they had discovered and the coast of Asia. They had some intercourse with the
natives, who seemed to them to resemble the North Americans. They presented to
the Russians the calumet, or pipe of peace, which is a symbol of friendship
universal among the people of North America, and an usage of arbitrary
institution peculiar to them."

The more recent and accurate discoveries of that illustrious navigator Cook,
and of his successor Clerk, have brought the matter still nearer to certainty.
The sea, from the south of Behring's Straits to the crescent of isles between
Asia and America, is very shallow. It deepens from these straits (as the
British seas do from those of Dover) till soundings are lost in the Pacific
Ocean; but that does not take place but to the south of the isles. Between them
and the straits is an increase from 12 to 54 fathoms, except only off St.
Thaddeus Noss, where there is a channel of greater depth. From the volcanic
disposition, it has been judged probable, not only that there was a separation
of the continents at the straits of Behring, but that the whole space from the
isles to that small opening had once been occupied by land; and that the fury
of the watery element, actuated by that of fire, had, i^ most remote times,
subverted and overwhelmed the tract and left the islands to serve as monumental
fragments.

Without adopting all the fancies of Buffon, there can be no doubt, as the Abbe
Clavigero observes, that our planet has been subject to great vicissitudes
since the deluge. Earthquakes have swallowed some lands, and subterraneous
fires have thrown up others: the rivers have formed new soil with their mud:
the sea retreating from the shores, has lengthened the land i^ some places, and
advancing in others has diminished it; it has separated some territories which
were formerly united, and formed new straits and gulph^. We have examples of
all these revolutions in the past century. Sicily was united to the continent
of Naples, as Eubea, now the Black Sea, was to Boeotia. Diodorus, Strabo, and
other ancient authors, say the same thing of Spain, and of Africa, and affirm,
that by a violent eruption of the ocean upon the land between the mountains
Abyla and Calpe, that communication was broken, and the Mediterranean Sea was
formed. Among the people of Ceylon there is a tradition that a similar
irruption of the sea separated their island from the peninsula of India. The
same thing is believed by those of Malabar with respect to the isles of
Maldivia, and with the Malayans with respect to Sumatra. It is certain, says
the count de Buffon, that in Ceylon the earth has lost 30 or 40 leagues, which
the sea has taken from it; on the contrary, Tongres, a place of the Low
Countries, has gained 30 leagues of land from the sea. The northern part of
Egypt owes its existence to inundations of the Nile. The earth which this river
has brought from the inland countries of Africa, and deposited in its
inundations, has formed a soil of more than 25 cubits of depth. In like manner,
adds the above author, the province of the Yellow River in China, and that of
Louisiana, have only been formed of the mud of rivers. Plina, Seneca, Diodorus,
and Strabo, report innumerable examples of similar revolutions, which we omit,
that our dissertation may not become too prolix; as also many modern
revolutions, which are related in the theory of the earth of the Count de
Buffon and other authors. In South America, all those who have observed with
philosophic eyes the peninsula of Yucatan, do not doubt that that country has
once been the bed of the sea; and, on the contrary, in the channel of Bahama,
many indications show the island of Cuba to have been once united to the
continent of Florida. In the strait which separates America from Asia many
islands are found, which probably were the mountains belonging to that tract of
land which we suppose to have been swallowed up by earthquakes; which is made
more probable by the multitude of volcanoes which we know of in the peninsula
of Kamtschatka. It is imagined, however, that the sinking of that land, and the
separation of the two continents, has been occasioned by those great and
extraordinary earthquakes mentioned in the histories of the Americans, which
formed an era almost as memorable as that of the deluge. The histories of the
Toltecas fix such earthquakes in the year I Te^pat^; but as we know not to what
century that belonged, we can form no conjecture of the time that great
calamity happened. If a great earthquake should overwhelm the isthmus of Suez,
and there should be at the same time as great a scarcity of historians as there
were in the first ages after the deluge, it would be doubted, in 300 or 400
years after, whether Asia had ever been united by that part to Africa; and many
would firmly deny it.

Whether that great event, the separation of the continents, took place before
or after the population of America, it is impossible for us to determine: but
we are indebted to the abovementioned navigators for settling the long dispute
about the point from which it was effected. Their observations prove, that in
one place the distance between continent and continent is only 39 miles, not
(as the author of the Reckerch^ Philosophiques sur les Americains would have
it) 800 leagues. This narrow strait has also in the middle two islands, which
would greatly facilitate the migration of the Asiatics into the New World,
supposing that it took place in canoes after the convulsion which rent the two
continents asunder. Besides, it may be added, that these straits are, even in
the summer, often filled with ice; in winter, often frozen. In either case,
mankind might find an easy passage; in the la^^, the way was extremely ready
for quadrupeds to cross and stock the continent of America. But where, from the
vast expanse of the north eastern world, to fix o^ the first tribes who
contributed to people the New Continent, now inhabited almost from end to end,
is (...) matter that baffles human reason. The learned may make bold and
ingenious conjectures, but plain good sense cannot always accede to them.

As mankind increased in numbers, they naturally protruded one another forward.
Wars might be another cause of migrations. There appears no reason why the
Asiatic north might not be an officin^ vir^ru^, as well as the European. The
overteeming country to the east of the Riphaean Mountains, must find it
necessary to discharge its inhabitants: the first great wa^ of people was
forced forward by the next to it, more tumid and more powerful than itself:
successive and new impulses continually arriving, short rest was gives to that
which spread over a more eastern tract; disturbed again and again, it covered
fresh regions; at length, reaching the farthest limits of the Old World, found
a new one, with ample space to occupy, unmolested for ages; till Columbus
cursed them by a discovery, which brought again new sins and new deaths to both
worlds.

"The inhabitants of the New World (Mr. Pennant observes) do not consist of the
offspring of a single nation: different people, at several periods, arrived
there; and it is impossible to say, that any one is now to be found on the
original spot of its colonization. It is impossible, with the lights which we
have so recently received, to admit that America could receive its inhabitants
(at least the bulk of them) from any other place than eastern Asia. A few
proofs may be added, taken from customs or dresses common to the inhabitants of
both worlds; some have been long extinct in the old, others remain in both in
full force.

"The custom of scalping was a barbarism in use with the Scythians, who carried
about them, at all times; this savage mark of triumph; they cut a circle round
the neck, and stripped off the skin, as they would that of an ox. A little
image, found among the Kalmucks, of a Tartarian deity, mounted on a horse, and
sitting on a human skin, with scalps pendant from the breast, fully illustrates
the custom of the Scythian progenitors, as described by the Greek historian.
This usage, as we well know, by horrid experience, is continued to this day in
America. The ferocity of the Scythians to their prisoners extended to the
remotest part of Asia. The Kamtschatkans, even at the time of their discovery
by the Russians, put their prisoners to death by the most lingering and
excruciating inventions; a practice in full force to this very day among the
aboriginal Americans. A race of the Scythians were styled Anthropophagi, from
their feeding on human flesh. The people of Nootka Sound still make a repast on
their fellow creatures; but what is more wonderful, the savage allies of the
British army have been known to throw the mangled limbs of the French prisoners
into the horrible cauldron, and devour them with the same relish as those of a
quadruped.

"The Scythians were said, for a certain time, annually to transform themselves
into wolves, and again to resume the human shape.

"In their marches, the Kamtschatkans never went abreast, but followed one
another in the same track. The same custom is exactly observed by the Americans.

"The Tungusi, the most numerous nation resident in Siberia, prick their faces
with small punctures, with a needle, in various shapes; then rub into them
charcoal, so that the marks become indelible. This custom is still observed in
several parts of America. The Indians on the back of Hudson's Bay, to this day,
perform the operation exactly in the same manner, and puncture the skin into
various figures; as the natives of New Zealand do at present, and as the
ancient Br^ons did with the herb glastem, or woad; and the Virginians, on the
first discovery of that country by the English.

"The Tungusi use canoes made of birch bark, distended over ribs of wood, and
nicely sowed together. The Canadian, and many other American nations, use no
other sort of boats. The paddles of the Tung^^^ are broad at each end; those of
the people near Cook river, and of Oonalascha, are of the same form.

"In burying of the dead, many of the American nations place the corpse at full
length, after preparing it according to their customs; others place it in a
fitting posture, and lay by it the most valuable clothing, wampum, and other
matters. The Tartars did the same: And both people agree in covering the whole
with earth, so as to form a tumulus, barrow, or carnedd.

"Some of the American nations hang their dead in trees. Certain of the Tungusi
observe a similar custom.

"We can draw some analogy from dress; convenience in that article must have
been consulted on both continents, and originally the materials must have been
the same, the skins of birds and beasts. It is singular, that the conic bonnet
of the Chinese should be found among the people of Nootka. We cannot give into
the notion, that the Chinese contributed to the population of the New World;
but we can, readily, admit, that a shipwreck might furnish those Americans with
a pattern for that part of the dress.

"In respect to the features and form of the human body, almost every tribe
found along the western coast has some similitude to the Tartar nations, and,
still, retain the little eyes, small noses, high cheeks, and broad faces. They
vary in size, from the lusty Calmu^s to the little Nogaians. The internal
Americans, such as the Five Indian nations, who are tall of body, robust in
make, and of oblong faces, are derived from a variety among the Tartars
themselves. The fine race of Tschutski seems to be the stock from which those
Americans are derived. The Tschutski, again, from that fine race of Tartars the
Kabardinski, or inhabitants of Kabarda.

"But, about Prince William's Sound begins a race chiefly distinguished by
their dress, their canoes, and their instruments of the chase, from the tribes
to the south of them. Here commences the Esquimaux people, or the race known by
that name in the high latitudes of the eastern side of the continent. They may
be divided into two varieties. At this place, they are of the largest size. As
they advance northward, they decrease in height, till they dwindle into the
dwarfish tribes which occupy some of the coasts of the Icy Sea, and the
maritime parts of Hudson's Bay, of Greenland, and Terra de Labrador. The famous
Japanese map places some islands seemingly within the straits of Behring, on
which is bestowed the title of Ya Zue, or the kingdom of the Dwarfs. Does not
this in some manner authenticate the chart, and give us reason to suppose that
America was not unknown to the Japanese; and that they had (as is mentioned by
Kaempfer and Charlevoix) made voyages of discovery, and according to the last,
actually wintered on the continent? That they might have met with the Esquimaux
is very probable; whom, in comparison of themselves, they might justly
distinguish by the name of dwarfs. The reason of their low stature is very
obvious: These dwell in a most severe climate, amidst penury of food; the
former in one much more favorable, abundant in provisions; circumstances that
tend to prevent the degeneracy of the human frame. At the island of Oonalascha,
a dialect of the Esquimaux is in use, which was continued along the whole coast
from thence northward."

The continent which stocked America with the human race, is supposed, by Mr.
Pennant, to have poured in the brute creation, through the same passage. Very
few quadrupeds continued in the peninsula of Kamtschatka; Mr. Pennant
enumerates only 25 which are inhabitants of land: All the rest persisted in
their migration, and fixed their residence in the New World. Seventeen of the
Kamtschatkan quadrupeds are found in America: Others are common only to
Siberia, or Tartary, having, for unknown causes, entirely evacuated
Kamtschatka, and divided themselves between America and the parts of Asia above
cited. Multitudes, again, have deserted the Old World, even to an individual,
and fixed their seats at distances most remote from the spot from which they
took their departure; from mount Ararat, the resting place of the ark, in a
central part of the Old World, and excellently adapted for the dispersion of
the animal creation to all its parts. "We need not be startled (says Mr.
Pennant) at the vast journeys many of the quadrupeds took to arrive at their
present feats. Might not numbers of species have found a convenient abode in
the vast alps of Asia, instead of wandering to the Cordilleras of Chili? Or
might not others have been contented with the boundless plains of Tartary,
instead of traveling thousands of miles to the extensive flats of Pampas? --
To endeavor to elucidate common difficulties is certainly a trouble worthy of
the philosopher, and of the divine; not to attempt it would be a criminal
indolence, a neglect to Vindicate the ways of God to man. But there are
multitudes of points beyond the human ability to explain, and yet are truths
undeniable: The facts are indisputable, notwithstanding the causes are
concealed. In such cases, faith must be called in to our relief. It would,
certainly, be the height of folly to deny to that Being who broke open the
great fountains of the deep to effect the deluge -- and afterward, to compel
the dispersion of mankind to people the globe, directed the confusion of
languages -- powers inferior in their nature to these. After these wondrous
proofs of omnipotency, it will be absurd to deny the possibility of infusing
instinct into the brute creation. "God himself is the soul of brutes;" his
pleasure must have determined their will, and directed several species, and
even whole genera, by impulse irresistible, to move by slow progression to
their destined regions. But for that, the illama and the pacos might still have
inhabited the heights of Armenia, and some more neighboring Alps, instead of
laboring to gain the distant Peruvian Andes; the whole genus of armadillos,
flow of foot, would never have quitted the torrid zone of the Old World for
that of the New; and the whole tribe of monkeys would have gamboled together in
the forests of India, instead of dividing their residence between the shades of
Indostan, and the deep forests of the Brasils. Lions and tigers might have
infested the hot parts of the New World, as the first do the deserts of Africa,
and the last the provinces of Asia; or the pantherine animals of South America
might have remained additional scourges with the savage beasts of those ancient
continents. The Old World would have been overstocked with animals; the New
remained an unanimated waste! Or both have contained an equal portion of every
beast of the earth. Let it not be objected, that animals bred in a southern
climate, after the descent of their parents from the ark, would be unable to
bear the frost and snow of the rigorous north, before they reached South
America, the place of their final destination. It must be considered, that the
migration must have been the work of ages; that in the course of their progress
each generation grew hardened to the climate it had reached; and that, after
their arrival in America, they would again be gradually accustomed to warmer
and warmer climates, in their removal from north to south, as they had in the
reverse, or from south to north. Part of the tiger, still inhabit the eternal
snows of Ararat, and multitudes of the very same species live, but with exalted
rage, beneath the line, in the burning soil of Borneo, or Sumatra; but neither
lions or tigers ever migrated into the New World. A few of the first are found
in India and Persia, but they are found in numbers only in Africa. The tiger
extends as far north as western Tartary, in lat. 40, 50, but never has reached
America."

In fine, the conjectures of the learned respecting the vicinity of the Old and
New World are now, by the discoveries of late great navigators, lost in
conviction; and, in the place of imaginary hypothesis, the real place of
migration almost incontrovertibly pointed out. Some (from a passage in Plato)
have extended over the Atlantic, from the straits of Gibraltar to the coast of
North and South America, an island equal in size to the continents of Asia and
Africa; over which had passed, as over a bridge, from the latter, men and
animals; wool headed negroes, and lions and tigers, none of which ever existed
in the New World. A mighty sea arose, and, in one day and night, engulphed this
stupendous tract, and with it every being which had not completed its migration
into America. The whole negro race, and almost every quadruped, now inhabitants
of Africa, perished in this critical day. Five only are to be found, at
present, in America; and of these only one, the bear, in South America: Not a
single custom, common to the natives of Africa and America, to evince a common
origin. Of the quadrupeds, the bear, stag, wolf, fox, and weesel, are the only
animals which we can pronounce, with certainty, to be found on each continent.
The stag, the fox, and the weesel, have made, also, no farther progress in
Africa than the north; but on the same continent the wolf is spread over every
part, yet is unknown in South America, as are the fox and weesel. In Africa and
in South America the bear is very local, being met with only in the north of
the first, and on the Andes in the last. Some cause unknown arrested its
progress in Africa, and impelled the migration of a few into the Chilian Alps,
and induced them to leave unoccupied the vast tract from North America to the
lofty Cordilleras.

CHAP. X.
Remains of Antiquity in America.

ALLUSIONS have often been made by travelers, and others, to some remains in
America which appeared to owe their original to a people more intimately
acquainted with the arts of life than the savage tribes which inhabited this
continent on its first discovery by the Europeans, or than those which are, at
present, scattered through various parts of its extent. In a small work,
published in London, in 1787, entitled Observations on some parts of natural
history^: To which is prefixed, an account of several remarkable vestiges of an
ancient date, which have been discovered in different parts of America, By Dr.
Benjamin Smith Barton, of Philadelphia.
Part I. the author has collected the scattered hints of Kaim, of Carver, of
Filson, and some other travelers, and writers; and has added a plan and
description of a regular work, which he supposes to have been a fortification,
that has been discovered near the confluence of the rivers Ohio and Muskingum.
The remains described, or alluded to, in this publication, are characters, or
singular marks, which were supposed by some Jesuits, who examined them, to be
Tartarian; furrows, as if the land had been ploughed; a stone wall; mounds of
earth, of different forms and sizes; earthen walls, and ditches, etc.

The mounds of earth are supposed, by the author, to have been designed for
different purposes: The smaller ones are, evidently, tumuli, or repositories of
the dead; and, he thinks, the larger ones, as that at Grave Creek (a branch of
the Ohio) many which are to be seen in Mexico, and in other parts of America,
were intended to serve as the bases of temples.

The most curious part of this little work is the description, together with
the plan, of the supposed fortification, above alluded to. It is situated on
the east side of the river Muskingum, about half a mile above it junction with
the river Ohio, nearly in the latitude of 39. 21. and about 170 miles below
Fort Pit, at the confluence of the rivers Al^eghaney and Monongahela. The
town, as it has been, sometimes, called, is a large level, encompassed by walls
of a tetragon form; occupying a piece of ground about one quarter of a mile
square. These walls are from six to ten feet in height, and from twenty to
forty feet in thickness. They are, at present, overgrown with vegetables, of
different kinds, and, among others, with trees, some of which are of a very
considerable diameter. Each side of the walls is divided, by three chasms, or
openings, into four, nearly equal, parts: These chasms are directly opposite to
each other. Within the walls there are three elevations; the largest of these
is of an oblong form, 74 yards long, 44 yards broad, and 6 feet in height: The
second is nearly of a similar form, 50 yards long, and 40 broad: The third is,
also, an oblong mount, but much smaller. Besides these three elevations, there
is a small circular mount, placed nearly in the center of four small caves; and
a "somi circular parapet," which, it is not improbable, may have been designed
to guard one of the chasms, or openings: This parapet has a small mount. The
author observes, that the three elevations "considerably resemble some of the
eminences which have been discovered near the river Mississippi," of which he
has given an account in his publication.

The fortifications (for a distinction has been made between them and the town,
but we cannot see with what great propriety) are nearly of the same form as the
town. The walls have here, also, openings: And at each of these openings there
is one, or more, of the small circular mounts.

The pyramid is one of the most conspicuous parts of these singular remains. It
is of a circular form; 50 feet in height, 390 feet in circumferance; and is
surrounded with a ditch, 5 feet deep, and 15 feet wide: Externally to the ditch
there is a parapet, which is 759 feet in circumference. "The pyramid, as well
as the eminences and walls, is now covered with grasses, and other kinds of
vegetables." Besides these, there are several other eminences, of which we do
not think it necessary to take any notice, in this place.

The author's opinion concerning these remains is this; that they owe their
original to "the Toltecas, or some other Mexican nation," and that these people
were, probably, the descendants of the Danes. The first member of this
conjecture appears not improbable, if we consider the similarity of the Mexican
mounts and fortifications, described by Torquemada, by the Abbe Clavegero, and
by other authors, to those of which our author has published an account; and,
also, if we consider the tradition of the Mexicans, that they came from the
north west, in which tract great numbers of these remains have been discovered.
As to the second member of this conjecture, we think it but feebly supported;
although we are not ignorant that Grotius and other writers have endeavored to
prove, that the northern nations of Europe, had, actually, some intercourse
with America, long before the time of Columbus.

It is said, there are inscriptions in strange characters in different parts of
the western country: One, in particular, on a flat rock on the river
Cumberland, the existence of which general Clarke affirms. It is said to be
lengthy, and would no doubt if decyphered throw great light upon the ancient
history of America. See American Museum, Vol. V. p. 144.


CHAP. XI.
The Ancients supposed to have had some imperfect Notion of a New World --
Pretensions of the Welsh to the Discovery of America -- Those of the Norwegians
better founded. -- Projects of CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS -- his Voyage --
Astonishment occasioned by observing the Variation of the Compass -- his
perilous Situation -- his Crew ready to mutiny -- their Joy on d^serying Land
-- they land on one of the Islands of the New World -- The Continent afterward
discovered -- The New World derives its name from AMERICUS VES^^^^^S --
Divisions of America -- Its productions -- Its different Possessions.

IT is believed, by many, that the ancients had some imperfect notion of the
New World; and several ancient authors are quoted in confirmation of this
opinion. In a book, ascribed to the philosopher Aristotle, we are told that the
Carthaginians discovered an island, far beyond the pillars of Hercules, large,
fertile, and finely watered, with navigable rivers, but uninhabited. This
island was distant a few days sailing from the continent: its beauty induced
the discoverers to settle there; but the policy of Carthage dislodged the
colony, and laid strict prohibition on all the subjects of the state not to
attempt any future establishment. This account is also confirmed by an
historian of no mean credit, who relates, that the Tyrians would have settled a
colony on the newly discovered island, but were opposed by the Carthaginians,
for state reasons.

The Welsh, fondly, imagine that their country contributed, in 1170, to people
the New World, by the adventure of Madoc, son of Owen Gwynedd, who, on the
death of his father, sailed there, and colonized part of the country. It is
pretended that Mado^ made two voyages: That sailing west, he left Ireland so
far to the north, that he came to land unknown, where he saw many strange
things; that he returned home, and, making a report of the fertility of the
newly discovered country, prevailed on numbers of the Welsh, of each sex, to
accompany him, on a second voyage, from which he never returned. The favorers
of this opinion assert, that several Welsh words, such as gwrando, "to hearken,
or listen;" the isle of Croes^, or "welcome;" Cape Breton, from the name of the
British island; gwynndwr, or "the white water;" and pingwin, or "the bird with
a white head;" are to be found in the American language. But likeness of sound,
in a few words, will not be deemed sufficient to establish the fact; especially
if the meaning has been evidently perverted: For example, the whole pinguin
tribe have, unfortunately, not only black ^^^ds, but are not inhabitants of the
northern hemisphere; the name was also bestowed on them by the Dutch a
pinguedine, from their excessive fatness. It may be added, that the Welsh were
never a naval people; that the age in which Mado^ lived was peculiarly ignorant
in navigation; and the most which they could have attempted must have been a
mere coasting voyage. The different opinions upon this subject, and the
foundations upon which they are built, are to be found in Dr. Robertson's
History of America; Dr. Belknap's American Biography, Vol. I. and Dr. John
Williams's inquiry concerning the first discovery of America. Curious extracts,
from the latter, are in the American Museum, Vol. XI. p. 152 and 2^9.


The Norwegians put in for a share of the glory, on grounds rather better than
the Welsh. By their settlements in Iceland, and in Greenland, they had arrived
within so small a distance of the New World, that there is a probability of its
having been touched at by a people so versed in maritime affairs, and so
adventurous, as the ancient Normans were. The proofs are much more numerous
than those produced by the British historians; for the discovery is mentioned
in several of the Icelandi^ manuscripts. The period was about the year 1002,
when it was visited by one Biorn; and the discovery pursued to great effect by
Leif, the son of Eric, the discoverer of Greenland. It does not appear that
they reached farther than Labrador; on which coast they met with the Esquimaux,
on whom they bestowed the name of Skraelingues, or dwarfish people, from their
small stature. They were armed with bows and arrows, and had leathern canoes,
such as they have at present. All this is probable; nor should the tale of the
German, called Turkil, one of the crew, invalidate the account. He was one day
missing; but soon returned, leaping and singing, with all the extravagant marks
of joy a bon vivant could show, on discovering the inebriating fruit of his
country, the grape: Torsaeus even says, that he returned in a state of
intoxication. To convince his commander, he brought several bunches: And the
country, from that circumstance, was named Vinland. There appears no reason to
doubt of the discovery; it is thought probable, however, that these people
reached no farther than the barren country of Labrador. In short, it is from a
much later period, that we must date the unequivocal discovery of America.

TOWARD the close of the 15th century, Venice and Genoa being rivals in
commerce, in which the former had greatly the superiority, Christopher Colon,
or Columbus, a native of Genoa, conceived a project of sailing to the East
Indies by directing his course westward. This design was founded upon a mistake
of the geographers, of those days, who placed the eastern parts of Asia
immensely too far to the eastward; so that had they been in the right, the
shortest way would have been to sail directly westward. Columbus applied,
first, to his own countrymen; but being rejected by them, he applied to
Portugal, where he met with no better success. Spain was his next resource:
here, after eight years attendance, he obtained, in 1492, a fleet of three
ships. The largest, a ship of no considerable burden, was commanded by
Columbus, as admiral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria, out of respect for
the Blessed Virgin, whom he honored with singular devotion. Of the second,
called the Pinta, Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother Francis pilot. The
third, named the Nigna, was under the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon. These
two were light vessels, hardly superior in burden, or force, to large boats.
This squadron, if it merits that name, was victualled for 12 months, and had on
board 90 men, mostly sailors, together with a few adventurers, who followed the
fortune of Columbus, and some gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom she appointed
to accompany him. Though the expense of the undertaking was one of the
circumstances which chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and retarded, so long,
the negotiation with Columbus, the sum employed in fitting out this squadron
did not exceed 4000 l. As Columbus was deeply impressed with sentiments of
religion, he would not set out upon an expedition so arduous, and of which one
great object was to extend the knowledge of the christian faith, without
imploring publicly, the guidance and protection of Heaven. With this view, he,
together with all the persons under his command, marched, in solemn procession,
to the monastery of Rabida. After confessing their sins, and obtaining
absolution, they received the holy sacrament from the hands of the guardian,
who joined his prayers to theirs for the success of an enterprise which he had
so zealously patronized.

Next morning, being Friday, the third day of August, in the year 1492,
Columbus set sail, a little before sun rise, in presence of a vast crowd of
spectators, who sent up their supplications to Heaven for the prosperous issue
of the voyage, which they wished, rather than expected. Columbus steered,
directly, for the Canary Islands, and arrived there without any occurrence that
would have deserved notice on any other occasion: but, in a voyage of such
expectation and importance, every circumstance was the object of attention. The
rudder of the Pinta broke loose, the day after she lest the harbor, and that
accident alarmed the crew, no less superstitious than unskilful, as a certain
omen of the unfortunate destiny of the expedition. Even in the short run to the
Canaries, the ships were found to be so crazy, and ill appointed, as to be very
improper for a navigation which was expected to be both long and dangerous.
Columbus refitted them, however, to the best of his power; and having supplied
himself with fresh provisions, he took his departure from Gomera, one of the
most westerly of the Canary Islands, on the sixth day of September.

Here the voyage of discovery may properly be said to begin; for Columbus,
holding his course due west, left, immediately, the usual track of navigation,
and stretched into unfrequented and unknown seas. The first day, as it was very
calm, he made but little way; but on the second he lost sight of the Canaries;
and many of the sailors, already dejected and dismayed, when they contemplated
the boldness of the undertaking, began to beat their breasts, and to shed
tears, as if they were never more to behold land. Columbus comforted them with
assurances of success, and the prospect of vast wealth, in those opulent
regions whither he was conducting them. He regulated every thing by his sole
authority; he superintended the execution of every order; and allowed himself
only a few hours for sleep; he was at all other times upon deck. As his course
lay through seas which had not, formerly, been visited, the sounding line, or
instruments for observation, were continually in his hands. After the example
of the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to the motion of tides and currents,
watched the flight of birds, the appearance of fishes, of sea weeds, and of
every thing that floated on the waves, and entered every occurrence with a
minute exactness, in the journal which he kept. As the length of the voyage
could not fail of alarming sailors habituated only to short (...) sions,
Columbus endeavored to conceal from them the real progress which they made.
With this view, though they ran 18 leagues the second day, after they left
Gomera, he gave out that they had advanced only 15, and he uniformly employed
the same artifice of reckoning short, during the whole voyage. By the 14th of
September, the fleet was above 200 leagues to the west of the Canary Isles.
There they were struck with an appearance, no less astonishing than new. They
observed that the magnetic needle, in their compasses, did not point exactly to
the polar star, but variest toward the west; and, as they proceeded, this
variation increased. This appearance, which is now familiar, though it still
remains one of the mysteries of nature, into the cause of which the sagacity of
man has not been able to penetrate, silled the companions of Columbus with
terror. They were now in a boundless, unknown, ocean, far from the usual place
of navigation; nature itself seemed to be altered, and the only guide which
they had left was about to fail them. Columbus, with no less quickness than
ingenuity, invented a reason for this appearance, which, though it did not
satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to them, that it dispelled their fears, or
silenced their murmurs.

He still continued to steer due west, nearly in the same latitude with the
Canary Islands. In this course, he came within the sphere of the trade wind,
which blows, invariably, from east to west, between the tropics, and a few
degrees beyond them. He advanced before this steady gale with such uniform
rapidity, that it was seldom necessary to shift a sail. When about 400 leagues
to the west of the Canaries, he found the sea so covered with weeds, that it
resembled a meadow of vast extent; and in some places they were so thick, as to
retard the motion of the vessels. This strange appearance occasioned new alarm
and disquiet. The sailors imagined that they were now arrived at the utmost
boundary of the navigable o^e^n; that these floating weeds would obstruct their
so^ther progress, and concealed dangerous rocks, or some large tract of land,
which had sunk, they knew not how, in that place. Columbus endeavored to
persuade them, that what had alarmed, ought rather to have encouraged them, and
was to be considered as a sign of approaching land. At the same time, a brisk
gale arose, and carried them forward. Several birds were seen hovering about
the ship, and directed their slight toward the west. The desponding crew
resumed some degree of spirit, and began to entertain fresh hopes.

Upon the first of October they were, according to the admiral's reckoning, 770
leagues to the west of the Canaries; but, lest his men should be intimidated by
the prodigious length of the navigation, he gave out that they had proceeded
only 584 leagues; and fortunately for Columbus, neither his own pilot, nor
those of the other ships, had skill sufficient to correct this error, and to
discover the deceit. They had, now, been above three weeks at sea: they had
proceeded far beyond what former navigators had attempted, or deemed possible:
all their prognostics of discovery, drawn from the flight of birds, and other
circumstances, had proved fallacious: the appearances of land, with which their
own credulity, or the artifice of their commander, had, from time to time,
flattered and amused them, had been altogether illusive, and their prospect of
success seemed now to be as distant as ever. These reflections occurred often
to men, who had no other object, or occupation, than to reason and to discourse
concerning the intention and circumstances of their expedition. They made
impression, at first, upon the ignorant and timid, and extending, by degrees,
to such as were better informed, or more resolute, the contagion spread, at
length, from ship to ship. From secret whispers and murmurings, they proceeded
to open cabals and public complaints. They taxed their sovereign with
inconsiderate credulity, in paying such regard to the vain promis^^ and rash
conjectures of an indigent foreigner, as to ha^ard the lives of so many of her
own subjects, in prosecuting a chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they had
fully performed their duty, by venturing so far i^ an unknown and hopeless
course, and could incur (...) blame, for refusing to follow, any longer, a
desper^^ adventurer to certain destruction. They contended, that it was
necessary to think of returning to Spain, while their crazy vessels were still
in a condition to keep the sea, but expressed their fears that the attempt
would prove vain, as the wind, which had hitherto been so favorable to their
course, must render it impossible to sail in the opposite direction. All agreed
that Columbus should be compelled by force to adopt a measure (...) which their
common safety depended. Some of the more audacious proposed, as the most
expeditious and certa^^ method for getting rid, at once, of his remo^strances,
to throw him into the sea; being persuaded that, upon their return to Spain,
the death of an unsuccessful projector would excite little concern, and be
inquired into with no curiosity.

Columbus was fully sensible of his perilous situation. He had observed, with
great uneasiness, the fatal operation of ignorance, and of fear, in producing
disaffection among his crew; and saw that it was now ready to burst out into
open mutiny. He reta^^ed, however, perfect presence of mind. He affected to
seem ignorant of their machinations. Notwithstanding the agitation and
solicitude of his own mind, he appeared with a cheerful countenance; like a man
satisfied with the progress which he had made, and confident of success.
Sometimes he employed all the arts of insinuation to soothe his men. Sometimes
he endeavored to work upon their ambition, or avarice, by magnificent
descriptions of the fame and wealth which they were about to acquire. On other
occasions he assumed a tone of authority, and threatened them with vengeance
from their sovereign, if, by their dastardly behavior, they should defeat this
noble effort to promote the glory of God, and to exalt the Spanish name, above
that of every other nation. Even with seditious sailors, the words of a man,
whom they had been accustomed to reverence, were weighty and persuasive; and
not only restrained them from those violent excesses which they meditated, but
prevailed with them to accompany their admiral for some time longer.

As they proceeded, the indications of approaching land seemed to be more
certain, and excited hope in proportion. The birds began to appear in flocks,
making toward the south west. Columbus, in imitation of the Portuguese
navigators, who had been guided in several of their discoveries by the motion
of birds, altered his course from due west toward that quarter whither they
pointed their flight. But after holding on for several days in this new
direction without any better success than formerly, having seen no object
during 30 days but the sea and the sky, the hopes of his companions subsided
faster than they had risen; their fears revived with additional force;
impatience, rage, and despair, appeared in every countenance. All sense of
subordination was lost. The officers, who had hitherto concurred with Columbus
in opinion, and supported his authority, now took part with the private men:
they assembled tumultuously, on the deck, expostulated with their commander,
mingled threats with their expostulations, and required him instantly to tack
about, and to return to Europe. Columbus perceived that it would be of no avail
to have recourse to any of his former arts, which having been tried so often
had lost their effect; and that it was impossible to rekindle any zeal for the
success of the expedition among men in whose breasts fear had extinguished
every generous sentiment. He saw that it was no less vain to think of employing
either gentle or severe measures, to quell a mutiny so general and so violent.
It was necessary, on all these accounts, to soothe passions which he could no
longer command, and to give way to a torrent too impetuous to be checked. He
promised, solemnly, (...) his men, that he would comply with their request,
provided they would accompany him, and obey his commands for three days longer;
and if, during that time, land were not discovered, he would then abandon the
enterprise and direct his course toward Spain.

Enraged as the sailors were, and impatient to turn their faces again toward
their native country, this proposition did not appear to them unreasonable. Not
did Columbus hazard much in confining himself to a term so short. The presages
of discovering land went now so numerous and promising, that he deemed the^
infallible. For some days, the sounding line had reached the bottom, and the
soil which it brought up indicated land to be at no great distance. The flocks
of birds increased; and were composed not only of sea fowl, but of such land
birds as could not be supposed to fly far from the shore. The crew of the Pinta
observed a cane floating, which seemed to be newly cut, and likewise a piece of
timber artificially carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna took up the branch of
a tree, with red berries, perfectly fresh. The clouds around the setting sun
assumed a new appearance; the air was more mild and warm; and, during night,
the wind became unequal and variable. From all these symptoms, Columbus was so
confident of being near land, that on the evening of the 11th of October, 1492,
after public prayers for success, he ordered the sails to be furled and the
ships to lie by, keeping strict watch, lest they should be driven ashore in the
night. During this interval of suspense and expectation, no man shut his eyes,
all kept upon deck, gazing intently toward that quarter where they expected to
discover the land which had been so long the object of their wishes.

About two hours before midnight, Columbus standing on the forecastle, observed
a light at a distance, and privately pointed it out to Pedro Guttierez, a page
of the queen's wardrobe. Guttierez perceived it; and calling to Salcedo,
comptroller of the fleet, all three saw it in motion, as if it were carried
from place to place. A little after midnight, the joyful sound of land! land!
was heard from the Pinta, which kept always ahead of the other ships. But
having been so often deceived by fallacious appearances, every man was now
become slow of belief; and waited, in all the anguish of uncertainty and
impatience, for the return of day. As soon as morning dawned, all doubts and
fears were dispelled. From each ship, an island was seen about two leagues to
the north, whose flat and verdant fields, well stored with wood, and watered
with many rivulets, presented the aspect of a delightful country. The crew of
the Pinta instantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn of thanksgiving to God; and
were joined by those of the other ships, with tears of joy and transports of
congratulation. This office of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an act of
justice to their commander. They threw themselves at the feet of Columbus, with
feelings of self condemnation mingled with reverence. They implored him to
pardon their ignorance, incredulity, and insolence, which had created him so
much unnecessary disquiet, and had so often obstructed the prosecution of his
well concerted plan; and passing, in the warmth of their admiration, from one
extreme to another, they now pronounced the man whom they had so lately
reviled, and threatened, to be a person inspired by Heaven, with sagacity and
fortitude more than human, in order to accomplish a design so far beyond the
ideas and conception of all former ages.

As soon as the sun arose, all their boats were manned and armed. They rowed
toward the island with their colors displayed, with warlike music, and other
martial pomp. As they approached the coast, they saw it covered with a
multitude of people, whom the novelty of the spectacle had drawn together,
whose attitudes and gestures expressed wonder and astonis^ment, at the strange
objects which presented themselves to their view. Columbus was the first
European who set foot in the New World, which he had discovered. He landed in a
rich dress, and with a naked sword in his hand. His men followed; and, kneeling
down, they all kissed the ground which they had so long desired to see. They,
next, erected a crucifix; and, prostrating themselves before it, returned
thanks to God for conducting their voyage to such an happy issue.

The above was one of the Bahama Islands; to which he gave the name of San
Salvador, and took possession of it in the name of their Catholic majesty's. In
this first voyage he discovered several other of the Lucavo, or Bahama Islands,
with those of Cuba and Hispaniola. The natives considered the Spaniards as
divinities, and the discharge of the artillery as their thunder: they fell
prostrate at the sound. The women, however, offered their favors, and courted
the embraces of their new guests as men. Their husbands were not jealous of
them; and in the arms of those wantons the companions of Columbus are said, by
some authors, to have caught that malady which directs its poison to the
springs of life. The Abbe Raynal is of opinion that this disorder was known in
Europe before the discovery of America. Hist. of the E. and W. Indies.
In a second voyage, many new islands were discovered. In a third, he attained
the great object of his ambition, by discovering the continent of America, near
the mouth of the river Oroonoko, on the first day of August, 1498. His success
produced a crowd of adventurers, from all nations; but the year before this,
the northern continent had been discovered by Sebastian Cabot, in the service
of Henry VII. of England.

Although Columbus had the distinguished merit of enlarging the circle of
science, and opening new channels for commerce, by discovering a new world, yet
he has been deprived of the honor of having it called by his name. Amerigo
Vespucci, a Florentine gentleman, accompanied Ojeda to American 1497; and foon
after his return, published an accoun^ of his voyage; which was drawn up not
only with art, but with some elegance. It circulated rapidly, and was read with
admiration. In his narrative he had insinuated that the glory of having
discovered the continent in the New World belonged to him. This was at first
believed, and the country began to be called after the name of its first
supposed discoverer. Thus mankind are left to regret an act of injustice,
which, having been sanctioned by time, it is now too late to redress. See Dr.
Robertson's Hist. of America, Vol. I.


NOTWITHSTANDING the many settlements of the Europeans in this continent, great
part of America remains still unknown. The northern continent contains the
Briti^n colonies of Hudson's Bay, Canada, and Nova Scotia: British America is
now divided into four provinces, viz. I. Upper Canada; II. Lower Canada, to
which are annexed, New Britain, or the country lying round Hudson's Bay, and
the island of ^ape Breton; III. New Brunswick; IV. Nova Scotia, to which is
annexed, the island of St. John's. Besides these, there is the island of
Newfoundland, which is governed by the admiral for the time being.
The New England states, and those of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, Virginia, North, and South, Carolina, and Georgia. It contains, also,
the Spanish territories of East, and West, Florida, Louisiana, New Mexico,
California, and Mexico. Besides these, there are immense regions to the west,
and north, the boundaries of which have never yet been discovered. In such as
are in any degree known, dwell the Esquimaux, the Algonquins, the Hurons, the
Iroquois, the Cherakee, the Chickas^^^, and many other tribes of Indians. In
the southern continent lie the Spanish provinces of Terra Firma, Guiana, Peru,
Paraguay, and Chili; together with that of Brasil, belonging to the Portuguese;
and the country of Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. Vast tracts, however, in
the inland parts, are unknown, being comprehended under the general name of
Anozonia. A large district, also, said to be the residence of a gigantic race
of men, lies on the east side of the continent, between the straits of Magellan
and the province of Paraguay. The account of this gigantic race, however, meets
with little credit.

This vast country produces many of the metals, minerals, plants, fruits,
trees, and wood, to be met with in the other parts of the world, and many of
them in greater quantities, and in high perfection. The gold and silver of
America have supplied Europe with such immense quantities of those valuable
metals, that they are become vastly more common; so that the gold and silver of
Europe now bear little proportion to the high price, set upon them before the
discovery of America.

It also produces diamonds, pearls, emeralds, amethysts, and other valuable
stones, which, by being brought into Europe, have contributed, likewise, to
lower their value. To these, which are chiefly the productions of Spanish
America, may be added a great number of other commodities, which, though of
less price are of much greater use. Of these are the plentiful supplies of
cochineal, indigo, anatto, logwood, brazil, fustic, pimento, lignum vitae,
rice, ginger, cocoa, or the chocolate nut, sugar, cotton, tobacco, banillas,
red wood, the balsams of Tolu, Peru, and Chili, that valuable article, in
medicine, the Jesuit's bark, mechoacan, sassafras, sarsaparilla, cassia,
tamarinds, hides, furs, ambergrise, and a great variety of woods, roots, and
plants; to which, before the discovery of America, the Europeans were either
entire strangers, or which they were forced to buy at an extravagant rate, from
Asia and Africa, through the hands of the Venetians and Genoese, who then
engrossed the trade of the Eastern World.

On this continent there grows also a variety of excellent native fruits; pine
apples, citrous, lemons, orang^^ (...) figs, grapes, great numbers of culinary,
medicinal, and other herbs, roots, and plants, with many (...) productions,
which are nourished in as great perfection as in their native soil.

Although the Indians still live in the quiet possession of many large tracts,
America, so far as known, is chiefly claimed, and divided into colonies, by
three European nations, the Spaniards, English, and Portuguese. The Spaniards,
as they first discovered it, have the largest and richest portion, extending
from New Mexico and Louisiana, in North America, to the Straits of Magellan, in
the South Sea, excepting the large province of Brasil, which belongs to
Portugal; for though the French and Dutch have some forts upon Surinam and
Guiana, they scarcely deserve to be considered as proprietors of any part of
the southern continent. Next to Spain the most considerable proprietor of
America was Great Britain, who derived her claim to North America from the
first discovery of that continent by Sebastian Cabot, in the name of Henry VII.
in the year 1497.

We shall now leave the general history of America, and proceed to give an
account of the discovery and settlement of North America.

CHAP. XII.
Discovery of North America, and the Attempts made to form Settlements in it,
till King James I. established the London and Plymouth Companies.

NORTH AMERICA was discovered in the reign of Henry VII. a period when the arts
and sciencies had made very considerable progress in Europe. Many of the first
adventurers were men of genius and learning, and were careful to preserve
authentic records of such of their proceedings as would be interesting to
posterity. These records afford ample documents for American historians.
Perhaps no people on the globe, can trace the history of their origin and
progress with so much precision, as the inhabitants of North America;
particularly that part of them who inhabit the territory of the United States.

The fame which Columbus had acquired by his first discoveries on this western
continent, spread through Europe, 1495.
and inspired many with the spirit of enterprise. As early as 1495, four years
only after the first discovery of America, John Cabot, a Venetian, obtained a
grant or commission from Henry VII. to discover unknown lands and annex them to
the crown. See Hazard's "Historical Collections," page 9, Vol. I, where this
grant is recited at large. It is dated A. D. 1495.


In the spring of 1496 he sailed from England with two ships, carrying with him
his three sons. In this voyage, which was intended for China, he fell in with
the north side of Terra Labrador, and coasted northerly as far as the 67th
degree of latitude. Smith, in his History of New York, says, his discoveries of
the continent reached "from the 38th to the 68th degree of north latitude."


1497.] The next year he made a second voyage to America with his son
Sebastian, who afterward proceeded in the discoveries which his father had
begun. On the 24th of June he discovered Bonnavista, on the north east side of
Newfoundland. Before his return he traversed the coast from Davis's straits to
Cape Florida.

1502.] Sebastian Cabot was this year at Newfoundland; and on his return,
carried three of the natives of that island to King Henry VII.

1513.] In the spring of 1513, John Ponce sailed from Porto Rico northerly, and
discovered the continent in 30 8 north latitude. He landed in April, a season
when the country around was covered with verdure, and in full bloom. This
circumstance induced him to call the country Florida, which, for many years,
was the common name for North and South America.

1516.] In 1516, Sir Sebastian Cabot and Sir Thomas Pert, explored the coast as
far as Brazil in South America.

This vast extent of country, the coast of which was thus explored, remained
unclaimed and unsettled by any European power, (except by the Spaniards in
South America) for almost a century from the time of its discovery.

1524.] It was not till the year 1524 that France attempted discoveries on the
American coast. Stimulated by his enterprizing neighbors, Francis I. who
possessed a great and active mind, sent John Verrazano, a Florentine, to
America, for the purpose of making discoveries. He traversed the coast from
latitude 28 to 50 north. In a second voyage, sometime after, he was lost.

1525.] The next year Stephen Gomez, the first Spaniard who came upon the
American coast for discovery, sailed from Groyn in Spain, to Cuba and Florida,
thence northward to Cape Razo, in latitude 46 north, in search of a northern
passage to the East Indies.

1534.] In the spring of 1534, by the direction of Francis I. a fleet was
fitted out at St. Malo's in France, with design to make discoveries in America.
The command of this fleet was given to James Cartier. In Hazard's Historical
Collection, Vol. I, page 19, is a commission from Francis I. to James Cartier
or Quartier, for making an establishment in Canada, dated Oct. 17, 1540.
Probably this commission was given him in consequence of his former discoveries.
He arrived at Newfoundland in May of this year. Thence he sailed northerly;
and on the day of the festival of St. Lawrence, he found himself in about
latitude 48 30 north, in the midst of a broad gulf, which he named St.
Lawrence. He gave the same name to the river which empties into it. In this
voyage, he sailed as far north as latitude 51, expecting in vain to find a
passage to China.

1535.] The next year he sailed up the river St. Lawrence 300 leagues, to the
great and swift Fall. He called the country New France; built a fort in which
he spent the winter, and returned in the following spring to France.

1539.] On the 12th of May, 1539, Ferdinand de Soto, with 900 men, besides
seamen, sailed from Cuba, having for his object the conquest of Florida. On the
30th of May he arrived at Spirito Santo, from whence he traveled northward to
the Chickasaw country, in about latitude 35 or 36. He died and was buried on
the bank of Missisippi River, May, 1542, aged 42 years. Alverdo succeeded him.

1542.] In 1542, Francis la Roche, Lord Robewell, was sent to Canada, by the
French king, with three ships and 200 men, women and children. They wintered
here in a fort which they had built, and returned in the spring. About the year
1550, a large number of adventurers sailed for Canada, but were never after
heard of. In 1598, the king of France commissioned the Marquis De la Roche to
conquer Canada, and other countries not possessed by any Christian Prince. We
do not learn, however, that la Roche ever attempted to execute his commission,
or that any farther attempts were made to settle Canada during this century.

January 6, 1548-49.] This year king Henry VII. granted a pension for life to
Sebastian Cabot, in consideration of the important services he had rendered to
the kingdom by his discoveries in America. Hazard's Hist. Col. Vol. I. page 23.
Hackluyt calls this "The large pension granted by K. Edward VI. to Sebastian
Cabot, constituting him Grand Pilot of England."
Very respectable descendants of the Cabot family now live in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.

1562.] The Admiral of France, Chatillon, early in this year, sent out a fleet
under the command of John Ribalt. He arrived at Cape Francis on the coast of
Florida, near which, on the first of May, he discovered and entered a river
which he called May river. It is more than probable that this river is the same
which we now call St. Mary's, which forms a part of the southern boundary of
the United States. As he coasted northward he discovered eight other rivers,
one of which he called Port Royal, and sailed up it several leagues. On one of
the rivers he built a fort and called it Charles, in which he left a colony
under the direction of Captain Albert. The severity of Captain Albert's
measures excited a mutiny, 1564.
in which, to the ruin of the colony, he was slain. Two years after, Chatillon
sent Rene Laudonier, with three ships, to Florida. In June he arrived at the
river May, on which he built a fort, and, in honor to his king, Charles IX. he
called it Carolina.

In August, this year, Capt. Ribalt arrived at Florida the second time, with a
fleet of seven vessels, to recruit the colony, which, two years before, he had
left under the direction of the unfortunate Capt. Albert.

The September following, Pedro Melandes, with six Spanish ships, pursued
Ribalt up the river on which h^ had settled, and overpowering him in numbers,
cruelly massacred him and his whole company. Melandes having in this way taken
possession of the country, built three forts, and left them garrisoned with
1200 soldiers. Laudonier and his colony on May river, receiving information of
the fate of Ribalt, took the alarm and escaped to France.

1567.] A fleet of three ships was this year sent from France to Florida, under
the command of Dominique de Courges. The object of this expedition, was to
dispossess the Spaniards of that part of Florida which they had cruelly and
unjustifiably seized three years before. 1568.
He arrived on the coast of Florida, April 1568, and soon after made a
successful attack upon the forts. The recent cruelty of Melendoes and his
company excited revenge in the breast of Gourges, and roused the unjustifiable
principle of retaliation. He took the forts; put most of the Spaniards to the
sword; and having burned and demolished all their fortresses, returned to
France. During the 50 years next after this event, the French enterprized no
settlements in America.

1576.] Capt. Frobisher was sent this year, to find out a north west passage to
the East Indies. The first land which he made on the coast was a Cape, which,
in honor to the queen, he called Queen Elizabeth's Foreland. In coasting
northerly he discovered the straits which bear his name. He prosecuted his
search for a passage into the western ocean, till he was prevented by the ice,
and then returned to England. Hazard's Historical Collection, Vol. I. page 23.


June 11th, 1578.] In 1578, Sir Humphry Gilbert obtained a patent from queen
Elizabeth, for lands not yet possessed by any Christian prince, provided he
would take possession within six years. With this encouragement he sailed for
America, 1583.
and on the first of August 1583, anchored in Conception Bay. Afterward he
discovered and took possession of St. John's Harbor, and the country south of
it. In pursuing his discoveries he lost one of his ships on the shoals of
Sablon, and on his return home, a storm overtook him, in which he was
unfortunately lost, and the intended settlement was prevented.

1584.] This year two patents were granted by queen Elizabeth, one to Admiral
Gilbert, (Feb. 6.) the other to Sir Walter Raleigh (Mar. 25.) for lands not
possessed by any Christian Prince. Hazard's Historical Collection, Vol. I. page
28 and 33.
By the direction of Sir Walter, two ships were fitted and sent out under the
command of Philip Amidas, and Arthur Barlow, with 107 passangers. In June 1585
they arrived on the coast, and anchored in a harbor seven leagues west of the
Roanoke. This colony returned to England in June, 1586. On the 13th of July,
they, in a formal manner, took possession of the country, and, in honor of
their virgin queen, Elizabeth, they called it Virginia. Till this time the
country was known by the general name of Florida. After this Virginia became
the common name for all North America.

1586.] This year, Sir Walter Raleigh sent Sir Richard Greenville to America,
with seven ships. He arrived at Wococon harbor in June. Having stationed a
colony of more than an hundred people at Roanoke, under the direction of Capt.
Ralph Lane, he coasted northeasterly as far as Chesapeak Bay, and returned to
England.

The colony under Capt. Lane, endured extreme hardships, and must have
perished, had not Sir Francis Drake fortunately returned to Virginia, and
carried them to England, after having made several conquests for the queen in
the West Indies, and other places.

A fortnight atter, Sir Richard Greenville arrived with new recruits; and
although he did not find the colony which he had before left, and knew not but
they had perished, he had the rashness to leave 50 men at the same place.

1587.] The year following, Sir Walter sent another company to Virginia, under
governor White, with a charter and twelve assistants. In July he arrived at
Roanoke. Not one of the second company remained. He determined, however, to
risk a third colony. Accordingly he left 115 people at the old settlement, and
returned to England.

This year (Aug. 13.) Manteo was baptized in Virginia. He was the first native
Indian who received that ordinance in that part of America. He, with Towaye,
another Indian, had visited England, and returned home to Virginia with the
colony. On the 18th of August, Mrs. Dare was delivered of a daughter, whom she
called Virginia. She was born at Roanoke, and ^as the first English child that
was born in North (...).

1590.] In the year 1590, governor White came over to Virginia with supplies
and recruits for his colony, but, to his great grief, not a man was to be
found. They had all miserably famished with hunger, or were massacred by the
Indians.

1602.] In the spring of this year, Bartholomew Gosnold, with 32 persons, made
a voyage to North Virginia, and discovered and gave names to Cape Cod, Martha's
Vineyard, and Elizabeth Islands, and to Dover Cliff. Elizabeth Island was the
place which they fixed for their first settlement. But the courage of those who
were to have tarried, failing, they all went on board and returned to England.
All the attempts to settle this continent which were made by the Dutch, French,
and English, from its discovery to the present time, a period of 110 years,
proved ineffectual. The Spaniards only, of all the European nations, had been
successful. There is no account of there having been one European family at
this time, in all the vast extent of coast from Florida to Greenland.

1693.] Martin Pring and William Brown, were this year sent by Sir Walter
Raleigh, with two small vessels, to make discoveries in North Virginia. They
came upon the coast, which was broken with a multitude of islands, in latitude
43 30 north. They coasted southward to Cape Cod Bay; thence round the Cape into
a commodious harbor in latitude 41 25, where they went ashore and tarried
seven weeks, during which time they loaded one of their vessels with sassafras,
and returned to England.

Bartholomew Gilbert, in a voyage to South Virginia, in search of the third
colony which had been left there by governor White, in 1587, having touched at
several of the West India Islands, landed near Chesapeak Bay, where, in a
skirmish with the Indians, he and four of his men were unfortunately slain. The
rest, without any further search for the colony, returned to England.

France, being at this time in a state of tranquillity, in consequence of the
edict of Nantz in favor of the Protestants, passed by Henry IV. (April, 1598)
and of the peace with Philip, king of Spain and Portugal, was induced to pursue
her discoveries in America. Accordingly the king signed a patent Hist. Coll.
Vol. I. p. 45.
in favor of De Mons, (November 8, 1603) of all the country from the 40th to
the 46th degrees of north latitude, under the name of Acadia. 1604.
The next year De Mons ranged the coast from St. Lawrence to Cape Sable, and
round to Cape Cod.

1605.] In May 1605, George's Island and Pentecost Harbor, were discovered by
Capt. George Weymouth. In May he entered a large river in latitude 43 20,
(variation 11 15 west,) which Mr. Prince, in his Chronology, supposes must have
been Sagadahock; but from the latitude, it was more probably the Piscataqua.
Capt. Weymouth carried with him to England five of the natives.

1606.] Sir Walter Raleigh's grant being vacated by attainder in 1603, James I.
by patent, Ibid. p. 50.
divided Virginia into two colonies, on the 10th of April this year. The
southern, included all lands between the 34th and 41st degrees of north
latitude. This was styled the first colony, under the name of South Virginia,
and was granted to the London Company. The northern, called the second colony,
and known by the general name of North Virginia, included all lands between the
38th and 45th degrees of north latitude, and was granted to the Plymouth
Company. Each of these colonies had a council of thirteen men to govern them.
To prevent disputes about territory, the colony which should last place
themselves, was prohibited to plant within an hundred miles of the other. There
appears to be an inconsistency in these grants, as the lands lying between the
38th and 41st degrees are covered by both patents. See Morse's Am. Univ. Geog.
for the preceding articles.


CHAP. XIII.
Account of the Settlement, Progress, and political State of the British
Colonies, within the present Limits of the United States.

THE following account of the British colonies, within the present limits of the
United States, is chiefly intended to prepare the minds of those readers, who
may not have had leisure or opportunity to peruse the works from which the
matter is abridged, to form just ideas of the liberties and privileges to which
the colonies were entitled by their charters. For this purpose, a few of the
principal political transactions of the first colonies, and some declarations
of their legislative assemblies, are selected, which will sufficiently evince
the sense they had of their dependence on the mother country, and their
political sentiments in general. It is presumed the reader will not be
displeased to have a short account of the progress of the colonies in
population and commerce, and an impartial account of the manners of the people.

The amazing increase of population, trade and riches, and the improved state
of the arts and manufactures, since the independence of America, does not come
within the limits of this work. For the present state of the Union, see the
Rev. Mr. Morse's American Universal Geography.

THE first successful settlement, after the division of Virginia into two
colonies, was made by the London company, in the territory of what is presently
called

VIRGINIA.
The unsuccessful attempts made by Sir Walter Raleigh to form a permanent
settlement, have been already related, in the chronological account of the
discoveries and attempts to form colonies, before king James erected the London
and Plymouth companies, in 1606.

The London company, who were now the proprietors of South Virginia, sent Mr.
Piercy, brother to the earl of Northumberland, with a colony, who discovered
Powhatan, now James' River. And in the spring of the year 1607, Capt.
Christopher Newport arrived with three vessels in Chesapeak Bay, and landed
near a point which he called Cape Henry, which name it still retains. Having
elected Mr. Edward Wingfield president for the year; 1607, June 22.
they next day landed all their men, one hundred and four in number; and built
James' Town, on James' River, the first town that was settled by the English,
in North America.

In August died Capt. Bartholomew Gosnold, the first projector of this
settlement, and one of the council. The following wanter, the new town was
burnt, and two years after, by new arrivals, the number of fouls amounted to
200. Capt. John Smith, afterward president, arrived on the coast, and by
failing up number of rivers discovered the interior country. Morse's American
Universal Geography, Vol. I. P. 112, and 123.


The council for South Virginia, having resigned th^^ charter, 1609, May 23.
obtained a new one in 1609, from king James, wherein (...) the privileges of
Englismen were secured to the colonists and their posterity, "as if they had
been abiding and born within this our realm of England, or any other of our
(...) dominions." Hazard's ^^st. Coll. Vol. I. P. 56.
The lands and tenements, within (...) precincts of the colony, were declared
"to be holden (...) us, our hideires and successors, as of our manor of (...)
Greenwich, in the county of Kent, in free and common soccage only, and not in
capite; yielding and paying the fifth part only of all ore of gold and silver,
that from time to time, and at all times hereafter shall be th^^^ gotten, had,
or obtained, for all manner of (...) vices." Ibid. P. 65.
This charter declared the colony "free of all subsidies and customs, for the
space of twenty (...) years, and from all taxes and impositions forever (...)
any goods or merchandises at any time or times he^^ after;" except only five
per cent. on goods impe^^ into England, or the dominions thereunto belonging,
according to the ancient trade of merchants. A^^ if such goods paid the said
duty, they might be ^^ported to foreign parts, provided they were shipped (...)
"within thirteen months after their first landing wi^^^ any part of those
dominions." Ibid. P. 6^.


There were now added to the former adventur^^ many of the first nobility and
gentry. To them (...) their successors, were granted in absolute property,
(...) the reservations before mentioned, the lands exten^^^ from Cane Comfort,
along the sea coast, southward (...) miles; from the same point, 200 miles
northward, and from the Atlantic westward to the South Sea: "(...) also all the
islands lying within one hundred (...) along the coast of both seas of the
precinct aforesaid." Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. P. 65.
The Plymouth company kept their first charter until the year 1620, when they
obtained a new one, which will be noticed in the account of New England.

The king added to his former grants, to the London Company, 1612. March 1^.
all islands in any part of the ocean between the 30th and 41st degrees of
north latitude, and within 300 leagues of any of the parts before granted to
the Company, not being possessed or inhabited by any other christian prince or
state, nor within the limits of the Northern Colony. Ibid. p. 74.


The London Company appointed Sir Thomas West, Lord De la War, general of the
colony; Sir Thomas Gates, 1609
his lieutenant; Sir George Summers, admiral; Sir Thomas Dale, high marshal; Sir
Ferdinand Wainman, general of the horse; and captain Newport, vice admiral.

June 8.] In June, Sir Thomas Gates, Admiral Newport, and Sir George Summers,
with seven ships, a ketch and a pinnace, having five hundred souls on board,
men, women and children, sailed from Falmouth for South Virginia. July 24.
In crossing the Bahama Gulf, on the 24th of July, the fleet was overtaken by a
violent storm, and separated. Four days after, Sir George Summers ran his vessel
ashore on one of the Bermuda Islands, which; from this circumstance, have been
called the Somer Islands. The people on board, one hundred and fifty in number,
all got safe on shore; and there remained until the following May. The
remainder of the fleet arrived at Virginia in August. The colony was now
increased to five hundred men. Capt. Smith, then president, a little before the
arrival of the fleet, had been very badly burnt by means of some powder which
had accidentally caught fire. This unfortunate circumstance, together with the
opposition he met with from those who had lately arrive^ induced him to leave
the colony and return to England* which he accordingly did the last of
September. Francis West, his successor in office, soon followed him, and George
Piercy was elected president.

1610.] The year following, the South Virginia or London company, sealed a
patent to Lord De la War, constituting him Governor and Captain General (...)
South Virginia. He soon after embarked for American with Capt. Argal, and one
hundred and fifty men, (...) three ships.

The unfortunate people, who, the year before, (...) been shipwrecked on the
Bermuda-Islands, had employed themselves during the winter and spring, under
the direction of Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and Admiral Newport, in
building a sloop to transport themselves to the continent. They embarked for
Virginia on the 10th of May, with about one hu^^^ed and fifty persons on board;
leaving two of their (...) behind, who chose to stay; and landed at James' Town
on the 23d of the same month. Finding the colony, which at the time of Capt.
Smith's departure, consisted of five hundred souls, now reduced to sixty, and
those few in a distressed and wretched situation, they with one voice resolved
to return to England; and for this purpose, on the 7th of June, the whole
colony repaired on board their vessels, broke up the settlement, and sailed
down the river on their way to their native country.

Fortunately, Lord De la War, who had embarked for James' Town the March
before, met them the day after they sailed, and persuaded them to return with
him to James' Town, where they arrived and landed the 10th of June. The
government of the colony, of right, devolved upon Lord De la War. From this
time we may date the effectual settlement of Virginia. Its history, from this
period, will be given in its proper place. Morse's A. U. G. Vol. I. p. 113, 114.


The colony was chiefly indebted for its settlement and establishment to Sir
Walter Raleigh, who is said to have expended L 40,000 in his different
enterprises; Lord de la War, and captain John Smith, likewise spent their
fortunes in laboring zealously for its prosperity.

An opening for a friendly intercourse with the natives was made by the
marriage of Mr. John Rolfe, a very worthy gentleman, to Pocahontas, the
daughter of Bowhatan, a famous Indian chief. This Indian princess had formerly
saved the life of captain Smith, when the clubs were lifted up to beat out his
brains; and afterward she rendered great services to the colony.

After her marriage, she embraced the christian religion, and went to England
with her husband. Capt. Smith, who was then at London, wrote a handsome letter
to the queen, setting forth the merits of his friend. Pocahontas, was
accordingly introduced to the queen and royal family; and she proved herself
worthy of their notice and respect. King James was so jealous of the
prerogative royal, that it is said, he was heard to express his indignation,
that a subject of his should dare to be allied to the daughter, even of a
savage prince.
Mr. Rolfe was preparing to return with his wife to Virginia, when she was
taken ill and died at Gravesend, leaving an infant son, Thomas Rolfe, from whom
are descended several families of note in Virginia, who hold their lands by
inheritance from her. See the life of captain Smith, in Dr. Belknap's American
Biog^^^hy, Vol. ^.


In the early stage of the colony, the settlers died so fast, that at the end
of 20 years, there remained only 1800 alive of 9000 English subjects who at
different times had migrated. This great mortality proceeded from quarrels with
the natives, famine, and sickness. They neglected the orders they had received,
to purchase the soil from the natives; and notwithstanding the favorable
opportunities they had to cultivate their good will, they enraged them by
violently seizing upon their property, without paying any consideration. The
consequence was, that of eighty plantations, which were filling apace, only
eight remained: the insulted natives having revenged their cause by the
massacre of the inhabitants.

The calamities already mentioned being attributed to the misconduct or neglect
of the company; and frequent complaints being made to king James, of the
oppressions of the treasurer and company, a commission was issued to enquire
into the affairs of Virginia and the Somer Isles, from the earliest settlement
of each. Upon the report of the commissioners, the king resolved to grant a new
charter; but the company refusing to surrender their former grants, a quo
warrants issued against the patents of the corporation, 1623 Nov.
and judgment was given against the treasurer and company. See Chalmer's
Political Annals, under the head of Virginia, see many of the preceding and
subsequent articles respecting ^^at colony.


The Virginia company being dissolved, the king took the colony under his
immediate dependence, which occasioned much confusion. Upon his death, king
Charles being of the same opinion with his father as to the government of
Virginia, 1625
he named a new governor, and council, and invested them with an authority
fully legislative and arbitrary. This system increased the colonial
dissatisfaction, which continued for years, till the Virginians received a
letter containing royal assurance, that "all their estates, trade, freedom, and
privileges, should be enjoyed by them in as extensive a^ manner, as they
enjoyed them before the recalling of the company's patent." On this they were
reconciled, and began again to exert themselves in making improvements. Bland's
Inquiry into the rights of the British colonies.


Being left for some years in a manner to themselves, they increased beyond
expectation. They remained under the administration of their late governors,
and other officers, who respected their privileges because they loved the
colony.

From the year 1629, to 1639, they were ruled rather as the vassals of an
eastern despot, than as subjects entitled to English liberties; but it is to
their credit that they opposed with a firm spirit, during the reign of Charles,
all attempts upon their liberties.

In 1639, Sir William Berkely was appointed governor, and his instructions
tended to restore the colony to that system of freedom which they had derived
from the Virginia Company, and which the writ of quo warrant^ had involved in
the same ruin with the corporation itself. This lenity may partly be ascribed
to the state of affairs at that time, in England, the civil war having soon
after commenced.

Civil dissensions, however, took place in the colony, which were embittered by
religious differences, and inflamed by acts made to prohibit the preaching of
the doctrines of the Puritans, who wished to purge the church of human
additions, and restore it to the purity of the apostolic age. The discontented
party, in the name of the assembly, petitioned the house of commons, "for the
restoration of the ancient patents and corporation government." But the
governor, council and burgesses, no sooner heard of the transaction, than they
transmitted an explicit disavowal of it.

In 1642, 1642
they declared, in the form of an act, "that they were born under monarchy, and
would never degenerate from the condition of their births, by being subject to
any other government." Nothing could be more acceptable than this act, which
being presented to the king, when at York, drew from him an answer, that they
should be always immediately dependent upon the crown, and that the form of
government should never be changed.

During the civil war, the Virginians remained unalterably attached to the
cause of their sovereign. When a republican government was established in
England, on the ruins of the crown, and the commons had triumphed over all
their opponents, they turned their attention toward the plantations; and an
ordinance was passed in October 1650, 1650
"for prohibiting trade with Barbados, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego." It
recited, that "in Virginia, and other places in America, there are colonies
which were planted at the cost, and settled by the people, and by the authority
of this nation, which ought to be subordinate to, and dependent upon England.
That they ever have been, and ought to be, subject to such laws and regulations
as are, or shall be made by the parliament. That diverse acts of rebellion have
been committed by many persons inhabiting Virginia, whereby they have set
themselv^^ in opposition to this commonwealth." It therefore declared them
notorious robbers and traitors. Persons in power generally reason alike against
those who oppose their authority, and dispute the legality or equity of their
measures, whatever might have been their own sentiments when in a lower
station, and while aggrieved by superiors.

A powerful fleet and army were sent, to reduce all their enemies to
submission. The commissioners we^^ to use their endeavors, by granting pardons
and by other peaceful arts, to induce the colonists to obedience; but if these
means should prove ineffectual, they were to employ every act of hostility, to
free those slaves and servants of masters opposing government, that would serve
as soldiers to subdue them; and to cause the acts of parliament to be executed,
and justice to be administered, in the name of the commonwealth.

After the arrival of the four commissioners, with the naval and military
force, under captains Dennis and Claybourne, who were likewise in the
commission, the Virginians refused to submit till articles of surrender had
been agreed upon. It was declared that, "the plantation of Virginia shall have
a free trade, as the people of England, to all places, and with all nations.
Virginia shall be free from all taxes, customs, and impositions whatsoever; and
none shall be imposed on them without consent of the general assembly; and
neither forts nor castles shall be erected, nor garrisons maintained without
their consent." Bland's Inquiry into the rights of the British colonies.

The instructions to the Commissioners are at full length in Hazard's
Historical Collections, Vol. I. p. 556.




The hardships they suffered by restrictions on their trade under Oliver
Cromwell, together with their attachment to the royal family, induced them to
seize the occasion of the death of the Protector's governor, to apply to Sir
William Berkely, who then lived privately during the revolutions of the day, to
resume the government of the colony; to which he consented, on their solemnly
promising to venture their lives and fortunes with him for Charles II.

Before they had heard of the death of Cromwell, Charles was proclaimed by
them, king of England, Scotland, Ireland and Virginia. During the distresses to
which the royalists were exposed in England, prior to this event, they resorted
to that colony; so that Virginia contained about 30,000 persons at the
restoration. Chalmer's Political Annals, under Virginia.


In 1671, the inhabitants amounted to 40,000 persons men, women and children;
2000 black slaves, and 6000 Christian servants, indented for a short time. In
the census, the whole inhabitants have been sometimes numbered, and sometimes
the tithes only. This term, in Virginia, in^^des the free males above 16 years
of age, and the slaves of both sexes above that age. In 1654, the tithes were
7209; in 1700, 22,000; in 1759, 105,000; and in 1772, 153,000. Jefferson's
Notes on Vir^^^ (...). 90, 91.


An opinion may be formed of the arbitrary views of the government in England,
and the situation of Virginia at this time, by a passage in Sir William
Berkely's letter in answer to the inquiries of the lords of the committee of
the colonies. "I thank God there are no free schools, nor printing, and I hope
we shall not have them these hundred years. For learning has brought
disobedience, and heresy, and sects into the world, and printing (...) divulged
them, and libels against the best government. God keep us from both." Chalmer's
Political Annals, under Virginia.


(...) first settlers in Virginia were of the church of ^ngland; and the great
body of the colony emigrate^ from their native country at a time when the
church^ was flushed with a victory over all the opposite sects and, when
transplanted into the New World, being possessed of power, they exercised it in
tyrannizing over all whose opinions differed from their standard. The
Episcopalians retained full possession of the country about a century, but the
indolence of the church clergy, occasioned a great change, a considerable time
before the revolution of America; the Presbyterians became the most numerous
sect: There were likewise many Baptists and Methodists. Morse's Un. Am. Geog.
Vol. I. p. 554.


The classes of rich and poor have always been mo^^ perceptible in Virginia
than in any of the other states. Negroe slavery was first introduced there; and
has had a baneful effect upon the manners and morals of the people.

The first settlers, many of whom were men of fortune, had large tracts of land
allotted them; the cultivation of tobacco, The unfortunate attempt of Sir
Walter Raleigh, to settle a colony in Virginia, was productive of one thing
which will always render it memorable, the introduction of tobacco into
England. Cartier, in his visit to Canada, fifty years before, had observed that
the nat^^^ used this weed in fumigation, but it was an object of disgust to
Frenchmen. Ralph Lane, at his return, in 1586, brought it first into Europe,
and Raleigh, who was a man of gaiety and fashion, not only learned the use of
it himself, but introduced it into polite circles; and even the queen herself
gave encouragement to it.

Raleigh laid a wager with the queen, that he would determine exactly, the
weight of the smoke which issued from his pipe. This he did, by first weighing
the tobacco and then the ashes. When the queen paid the wager, she pleasantly
observed, that many laborers had turned their gold into smoke, but that he was
the first who had vonverted smoke into gold.

King James had so refined a taste, that he not only held this Indian need in
great abhorrence himself, but endeavored, by proclamations and otherwise, to
prevent the use of it among his subjects. But all his ^eal and authority, could
not suppress it. -- Dr. Belknap's Am. Blog. Vol I. p. 223.


and other staple productions of the country, likewise, occasioned the lands to
fall into a few hands. These circumstances were unfavourable to that equality
among the citizens which took place in New England; and, in a degree somewhat
less, in the middle colonies. Those of the Virginians who were rich, were,
generally, polite, hospitable, and of an independent spirit, while a great
number of the lower class were uninformed and abject. See Morse's Am Un. Geog.
Vol. I. p. 555.
The spirit of their government was aristocratic; and the whole country was led
by a few influential characters. This colony has produced many eminent men, who
have made a shining figure in the cabinet and in the field.

Notwithstanding the manners, customs and laws, in this colony, were entirely
opposite to those of Massachusetts, where the first opposition was made, and
the first blood was shed in the late war; yet Virginia was the first colony
which reprobated parliamentary innovations -- the first which moved for
independency -- and the first which formed a government under it. She was, on
the other hand, the last to enact laws for the payment of British debts.
Kentucky, now one of the United States, was part of the territory of Virginia,
before the revolution of America.


The annual exports of Virginia, before the war, were nearly to the value of
607,142 guineas, one year with another. These articles were chiefly tobacco,
wheat, Indian corn, shipping, masts and lumber, tar, pitch, etc. peltry, beef,
pork, flax seed, hemp, cotton, pit coal, pig iron, sturgeon, brandy, horses,
etc. The annual average quantity of tobacco was 55,000 hhds. of 1000lb. each;
wheat, 800,000 bushels; Indian corn, 600,000. In the year 1758, Virginia
exported seventy thousand hogsheads of tobacco, which was the greate^^ quantity
ever produced in this country in one year. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p.
177, 178.


NEW YORK.
As early as the year 1607, and 1608, Henry H^^son, an Englishman, under a
commission from (...) James, in the employ of certain merchants, made (...) for
the discovery of a north west pass^^ to the First Indies. In 1609, Morse's
American Universal Geography, Vol. I. p. 114.
upon some misunderstanding, Hudson engaged in the Dutch service, in (...)
prosecution of the same design; and, on his retu^^ ranged along the coast of
what has since been (...) New England, which three years before was gra^^^ by
king James to his English subjects, the Plymo^^ company. He entered Hudson's
River, giving it (...) own name, and ascended it in his boat to Aurania, no^
called Albany. Smith, in his History of New York, follows the authority (...)
S^^th, Douglass, Olomixon, and other English writers, who say (...) H^^son
discovered "Long Island, New York, and the river which bears his name, in
1608;" and that he "afterward sold the country, or rather his right, to the
Dutch." p. 14.
In 1613, the Dutch West India co^^pany sent some persons to this river to
trade with the Indians. Morse's American Universal Geography, Vol. I. p. 114.


From this time we may date the settlement of New York, called the New
Netherlands. The sta^^^, 1614.
general granted a patent to sundry merchan^^ for an exclusive trade on North
River; and this year they built a fort on the west side, near Albany. Smith's
History of New York, p. 14.


The Dutch writers are not agreed as to its extent (...) some describe it to be
from Virginia to Canada, (...) others inform us that the arms of the states
genera^ were erected at Cape Cod, Connecticut, and Hudso^^ River, and on the
west side of the entrance into (...) ware Bay. Ibid. p. 16.
The English objected to these clai^^^ though they did not oppose the
settlement of the Dutch^^ in the country, until this year; when captain Argal,
was sent out by Sir Thomas Dale, governor of Virgin^^, to dispossess the
French of the two towns of Port ^oyal and St. Croix, lying on the east side of
the bay of Fundy, in Acadia, then claimed as part of Virginia. In his return he
obliged the Dutch, on Hudson's River; who were unable to resist him, to submit
to the king of England, and under him to the governor of Vir^^^^. Smith's
History of New York, p. 14.


In 1615, the Dutch erected a fort on the south west (...) of the island
Manhattans, where the city of New York now stands; and two others in 1623. One,
called Good Hope, on Connecticut River, and the other Nassau, on the east side
of Delaware Bay. Ibid. p. 15.


The first settlers of this state were particularly friendly to the English
colony that settled at Plymouth, in 1620; and continued to be amicably disposed
to the English colonies east of them, until the unhappy dispu^e arose
concerning the lands on Connecticut (...). Morse's American Universal
Geography, Vol. I. p. 427.


Peter Stuyvesant was the last Dutch governor; and ^^ered into office in 1647.
The inroads upon his government kept him constantly employed. New England, on
the east, had entered into a league against the settlement four years before,
Smith's Hist. of New York, p. 17.
but although it had ^^^^uced no effect, they remained troublesome neigh^^s;
Maryland, on the west, alarmed his fears by its (...) increase; and about the
same time, captain For^^^^, a Scotchman, claimed Long Island for the dowager of
Sterling; and the Swedes too were perpetu^^^ incroaching upon Delaware. Ibid.
p. 18.


At length, after the Dutch had kept possession of the (...) about 50 years,
king Charles I. being on the (...) of a war with the republic, resolved upon
the conquest of New York; "a territory which James I. had given by patent to
the earl of Sterling, but which had never been planted but by the Hollanders"
See Smith's Hist, of New York, p. 41, 43.
In (...) 1664 the king granted to his brother Ja^^ then duke of York, 1664,
March.
"the region exten^ from the western banks of Connecticu^, the eastern shore of
the Delaware, together with Long Island, conferring on him the civil and
^^^itary powers of government. Col. Nichols was (...) with four frigates and
300 soldiers to effect the business. The Dutch governor being unable to make
resist^^^, the New Netherlands submitted to the English (...) in September, and
Nichols entered upon the (...) of his power, as deputy governor of the duke of
Yo^^ the proprietary. Gordon's Hist of the American Revolution, Vol. I. p. 44.
The Dutch, by way of re^^al, 1667
took the English settlement of Surinam. They afterward retook New York, but
by the tre^y of Breda, it was ceded to the English in exchange (...) Surinam.

In the war of 1672, it was again taken by the Dutch without a gun being fired
on either side; and two (...) after it was restored by the treaty of Westmin^^
Very few of the Dutch removed, and there was sca^^ly any other change than that
of rulers.

The manners and character of the inhabitants (...) every colony or state, will
take their coloring, (...) greater or lesser degree, from the peculiar manner
(...) the first settlers. It is much more natural for immigr^^^ into a
settlement to adopt the customs of the (...) inhabitants, than the contrary;
even though (...) immgrants should, in length of time, become (...) most
numerous. Hence it is, that the neatness, pa^^ money and industry of the Dutch
were early imita^^ by the first English settlers in the province, and until the
revolution, formed a distinguishing trait in their provincial character. It is
still discernable, though i^ a much less degree, and will probably continue
(...) for many years to come. Hume's Hist of England, Vol. VII. 8vo. p. 339.


Besides the Dutch and English, already mentioned, there are many who migrated
from Scotland, Ireland, Germany, and some few from France. Many Germans are
settled on the Mohawk, and some Scotch people on the Hudson, in the county of
Washington: and the French settled principally at New Rochelle, and on Staten
Island. Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 427.

The emigrants from France, who were Protestants, came over after the unjust
revocation of the edict of Nantz, in 1685. It is remarkable, that among the
descendants of these French Protestants, there have been three presidents of
congress, viz. the Hon. Henry Laurens, Elim Boudinot, and John Jay, Esqs --
M^rse.




This colony suffered many hardships under their rul^^ before the revolution in
1688. Nichols, the first governor, notwithstanding the absolute power with
which he was vested, governed the province with in^^^ity and moderation; but
many of his successors, knew no other law than the will of their masters.
Smith's History of New York. p. 40, 45.


The people, however, were not behind their neigh^ours, in asserting their
rights and privileges on every occasion. After the accession of William and
Mary to the throne of England, colonel Sloughton was appointed governor, and a
legal assembly was convened in the year 1691. They passed "an act declaring
what are the rights and privileges of their majesties' subjects, within the
province." The law enacts, "That the supreme legislative power and authority
under their majesty's, shall forever be, and reside in a governor and council,
appointed by their majesty's, their heirs and successors; and the people by
their representatives met and convened in general assembly." It further enacts,
"That no aid, tax, tillage, etc. whats^^ver, shall be laid, assessed, levied,
or required, of or on any their majesties' subjects within the province, etc.
or their estates, upon any manner of color or pretense whatsoever, (...) by
the act and consent of the governor and council, and expresentatives of the
people, in general assembly met and ^^^vened." It must, nevertheless, be
observed, that king William was pleased to put a negative upon the act six
years after. Smith's Hist. of New York, p. 89, and Gordon's Hist. of the Act.
Rev. Vol. I. p. 97.


New York was considerably retarded in its gro^^^ by the monopoly of large
tracts of land, which red^^ed many to the necessity of being tenants in place
of being proprietors; or of removing to other sta^^^ where they could settle
more advantageously. N^^ withstanding these impediments, in the year 1756, the
white inhabitants amounted to 83,233; and in the year 1771, to 148,124; being
an increase of nearly two to one in the space of 15 years. Ramsay's Am. Rev.
Vol. I. p. 21.


The advantages of inland navigation in this country is so great, that, at a
medium, there is scarcely a far^^er in the province, that cannot transport the
fruit of a year's labor, from the best farm, in three days, at a proper
season, to some convenient landing, where the market will be to his
satisfaction; and all the wants from the merchant, cheaply supplied. Upon this
article of easy carriage alone, the profits of farming here, exceed those in
Pennsylvania, at least by thirty per (...). Take the province throughout, the
expense of transporting a bushel of wheat, is but two pence for the distance of
100 miles; but the same quantity, at a like distance in Pennsylvania, will
exceed the expense in New York one shilling at least. Smith's Hist. of New
York, p. 223. This author wrote nearly forty years ago; and the inland
navigation now constructing in Pennsylvania, will, no doubt make, when it is
completed, a considerable alteration in its favor, as to the carriage of goods.


The situation of New York, with respect to foreign markets, has decidedly the
preference to any of the other colonies; having at all seasons of the year, a
short and easy access to the ocean.

The trade of New York, even in 1756, was very extensive. The exports were
chiefly bread, pease, rye meal, Indian corn, apples, onions, boards, staves,
hor^es, sheep, butter, cheese, beef and pork, etc. besides numerous articles
imported for reexportation. Flour was at that time shipped to the amount of
80,000 barrels per annum Smith's History of New York, p. 232.
; and in the same year 12,528 hhds. of flax seed were exported to Ireland,
alone. Oysters are a considerable article in the support of the poor: they
there employed a fleet of 200 small craft: and this single article was then
computed to be worth annually nearly L12,000. Ibid. p. 206.
Iron was likewise no inconsiderable article in their commerce. The importation
of dry goods from England, in that year, amounted to L100,000 sterling. Ibid.
p. 233.


Wheat is the staple commodity, of which no less than 677,700 bushels were
exported in the year 1775, besides 2,553 tons of bread, and 2,828 tons of
flour. Morse's American Universal Geography, Vol. I. p. 436.
In the year 1774, the trade of this country employed 1075 vessels, whose
burden amounted to 40,812 tons. Vermont, now one of the fifteen United States,
formed part of the territory of New York. And a part of it was claimed by New
(...).


NEW ENGLAND.
THE early discovery of the coast of New England, by Bartholomew Gosnold, and
others, has been already mentioned in the chronological account of discoveries,
which took place before the charters were granted to the London and Plymouth
Companies.

In 1607, some of the patentees of the Plymouth company began a settlement at
Sagadahock, and laid the plan of a great state. 1607.
The following persons were sent over to begin the colony. George Popham,
president; Raleigh Gilbert, admiral; Edward Harlow, master of the ordnance;
Robert Davis, fergeant major; Ellis Best, marshal; -- Seamars, secretary; James
Davis, commander of the fort; Come Carew, searcher; and about one hundred
people. The president died the first winter, which was extremely cold: Sir John
Popham, his brother, the great promoter of the design, and Sir John Gilbert,
the admiral's brother, died the same year in Europe; and the next year, 1608,
the whole number which survived the winter returned to England. 1608.
The design of a plantation was at an end. Book English and French continued
their voyages to the co^^^ some for fishing, and some for trade with the
natives; and some feeble attempts were made by the French toward plantations,
but they were routed by the English in 1613, 1613.
under Sir Samuel Argal. There was no spirit in the people of either nation
(...) colonizing. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 2.


Captain John Smith, having quitted the colony of South Virginia, went to
England. The report of his valor, and his spirit of adventure, pointed him out
(...) a number of merchants, who were engaged in the American fishery, as a
proper person to make discoveries on the coast of North Virginia. 1614.
In April 1614, he sailed from London with two ships, having 45 men and boys on
board, and arrived at the island of Mona^igan, On the east side of Kenebeck
River. The ruins of some of the houses are yet to be seen.
in latitude 43, as it was then computed, where he built seven boats. The
design of the voyage was to take whales, and exami^^ a mine of gold and another
of copper, which were said to be there. The mines proved a fiction, and by long
chasing the whales to no purpose, they lost the best season for fishing. While
the seamen were that employed, Smith, in one of his boats, with eight (...)
ranged the coast east and west, from Penobscot to Capt Cod; bartering with the
natives for beaver and other furs, and making observations on the shores,
islands, harbors, and head lands; which, at his return to England, he wrought
into a map, and presenting it is prince Charles, with a request that he would
give the country a name, it was, for the first time, called New England. See
Dr. Belknap's American Biography, Vol. I. p. 306.
And since that time, the territory now ^^^prehended in the states of Vermont,
New Hamp^ire, Massachusetts, (comprehending the District of Maine,) Rhode
Island, and Providence Plantations, and Connecticut, has been known by that
name; and is sometimes called the Northern, or Eastern states. See Morse's Am.
Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 309.
Captain Smith, carried out with him, in this voyage, an Indian, named Tantum,
perhaps the same that Capt. Weymouth carried to England in 1605. When at Cape
Cod, he set his Indian ashore, and left him, and returned to Monahigan. When he
was in the bay of Massachusetts, he found two French ships, who had come there
six weeks before, and during that time had been trading very advantageously
with the Indians. It was conjectured that there were, at this time, three
thousand Indians upon the Massachusetts Islands. Ibid. p. 115.


In July captain Smith embarked for England, in one of the vessels, leaving the
other under the command of captain Thomas Hunt, to equip for a voyage to Spain.
After captain Smith's departure, Hunt perfidiously allured twenty Indians, one
of whom was Squanto, to come on board his ship at Patuxit, and seve^ more at
Nausit, and carried them to Spain, where he sold them for twenty pounds each,
for life. This infamous transaction excited in the breasts of the Indians such
an inveterate hatred of the English, as that, for many years after, all
commercial intercourse with them was rendered exceedingly dangerous. Ibid. p.
115.
Squanto, who was afterward ransomed and sent back, became very serviceable to
the English.

Notwithstanding captain Smith's favorable accounts of the continent, who
would remove and settle in so remote and uncultivated a part of the globe, if
he could live tolerably at home? The country would afford no immediate
subsistence, and therefore was not fit for indigent persons. Particular
persons, or companies, would have been discouraged from supporting a colony, by
the long continued expense and outset, without (...) return. "Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, and captain Mason, spent twenty thousand pounds each, in attempts for
settlement, and each of them thought it advisable to give over their designs
and sit down with the loss." Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p.
3.
No encouragement could be expected fr^^ the public. The advantages of commerce
from the colonies were not then foreseen, but were afterward learned by
experience. Virginia, in its infancy, was struggling for life; and what its
fate would have been, if the fathers of it in England had not seen the rise and
growth of other colonies near it, is uncertain.

The grant of North Virginia to the Plymouth company, in 1606, has been
mentioned already. See page 121.
King James granted a new patent, 1620, Nov. 3.
incorporating the duke of Lenox, the marquises of Buckingham and Hamilton, the
earls of Arun^h and Warwick, Sir Francis Gorges, with thirty four others, and
their successors, stiling them "The council established at Plymouth, in the
county of Devon, for the planting, ruling, ordering and governing of New
England, in America." To this council he granted all that part of America which
lies between the 40th and 48th degrees of north latitude, throughout the ma^^
land from sea to sea; excepting only such lands as were at that time actually
possessed by any christian prince or state. Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. p. 103.
This patent is the basis of all the subsequent grants of land in New England.

In order to form a judgment of the manners and character of the first settlers
of this country, it is necessary to take a brief view of the history of the
Puritans.

The Puritans were of that party of the church of England, who, during the
reformation of religion from the errors of popery, in the reign of Edward VI.
opposed the popish ceremonies and habits retained in the church, though
otherwise united to their brethren in religious tenets. During the cruel reign
of queen Mary, the opposition became more general and determined; and great
numbers fled to and resided in foreign parts, in order to escape persecution.

Upon the accession of queen Elizabeth, the refugees returned to England,
loaded with experience and learning, but in the utmost distress and poverty.
Those of the clergy who would comply with the queen's establishment, were
quickly preferred; but the rest, after being permitted to preach a while, were
suspended, and reduced to their former indigence.

The clergy and laity, who wished for greater ecclesiastical purity, struggled
hard for the abolition of ceremonies, and habits which they thought unlawful;
ceremonies which even their opponents acknowledged to be in their own nature
indifferent. From their attempting a purer form of worship and discipline, than
had yet been established, they obtained the honorable nick name of Puritans.
Neal's Hist. of the Puritans, Vol. I. p. 138.


Persecution tended more and more to disseminate Puritanism. The leaders both
in church and state, instead of granting liberty of conscience, which might
have preserved peace amongst the discording sects, concurred in using
compulsory methods for enforcing uniformity.

"The controversy with the Puritans had but a small beginning, viz. The
imposing of the popish habits and a few indifferent ceremonies; but it opened
by degrees into a reformation of discipline, which, all confessed, was wanting;
and at last the very doctrines of faith were debated." Ibid. p. 594.


In the year 1593, an act was passed for punishing all who refused to go to
church, or were present at any conventicle or meeting. The convicted were
imprisoned until they made a declaration of conformity; which if not done in
three months, they were to quit the realm, and go into perpetual banishment. If
they did not depart within the time limited, or returned afterward without a
license, they were to suffer (...). Some few suffered death: Neal's History of
the Puritans, Vol. I p. 558.
and many, to avoid these evils, voluntarily exiled themselves from their
nation country.

The weight of the penal statutes fell upon the Brownists, who derived their
name from Robert Brown, a man of an honorable family, and nearly related (...)
lord treasurer Cecil. He traveled through the country, about the year 1586,
holding forth against bishops, ecclesiastical courts, the ordination of
ministers, etc. (...) having gathered a separate congregation, they were
sometimes called Separatists. They held that the church of England was not a
true church, and that all her ordinances and sacraments were invalid: and they
renounced communion with all other reformed churches, except they were of their
own model. But (...) Puritans are, carefully, to be distinguished from this
sect; as they thought it unlawful to separate, and were the chief writers
against the Brownists. The more moderate Puritans evaded those acts, by going
to church when the prayers were nearly ended, and by receiving the sacrament
when administered with (...) latitude.

When king James came to the throne, he had a (...) fair opportunity of
pacifying matters, or, at least, (...) might have left them as he found them.
On the contrary, he suffered them to be persecuted, but not destroyed; they
were exasperated, and yet left powerful; and the ministry, at that time, like
those (...) brought on the American war, exposed their (...) weakness and
ignorance, by an ill timed severity.

Charles I. followed the same false policy. The prince possessed great virtues,
but had few ami^^ qualities. As grave as the Puritans themselves, (...) could
never engage the licentious part of the world (...) his favor; and that
gravity being turned against (...) Puritans, made him more odious to them. He
(...) himself up entirely to the church and churchmen; and he finished his ill
conduct, in this respect, by conferring the first ecclesiastical dignity in the
kingdom, and a great sway in temporal affairs, upon Dr. Laud, who, hardly fit
to direct a college, was entrusted with the government of an empire.

During the arbitrary reign of James and his son Charles, all who stood by the
laws of the land and opposed their arbitrary government were stigmatized as
Puritans, although strenuous churchmen, which further strengthened the cause of
the church Puritans; the former, called by way of distinction state Puritans,
joining the latter, both together became at length apparently the majority of
the nation.

To these persecutions we must ascribe, if not the settlement, yet at least,
the quick rise and flourishing state of the colonies in North America.
Persecution drove the Rev. Mr. Robinson and his congregation to Holland, 1606.
about the year 1606. When Mr. Robinson and his associates, separated from the
church of England, they were rigid Brownists; but Mr. Robinson, being a man of
great learning, and of a liberal mind, after conversing with the learned
divines in Holland, became moderate, as did his people; so that those who were
rigid Brownists would not hold communion with them. Mr. Robinson, in his
conversation and writings, proved a principal in ruining Brownism; and, in the
opinion of some, was the father, of others, the restorer, of the Independent,
or Congregational, churches. His society did not require of those who joined
them, a renunciation of the church of England. They also acknowledged the other
reformed churches as true and genuine. Still it is to be remarked, that no
person was admitted, because of their being members of such churches, but on
account of their known piety; their belonging to and continuing in such
churches, was not an argument for rejecting them; nor was it the argument for
their reception. Gordon's Hist of the American Revolution, Vol. I. p. 13, 14.


In 1617, they began to think of removing to America. They laid great stress
upon their peculiar tenets, but this did not lessen their regard to morality.
The manners of the Dutch were too licentious for them. Their children left
them; some became soldiers, and others sailors, in the Dutch service; and they
feared, that in a few years their posterity would become Dutch, and their
church extinct. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 3.


With these views, this handful of men resolved (...) separate themselves from
all the existing establishments in the world, and hand down to future ages the
model of a church, free from human additions, and a system of civil policy,
unfettered by the arbitrary institutions of the old world.

The Dutch labored to persuade them to go to Hudson's River, and settle under
their West India company; but they had not lost their affection for the
English, and chose to be under their government and protection. 1617.
They applied to the Virginia company for a patent, for part of the country. To
render it probable that their undertaking would not, like all former, be
abortive, they gave among others these special reasons. "That they were knit
together is a strict and sacred bond, by virtue of which they held themselves
bound to take care of the good of each other, and of the whole. That it was not
with them as with other men, whom small things could discourage, or small
discontents cause to wish themselves at home again." Hazard's Historical
Collections, Vol. I. p. 303.
The Virginia company were very much pleased with the application, and some of
the chief of them addressed the king to grant the petitioners liberty in
religion, under the great seal; but this was refused. He promised to connive,
and not molest them; but this would not do for them Ibid.
at that time. They laid aside the design for that year. 1619.
In 1619, they renewed their application, and resolved to venture, though they
could not have a special grant, from the king, of liberty of conscience. They
hoped their remote situation would put them out of danger of the ecclesiastical
courts. The affairs of the Virginia company were in great confusion, and it was
the latter end of the year before the patent was granted. It was taken out
under the company's seal to John Wincob. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts,
Vol. I. p. 3, 4.
Wincob not removing with the rest, they never took any benefit seem the patent.

"Mr. Weston and other merchants of London engaged, some to adventure their
money, and some to go over with them. They therefore made the necessary
preparations; and, in July 1620, the principal of them went over to
Southhampton, 1620.
where two ships were ready to take them on board. They sailed the beginning of
August, but were obliged, repeatedly, to put back, and to leave one of their
ships behind, with part of their company, at last. They intended for Hudson's
River or the coast near to it; but the Dutch had bribed their pilot, and he
carried them farther northward, so that they fell in about Cape Cod, and
arrived in that harbor the 11th of November." Ibid. p. 5.


The whole number, exclusive of the mariners, amounted to 101, about one fourth
part heads of families, the rest wives, children and servants. "They were
convinced, upon their passage, that they could not long subsist without
government. Some of the inferior class among them muttered that when they
should g^t ashore, one man would be as good as another, and that they would do
what seemed good in their own eyes. This led the graver sort to consider how to
prevent it, and, for this purpose, they prepared an instrument for every man to
sign before he landed, Hutchinson's History, Vol. II. p. 455.
By this they formed themselves into a body politic, under the crown of
England, "To enact, constitute and frame such just and equal laws and
ordinances, acts, constitutions and offices, from time to time, as shall be
thought most meet and convenient for the general good of the colony." They
employed themselves in making discoveries until the 31st of December, when they
settled at Plymouth, which is the first town that was settled in New England.
Here they suffered all the inconveniences of cold, poverty, and sickness; so
that forty four of their number died within six months after their arrival. The
remainder, animated with a degree of religious terror, supported indescribable
hardships; glorying, in the midst of their sufferings, that they enjoyed civil
and religious liberty, and that they were out of the reach of ecclesiastical
courts.

In some of their excursions, they found buried several baskets full of Indian
corn, to the amount of about eight bushels, which fortunately served them for
planting the next spring, and was perhaps the means of preserving them from
perishing with hunger. They made diligent inquiry for the owners, whom they
found, and afterward paid double the value of it. Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I.
p. 149.
These founders of the colony were a plain, frugal, industrious people, strict
observers of moral and religious duties; but it was several years before their
perseverance obtained them a comfortable subsistence. Of this first colony
there were alive in 1650, 30; in 1670, 122 in 1694, 2; and Mary Cushman, only
daughter of Isaac Allert^^, was alive in School. For a particular account of the
first settlers, (...) Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 455.


All the historians of New England take notice of two remarkable events which
made room for the establishment of the English. The one was a war "began by
(...) Tarratenes, a nation who resided eastward of Penobscot. These formidable
people surprised the bash^^^ or chief sachem at his head quarters, and
destroy^^ him with all his family; upon which all the other ^^hems who were
subordinate to him, quarrelled among themselves for the sovereignty; and in
these dissensions many of them as well as of their unhappy people perished."
Belknap's American Biography, Vol. I. p. 358.
The other was a mortal and contagious distemper, which swept away great
numbers of the Indians, a few years before the English came to New Plymouth, so
that some tribes were in a manner extinct; the Massachusetts, particularly, are
said to have been reduced from thirty thousand to three hundred fighting men.
Hutchinson's Hist. of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 34.
The extent of this pestilence was between Penobscot in the east, and
Narraganset in the west. These two tribes escaped, whilst the intermediate
people were wasted and destroyed. Belknap's American Biography, Vol. I, p. 356.
The small pox, likewise, made great havoc among the Indians after the English
settled in the country. An instance of mortality among the Indians of
Nantucket, in the year 1763, strengthens the probability of the distemper above
mentioned, and of its amazing effects. Between 260 and 270 persons had been
seized with a fever, of which number 6 men and 9 women only recovered. It
appears that the English inhabitants were entirely free from this pestilence. A
physician of note supposed this mortality to proceed from a dearth among the
Indians the two preceding years, so that they had but little corn or any other
farinaceous food, and this year had been some months without any, which caused
them to fall upon their pumpkins, squoshes, etc. before they were ripe; and
this food brought their blood into a putrid and broken state. Hutchinson's
History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 35.


"As early as March, 1621, Masassoit, one of the most powerful sagamores of the
neighboring Indians, with sixty attendants, made a visit to the Plymouth
settlers, and entered into a formal and very friendly treaty with them, wherein
they agreed to avoid injuries on both sides -- to punish offenders -- to
restore stolen goods -- to assist each other in all justifiable wars -- to
promote peace among their neighbors, etc. -- Masassoit, and his successors for
fifty years, inviolably observed this treaty. The English are much indebted to
him for his friendship; and his memory will ever be respected is New England.
Morse.


"The Narragansets, disliking the conduct of Masassoit, declared war against
him, which occasioned much confusion and fighting among the Indians. The
Plymouth colony interposed in favor of Masassoit, their good ally, and
terminated the dispute, to the terror of their enemies. Even Canonicus himself,
the terrific sachem of the Narragansets, sued for peace.

"On the 13th of September 1621, no less than nine sachems declared allegiance
to king James; and Masassoit, with many of his sub-sachems, who lived round the
bays of Patuxent and Massachusetts, subscribed a writing, acknowledging the
king of England their master." These and several of the foregoing articles are
extracted from Morse's American Universal Geography, Vol. I.


In March 1624, Mr. Winslow, agent for the colony, arrived, and, together with
a good supply of clothing, brought a bull and three heifers, which were the
first cattle of the kind in this part of America. None of the domestic animals
were found by the first European settlers. This year, the Plymouth plantation
consisted of 180 persons, who lived in thirty two dwelling houses. "Their stock
was a few cattle and goods, and plenty of swine and poultry." The town was
impaled about a mile in compass. On a high mount in the town they had erected a
fort, and a handsome watch tower. See Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 320.


Mr. Robinson had been disappointed by those in England, who undertook for the
passage of him and the remainder of his congregation, until the year 1625, when
he died at Leyden; and his congregation dispersed, although some found the way
to their brethren before, and some after, his death. Hutchinson's Hist. of
Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 454.
His son Isaac, came over to Plymouth, where he lived to the age of 90 years.
His descendants still live in Barnstable county, Massachusetts. Morse's
American Universal Geography, Vol. I. p. 320.


"For two or three years after the settlement of Plymouth, all things were in
common, no man having any property but what was put into the common stock; and
every person furnished with clothing and provisions out of this stock. A
certain quantity of land, on the beginning of the year, was assigned for
planting, and every one had such a proportion of the labor assigned him. Mr.
Bradford Mr. William Bradford (...) the second governor of the colony, being
successor to Mr. John Carver.
remarks, upon this occasion, that the ill success of this community of goods,
even among godly and sober men, fully evinced the vanity of that conceit of
Plato, that the taking away property and bringing in community into a
commonwealth would make them happy and flourishing: and in fact, they raised so
little provisions, that once, at least, they were in danger of starving, and
before their crops were fully ripe, great part would be stolen out of the
fields to satisfy hungry bellies; and severe whipping of the offenders would
not deter others, in like circumstances, from committing the like offense;
besides, it occasioned constant discontent and murmuring. The young men, most
capable of labor, who had no families, thought much of laboring for other
men's wives and children; those in their full strength complained that it was
unjust, to allow them no more in the division of victuals and clothing, than to
them who were weak, and could not do a quarter part of the labor; the aged and
grave men thought it an indignity and disrespect to be on a level in labor, so
in vict^^^ and clothes, with the younger, and in other respect inferior sort.
Husbands could not brook it, that their wives should be commanded to do menial
services, dressing meat, washing clothes, etc. for other men; a^ being to do
and all to receive alike, it was inferred that in all other respects they ought
to be alike, and one man was to all intents and purposes as good as another,
and no subordination, no civil distinction, could be preserved. After three
years, they found it absolutely necessary to come into some new measures, and
began with assigning to each family a certain quantity of land sufficient to
raise corn enough for their support, but (...) all other respects to continue
in the general way, until the seven years, for which they had contracted with
their partners in England, for the profits of their labor, were expired. There
was immediately a new face upon their affairs, much more corn was planted than
the governor, by the exertion of all his authority, could ever cause them to
plant in any year before. Women and children, who were weak and unable before,
went, cheerfully, with their husbands and parents to plant corn; and every
family had enough for their support, and many of them some to spare. An
emulation was created, and increased every year, to exceed in quantity: and in
a few years, they were able to raise sufficient to make it a valuable article
in the Indian trade, being then worth six shillings sterling a bushel. The
Indians in a great measure left off raising it, the hunting life being more
agreeable to them, when they found with their furs they could purchase what
they wanted.

"The colony had struggled for seven for eight years, and had made but small
improvements in cultivating the ground, and were not numerous enough to think
of dividing and extending the inland parts of the country, then Mr. Endicot
arrived at Salem, to prepare the may for the grand undertaking of settling the
Massachusetts. This must have given fresh spirit to the Plymothenians. Without
this, there is great reason to question whether the plantation would not in a
few years have been deserted, and the settlers have removed to some more
fertile part of America; or which is more probable, have returned to England,
where, from the change of times, they might have enjoyed civil and religious
liberty, for the sake of which they quitted it, in as great a latitude as their
hearts could wish." Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 474, 477.


The Plymouth company retained the power vested in them by the crown, until the
year 1635, when they resigned their charter. Previous to this they made several
grants of land to adventurers who proposed to settle in New England. New
Hampshire was granted to captain John Mason, in 1621; the Province of Maine to
Sir R. Gorges, in 1622; and Massachusetts Bay to Sir Henry Rosewell, and five
other persons, and their associates, in 1627. For a particular account of the
different settlements in New England, see Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. and
Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. and II.
Connecticut was granted in 1630, to the earl of Warwick; another grant was
likewise made in 1635, to the duke of Hamilton. This last claim was disputed,
and never took effect. Rhode Island, was settled in 1636, by Mr. Roger
Williams, from Massachusetts; which he was obliged to leave from motives of the
same kind with these which brought the Puritans to New England. See
Hutchi^son's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 37, etc.


Notwithstanding all the sufferings the Puritans had undergone in England, they
were no sooner free from the tyranny of ecclesiastical courts, and settled in
the country, than they fell into religious disputes and contentions among
themselves; and such is human nature that the majority here were as fond of the
principle of (...) formity, as those from whose persecution they had (...).
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 37.


From this time, New England began to flourish. (...) settlement had been
successfully enterprized at Sal^^^ in 1628, by governor Endicot, and Boston
was sett^^ as early as 1631, from Charlestown. Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. p.
298.


The colony of Plymouth had no charter from (...) crown, but obtained a patent
from the "Plymo^^^ council," Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p.
9 and 21.
in 1629, and was considered as a government, de facto, and recognized as such
by king Char^^^ Hazard's Hist. Coll.
and his successors, in their letters and orders, sect (...) the colony at
various times, prior to their incorporation with Massachusetts in 1691.

New England was greatly alarmed in the spring of 1630, by the "great
conspiracy that was entered (...) by the Indian^ (...) all parts, from the
Narraga^^^^ round to the east (...), to extirpate the English. (...) colony at
Plymouth was the principal object of (...) conspiracy. They well knew that if
they could effect the destruction of Plymouth, the infant settlement (...)
Massachusetts would fall an easy sacrifice. They (...) their plan with much
art. Under color of some (...) version at Plymouth, they intended to have
fallen upon the inhabitants, and thus have effected their (...). But their plot
was disclosed to the people of Char^^^ town, by John Sagamore, an Indian, who
had (...) been a great friend to the English." The preparation made to prevent
any such fatal surprise in future, (...) the firing of the great guns, so
terrified the Indians the they dispersed, relinquished their design, and
declar^^ themselves the friends of the English. See Morse's Am. (...). Geog.
Vol. I. p. 322.


The English first seated themselves at Hartford (...) Connecticut, in 1636,
and afterward at Weathersfield, Windsor, and Springfield. Four years after,
they (...) the Dutch garrison, and drove them from the (...) of the river,
having first settled New Haven, (...), regardless of the protest of the Dutch
against (...). The laws made in the Dominion of New Haven (...) inserted below;
and cannot fail to please the cu^^^^ ^eader, as they give a more extensive idea
of the manners of those times, than the most labored description could convey.
The governor and magistrates, convened in general assembly, (...) the supreme
power under God, of this independent dominion. -- (...) the determination of
the assembly, no appeal shall be made. -- The governor is amenable to the
voice of the people. -- The governor shall have a single vote in determining
any question, except a (...), when the assembly shall be equally divided. --
The as^^^^^^ of the people shall not be dismissed by the governor but shall
(...) itself. -- Conspiracy against this (...) shall be punished (...) death.
-- Whosoever says there is a (...) and jurisdiction (...) and over this
dominion, shall suffer death and loss of property. (...) Whatever attempts to
change or overturn this dominion, shall suf^^^ death. -- The judges shall
determine controversies without a ju^^ -- No one shall be a freeman, or give a
vote, unless he be con^^^^, and a member in full communion of one of the
churches allowed in this dominion. -- Each free man shall swear by the blessed
God (...) true allegiance to this dominion, and that Jesus is the only (...).
-- No quaker, or differnter from the established worship of this (...), shall
be allowed to give a vote for the election of magistrates (...) officer. -- No
food or lodging shall be offered to a quaker, (...), o^ other heretic. -- If
any person turns quaker, he shall be (...) and not suffered to return, but on
pain of death. -- No (...) shall abide in the dominion; he shall be banished;
and suffer (...) return. -- Priests may be seized by one without a war^^^t. --
No one to cross a river, but with an authorized ferryman. -- No one shall run
on the sabbath day, or walk in his garden, or (...) where, except reverently to
and from meeting. -- No one shall (...), cook victuals, make beds, sweep house,
cut hair, or shave, on (...) day. -- No woman shall kiss her children on the
sabbath or (...) day. -- The sabbath shall begin at sunset on Saturday. -- To
pick an ear of corn growing in a neighbor's garden, shall be deemed theft. --
A person accused of trespass in the night, shall be judged (...), unless he
clear himself by his oath. -- When it appears that (...) has confederates, and
he refuses to discover them, he may (...). -- None shall buy or fell lands
without permission of the selectmen. -- A drunkard shall have a master
appointed by the sele^^men, who are to debar him from the liberty of buying and
selling. -- Whosoever publishes a lie, to the prejudice of his neighbor, shall
(...) the stocks, or be whipped ten stripes. -- No minister shall (...) school.
-- Every rateable person who refuses to pay his proper (...) support the
minister of the town or parish, shall be fined by the (...) 2 l. and 4 l. every
quarter until he or she pay the rate to the (...) -- Men-stealers shall suffer
death. -- Whosoever wears (...) trimmed with gold, silver, or bone lace above
as. per yard, shall (...) presented by the grand jurors; and the selectmen
shall tax the offender at 300 l. estate. -- A debtor in prison, swearing he has
no estate, shall be let out, and sold to make satisfaction. -- Whosoever sets a
fire in the woods, and it burns a house, shall suffer death; and persons
suspected of this crime shall be imprisoned without benefit of bail. --
Whosoever brings cards or dice into this dominion, shall pay a (...) of five
pounds. -- No one shall read common prayer books, keep Christmas or set days:
make minced pies, dance, play cards, or play^^ any instrument of music, except
the drum, trumpet, and Jewsharp. -- No gospel minister shall join people in
marriage. The magistr^tes only shall join them in marriage, as they may do it
with less (...) to Christ's church. -- When parents refuse their children
convenient marriages, the magistrate shall determine the point. -- The
sel^^men, on finding children ignorant, may take them away from their parents,
and put them into better hands, at the expense of their parents. -- Fornication
shall be punished by compelling marriage, or (...) the court shall think
proper. -- Adultery shall be punished with death. -- A man that strikes his
wife, shall pay a fine of ten pounds. -- A woman that strikes her husband,
shall be punished as the (...) directs. -- A wife shall be deemed good evidence
against her husband. -- No man shall court a maid in person, or by letter,
without (...) obtaining consent of her parents: 5 l. penalty for the first
offense; roll. for the second; and for the third, imprisonment during the
pleasure of the court. -- Married persons must live together or be imprisoned.
-- Every male shall have his hair out round according to a cap. NOTE. The above
laws were originally printed on blue paper, (...) which account they were
called the "blue laws."

An account of the ancient system of laws in Massachusetts is in Hutchinson's
Hist. Vol. I. p. 435.




The persecution in England, in the reign of Charles I proved to be a principle
of life and vigor to the infant settlements in America. "Several men of
eminents in England, who were the friends and protectors of the Puritans,
entertained a design of setting in New England, if they should fail in the
measures they were pursuing for the establishment of the liberty and the
reformation of the religion of their own country. They solicited and obtained
grants in New England, and were at great pains in settling them. Among these
paten^^^s were the lords Brook, Say and Seal, the Pelhams, the Hampdens and the
Pyms; names which afterward appeared with great eclat. Sir Matthew Boynton, sir
William Constable, sir Arthur Haslering, and Oliver Cr^mwell, were actually
upon the point of embarking for New England, when archbishop Laud, unwilling
that so many objects of his hatred should be removed out of the reach of his
power, applied for, and obtained an order See Hazard's Hist Coll. Vol. I p.
341, where there is a copy of the order made at the Council table, Feb. 21, 1633
from the court to put a stop to these transportations. However, he was not
able to prevail (...) far as to prevent New England from receiving vast
additions, as well of the clergy, who were silenced and deprived of their
(...), for (...) conformity, as of the (...) who adhe^ed to their opinions."
Morse's American Universal Geography, Vol. I. p. 321.


In 1640, the importation of settlers ceased. The motive which had led to
transportation to America was over, 1640.
by the change of affairs in England. At this time, the number of passengers
who had come over, in 298 vessels, from the beginning of the colony, amounted
to 21,200 men, women and children; perhaps about 4000 families. "Since which
more persons have removed out of New England, to other parts of the world, than
have come from other parts to it; and the number of families, at this day, When
Mr. Hutchinson wrote (...) History of Masachusetts.
in the four governments, New England, before the civil wars, contained 25000
sou^^ British History in America, Vol. I. p. 372.
may be supposed to be less, rather than more, than the natural increase of
four thousand. This sudden stop had a surprising effect upon the price of
cattle. They had lost the greatest part of what they intended for the first
supply, in the passage from Europe. As the inhabitants multiplied, the demand
for the cattle increased, and the price of a milch cow had been kept from L25
to L30, but fell at once this year to L5 or L6. A farmer, who could spare but
one cow in a year out of his stock, used to clothe his family with the price of
it, at the (...) pense of the new comers; when this failed they (...) put to
difficulties. Although they judged they (...) 12000 neat cattle, yet they had
but about 3000 sheep in the colony. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol.
I. p. 93.


In a few years after the English arrived at Plymouth, their settlements became
so extensive, and were so distant from each other, as to render their situation
very (...) secure. Surrounded by enemi^s, distracted by (...) divisions, and
too far distant to receive seasonable (...) from the mother country, they were
led to consult the^^ common safety by confederating together. Articles were
drawn up in 1638, Ibid. p. 125.
but they were not ^^^ished and ratified till the 7th of September 16^^: 1643.
from which time we are to look upon Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut and
New Haven as one body. Commissioners were annually chosen, who had the
management of such affairs as concerned the union generally, whilst each
retained its sovereignty in other respects. At the next meeting Massachusetts
claimed, and obtained, precedence of the other colonies. It was then agreed
upon that "their commissioners should first subscribe^ after the president, in
this and all future meetings (...) and the others in the order above named. See
Hazard's Historical Collections, Vol. II. p. 7 and 14.
The colony of Rhode Island would gladly have joined in this confederacy, but
Massachusetts refused to admit their commissioners. The union subsisted, with
some alterations, until the year 1686, when all the charters except that of
Connecticut, were, in effect, vacated by a commission from James II. See
Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 322.


The united colonies "entered into a league both against the Dutch and Indians,
and grew so powerful as (...) shortly after, upon a design of extirpating the
^^^mer. The Massachusetts Bay declined this enterprise, which occasioned a
letter to Oliver Cromwell, from William Hook, dated New Haven, November 3,
1653, in which he complains of the Dutch, for supplying the natives with arms
and ammunition, 1653.
begs his assistance with two or three frig^^^s, and that letters might be sent
to the eastern colo^ies, commanding them to join in an expedition against the
Dutch colony." Oliver's affairs would not admit of so distant an attempt: and
he concluded a peace with the Dutch the year after. His son Richard however
drew up instructions to his commanders for subd^ing the Dutch in America, and
wrote letters to the English American governments for their aid, but the
enterprise was laid aside. See Smith's History of New York, p. 17, 18.


In 1669, there were no less than 120 towns settled, 1669.
and 40 churches gathered, in New England. Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 321.
Cromwell seems to have been the first who had a true sense of the importance
of the colonies to the mother country. He obtained an act or ordinance of
parliament, prohibiting the plantations from ^^ceiving or exporting any
European commodities, except in English built ships, navigated by Englishmen,
and all correspondence was forbidden with any nation (...) colony not subject
to England, and no alien was allowed to set up a factory, or trade in the
plantations. But however grievous this act might prove to the other colonies,
Barbados and the Caribbees were under the same government. These, with
Virginia, Maryland and Bermudas, were all the colonies except New England,
which were settled when Cromwell took the government upon him. Hutchinson's
Hist. of Mass. Vol. I. p. 1947*
it is certain that those of New England, whether it was designed to extend
there or not, suffered nothing by it. They were not only indulged in their
trade to all parts, but enjoyed the extraordinary privilege of having their
goods imported into England free from all custom which other subjects were
liable to pa^^ which seems to have continued until the restoratined.
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 195.


Whilst Oliver ruled, New England met with the utmost indulgence; and, from the
year 1640 to 1660, it approached very near to an independent commonwealth.
Ibid. Vol. II. p. 2 and 3.
The house of commons, in a memor^^^ resolve of the 10th of March 1642, gives
New England the title of kingdom. Ibid. Vol. I. p. 15.
It is likewise worthy if observation, that the commissioners sent over by king
Charles II. assert in their narrative, Hutchinson's Collection, p. 420.
that the colony solicited Cromwell to be declared a free state.

At the first arrival of the English, the Indians were treated with kindness,
to obtain their friendship and favor; but they having no acquaintance with
(...) arms, the English grew by degrees less apprehensive of danger, finding by
means of cor^^ets or armor, the they were not so much exposed to danger from
bo^^ and arrows of so simple construction as those of the Indians. The quarrels
which the Indians had always been engaged in among themselves were a farther
(...) curity to the English, who on the one hand endearoured to restrain them
from an open war with one a^^^^^er, and on the other to keep up so much
contention (...) to prevent a combination; and to make an appeal is the
colonists, as umpires, necessary. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol.
I. p. 275.
In this disu^^^ed state it was impossible for them to make any effectual
opposition to the English, even after they had obtained fire arms and were
become good marksmen.

Those of the New England colonies which suffered most in the Indian wars, were
Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The war with the Pequods, the most (...) of
the neighboring nations, began about the (...) 1636, and ended in the ruin of
that tribe. And (...) a later period the Narragansetts shared the same (...)
Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. (...). 58, 59, 300, 307. Vol. II. p. 478.
Others were constrained to seek out new habi^tions in the interior parts,
unable to contend with their more skilful antagonists.

The population of Massachusetts and New Hampshire suffered considerably by the
wars with the Indi^^^. From 1675, when Philip's war began, to 1713, (...) or
six thousand of the youth of the country had ^^^ished by the enemy, or by
distempers contracted in the service. Hutchinson's History, Vol (...) For a
particular account of the wars with the Indians, (...) ^^^on's History of
Massachusetts and Dr. Belknap's History (...) Hampshire.


Though the greater part of the English settlers came littler with religious
views, and fairly purchased their (...) of the Indians, yet it cannot be denied
that some, especially in the eastern parts of New England, had (...) views
only; and from the beginning used ^^^dulent methods in trade with them, and
encroached upon their lands. Such things were indeed disal^^^ed by the
government, and would always have been punished, if the Indians had made
complaint; but they (...) only the law of retaliation. See Belknap's Hist. of
New Hampshire, Vol. I. p. 128.
It must likewise he acknowledged, that in the eastern parts, "when any person
was arrested, for killing an Indian (...) peace, he was either forcibly rescued
from the hands of justice, or if brought to trial, invariably acquitted; it
being impossible to impannel a jury some of whom had not suffered by the
Indians, either in their persons (...) families." Ibid. Vol. II. p. 83.


The following account of the national character, manners, customs, and
sumptuary laws of the first ^^^tlers, is extracted from Dr. Belknap's History
of (...) Hampshire.

The early planters of New England did not content themselves with merely
living peaceably among the ^^dians, but exerted themselves vigorously in
^^^^^ouring their conversion to christianity, which was (...) of the
obligations of their patent. This painful work was remarkably succeeded; and
the names of Eliot (...) Mayhew will always be remembered as unwearied
instruments in promoting it. Great care was taken by the government to prevent
fraud and injustice (...) the Indians in trade, or violence to their persons.
(...) nearest of the natives were so sensible of the justice of their English
neighbors, that they lived in a st^^s of peace with them, with but little
interruption, for (...) fifty years.

Slavery was thought so inconsistent with the natur^l rights of mankind, and
detrimental to society, that an express law was made, prohibiting the buying or
selling of slaves, except those taken in lawful war, or reduced to servitude
for their crimes by a judicial sentence; and these were to have the fame
privileges (...) were allowed by the laws of Moses. There was a ^^markable
instance of justice in the execution of (...) law in 1645, when a Negro who had
been fraud^l^^ly brought from the coast of Africa, and sold in the country, was
by the special interposition of the general court taken from his master in
order to be sent (...) to his native land. How long after this the importation
of blacks continued to be disallowed is uncertain.

Intemperance and profaneness were so effectually discountenanced, that Hugh
Peter's, who resided in the country seven years, declared before the parliament
that he had not seen a drunken man, nor heard a profane oath during that
period. The report of this extraordinary strictness, whilst it invited many of
the best men in England to come over, kept them clear of those wretches who fly
from one country to another to escape the punishment of their crimes. Their
(...) for purity of every kind, carried them into some ^^^ements, in their laws
which are not gener^^^ supposed to come within the sphere of mag^^^cy, and in
larger communities could scarcely (...) attended to in a judicial way.

The drinking of healths, and the use of tobacco, were forbidden, the former
being considered as a heath^^sh practice, grounded on the ancient libations;
the other as a species of intoxication and waste of time, laws were instituted
to regulate the intercourse be^^ten the sexes, and the advances toward
matrimony: ^^y had a ceremony of betrothing, which preceded that of marriage.
Pride and levity of behavior came under the cognizance of the magistrate. Not
only the (...), but the mode of dress, and out of the hair, were subject to the
state regulations. Women were ^^bidden to expose their arms or their bosoms to
view; it was ordered that their fleeves should reach down to their wrist, and
their gowns be closed round the neck. Men were obliged to cut short their hair,
that they ^ight not resemble women. No person, not worth (...) was allowed to
wear gold or silver lace, or silk ^oods and scarfs. Offenses against these laws
were presentable by the grand jury; and these who dressed above their rank,
were to be assessed accordingly. Sumptuary laws might be of use in the
beginning of a new plantation, but these pious rulers had more in view than the
political good. They were not only concerned for the external appearance of
sobriety and good order, but thought themselves obliged, so far as they were
able, to promote real religion, and enforce the observance of the divine
precepts.

As they were fond of imagining a near resemblances between the creumstances of
their settlement in this country, and the redemption of Israel from Egyptian
Babylon; it is not strange that they should also (...) upon their "common
wealth, as an institution of (...) for the preservation of their churches; and
the (...) rulers as both members and fathers of them." The famous John Cotton,
the first minister in Boston, (...) the chief promoter of this sentiment. When
he arriv^^ in 1633, he found the people divided in their opinion^ Some had been
admitted to the privileges of freemen (...) the first general court, who were
not in communi^^ with the churches; after this, an order was pass^^^ that none
but members of the churches should be admitted freemen; whereby all other
persons were (...) cluded from every office or privilege, civil or milit^^.
This great man, by his eloquence, confirmed those (...) had embraced this
opinion, and earnestly pleade^^ "that the government might be considered as a
the^^racy, wherein the Lord was judge, lawgiver and (...) that the laws which
he gave Israel, might be adopted ^^far as they were of moral and perpetual
equity; (...) the people might be considered as God's people, in conenant with
him; that none but persons of appro^^ piety and eminent gifts, should be chosen
rulers; that the ministers should be consulted in all matters of religions and
that the magistrates should have a superintending and coercive power over the
churches." At the (...) fire of the court, he compiled a system of laws,
founded chiefly on the laws of Moses, which was considered (...) the
legislative body as the general standard; though they never formally adopted
it, and in some instan^^^ varied from it.

Before the American revolution, the arts, though carried to a greater degree
of perfection in New England, than in any of the other colonies, had not ma^^
(...) the same progress as agriculture. There were ^^ above four or five
manufactures of any importance. ^^ose were ship building, the distilling of rum
from ^^sses, the making of hats, and different manufactures of hemp and flax.

The first external resource they met with, was in the ^^ery. It was encouraged
to such a degree, that a reg^^ation took place, by which every family who
declar^^^at it had lived upon salt fish for two days in the week for a whole
year, were disburdened of a part of (...).

Besides the fishery noar Cape Cod, which employed (...) numbers; New England
sent every year about (...) vessels, from 35 to 40 tons each, to the Great
(...), to Newfoundland, and to Cope Breton, which ^^monly made three voyages a
season; and brought (...) at least 100,000 quintals of cod. Besides, there
(...) larger vessels which sailed from the same ports, (...) exchanged
provisions for the fish caught by the ^^glish, who were settled in those frozen
and barren regions. All this cod was afterward distributed in the southern
parts of Europe and America. See Abbe Raynal's Hist. of F. and W. Indies, Chap.
XVII.


The whole fishery, from triding beginnings in the year 1701, at length brought
into Massachusetts, about the beginning of the war, no less a sum than ^^,000
l. sterling, annually, through the island of Nan^^ ^^t alone, and employed 150
sail of vessels, with (...) 2500 seamen. See Minot's Hist. of the Insurrection
in Massachusetts, p. 13.


Fish was not the only article with which the British islands in the New World
were supplied by New England. It furnished them besides with horses, oxen,
^ogs, salt meat, butter, tallow, cheese, flour, biscuit, (...) corn, peace,
fruits, cider, hemp, flax, and woods of all kinds. The same commodities passed
into the ^^ands belonging to the other nations, sometimes openly, sometimes
clandestinely, but always in left quantities during peace, than in war time.
Hondur^^, S^^^nam, and other parts of the American continen (...) also markets
open to New England. This pro^^^ likewise imported wines and brandies from the
Ma^^ras and the Aaores, and paid for them with cod ^^ and corn.

The ports of Italy, Spain and Portugal received ^^nually 60 or 70 of their
ships laden with cod, wood (...) ship building, naval stores, corn, and fish
oil. The ^^turns were olive oil, salt, wine, and money, ^^^^^ately to New
England, where they landed their car^^^ clandestinely. Thus they cluded the
customs (...) would have been obliged to pay in Great Britain (...) they had
gone there; as by a positive order they (...) bound to do. The ships which did
not return to (...) ports from whence they first set out, were sold in these
where they disposed of their cargoes. They had ^^^quently no particular
destination, but were freighted indifferently for every merchant, and every
port, till they met with a proper purchaser.

The mother country received from its colony, yards and masts for the royal
navy, planks, pot and pearl (...) pitch, tar, turpentine, a few furs, etc. and,
in (...) of scarcity, some corn.

Besides the trade New England carried on with her own productions, she
appropriated to herself part of the produce of North, and South, America, by
undertaking to convey the several exchanges made between these countries. On
this account the New England^^ were looked upon as the brokers or Hollanders of
this part of the world.

Notwithstanding this lively and continued exertion, she was not able to
discharge her debts. She was never able to pay exactly for what she received
from the mother country, either in productions of her own, (...) of foreign
industry, or in those from the (...) Indies; all which articles of trade
amounted an^^ally to 393,750 l. sterling.

She had, however, trade enough to keep 6000 sailors (...) constant employment.
Her shipping consisted of (...) large vessels, which carried altogether, 40,000
tons l^^den; besides a great number of smaller vessels for ^^^ing, The (...)
fishery of Massachusetts alone, employed annually, on an average, from 1765 to
1775, 669 vessels of 25,630 tons, 4405 seamea, and took 351,300 quiatals of
fish; of which 178,800 quintals were sold to Europe, and 172,500 to the West
Indies. The whale fistery of Massachusetts alone, employed annually, on an
average from 1771 to 1775, 183 vessels for the northern fishery, of ^3,820
tons, and (...) for the southern, of 14,020 tons, and employed 4059 seamen,
(...) 39,390 his. of spermaceti oil, and 8640 bls. of whale oil. The (...) of
both the fisheries amounned annually to 600,000 l. lawful (...). See Mr.
Jefferson's Report, Feb. 1, 1791.
and for the coasting trade, which sailed out ^^^criminately from the numerous
harbors that are (...) on the coast. Almost all of them loaded and un^^ed at
Boston. See Raynal's Hist. of the E. and W. Indies. Chap. XVII.


The number of inhabitants in Massachusetts Bay, (...) Hampshire, Connecticut,
and Rhode Island, be^^^^ the year 1760, amounted probably to 500,000.
Hutchinson's Hist. Preface to Vol. I. p. iii.


The following is an account of the value of exports (...) the New England
colonies to England, alone, for (...) years; and the imports from thence,
during (...) same period; as submitted to the inspection of the (...)
parliament. American Museum, Vol. VI. p. 402.


Exports. Imports. 1763 L.71,253 L.258,854 1764 92,593 462,573 1765 150,690
455,526 1766 146,318 424,727 1767 132,694 421,067 1768 150,898 426,549 Exports.
Imports. 1769 133,788 214,615 1770 154,398 400,^^^ 1771 158,218 1,420,119 1772
132,082 826,394 1773 128,003 529,^^^

MASSACHUSETTS BAY.
THE first grant within the bounds of Massachusetts was obtained by Mr. Weston,
who, in the summer of 1622, 1622.
sent over two ships, with 50 (...) men, to begin a plantation at Wessagusset,
(...) called Weymouth. They were sickly when they (...) rived, and received
necessaries and refreshments (...) their neighbors at New Plymouth. They were
(...) solute crew, soon brought themselves to poverty, (...) robbed the Indians
and offered other abuses to (...) The Indians made their complaint to the
colony (...) New Plymouth; but the abuses continuing, the (...) year they laid
a plot for the destruction of all Weston's company. It was this plantation,
which gave occasion to the author of (...) dibras to make merry with New
England in general, for hanging bedrid weaver, instead of a useful cobbler. The
Plymouth (...) their neighbors, allowed that there was some foundation for the
^^ry. Several had been concerned in a theft. The Indians (...) that the
ringleader should be put to death. They hanged one, (...) was less culpable and
not like to live, in his stead. Others say they deceived the Indians, and
hanged up one who died of sickness or fa^^ing, a little while before. Hubbard.
The plot was discovered to the New Plymouth people, who sent some of their men
(...) prevented the execution of it, by the surprisal of th^^ who were to be
the principal actors. Mr. We^^^ coming over to visit his plantation, was cast
away is Ipswich Bay, and stripped by the Indians of every (...) but his shirt.
Being thus rendered incapable of affording any relief to his colony, it came to
an end, (...) one year's continuance. H^^hinson's Hist. of Massachusetts, Vol.
I. p. 5, 6.


Captain Robert Gorges obtained a patent dated Dec. 13, 1622, of lands on the
north east side of Massachu^etts Bay. He made some attempts to revive Weston's
plantation, but returned home the year after, without success. The earl of
Warwick had a patent for Masschusetts Bay, about the same time, but the bounds
are not known.

In 1624, Lydford, the minister of New Plymouth, and one John Oldham, stirred
up a faction there, and were banished that colony. 1624.
They began a settlement at Nantasket. The same year some persons, belonging to
Dorchester in England, sent over fishermen and made necessary provision for a
fishery at Cape (...), and Roger Conant, who with John Oldham, had removed with
the rest to Nantasket, (...) appointed their overseer. A grant was made by one
of the Gorges', (it is not said which,) to Oldham and others, of part of
Massachusetts Bay. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 7.


In 1625, one captain Wallaston, with about 30 persons, began a plantation near
Weston's. They gave it the name of Mount Wallaston, 1625.
now a part of the town of Braintree. No mention is made of a patent to
Wallaston. One Morton, of Furnival's Inn, was of this company. He was not left
in command, but con^^ived to make himself chief, changed the name of Mount
Wallaston to Merry Mount, set all the servants ^ee, erected a May pole, and
lived a life of dissipation, until all the stock, intended for trade, was
consumed. He was charged with furnishing the Indians with guns and ammunition,
and teaching them the use of them. At length, he made himself so obnoxious to
the planters in all parts, that at their general desire, the people of New
Plymouth seized him by an armed force, and ^^nfined him, until they had an
opportunity of sending him to England. 1626.
In the fall of 1626, Roger Conant, and some, if not all, of his company,
removed from Cape Ann to a neck of land upon Naumkeag River. Mention is made of
plante^s at Wi^simit about the same time, who probably removed there from some
of the other plantations. This is all the account we have of any settlements,
or attempts for settlements, in the Massachusetts Bay, until the year 1627. Mr.
White, the minister of Dorchester, in England, had encouraged Conant and his
company to remain in New England, and promised them, men, provisions, etc.
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 8.


In 1627, March 19, the council of Plymouth sold to sir Henry Rosewell, 1627.
sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphrey, John Endicot, and Simon
Whetcombe, who lived about Dorchester in England, their heirs and associates,
all th^^ part of New England, three miles to the south of Charles River, and
three miles north of Merrimack River, from the Atlantic to the South Sea. All
the losser grants, which have been mentioned, within those limits, were,
without doubt, looked upon to be forfeited and void; the settlement of the
country being entirely neglected by the grantees.

It is very likely, the three persons, first named in this grant, had nothing
more in view by the purchase, than a settlement for trade with the natives, or
for fishery, or other advantageous purposes. As soon as a colony for religion
was projected, we hear no more of them. The other three remained. Mr. White
managed a treaty, between sir Richard Saltonstal, Matthew Cradock, and John
Venn, esquires, and several others in and about London, and the original
patentees. A purchase was made, and the same summer Mr. Endicot, one of the
original patentees, was sent over to Naumkeag, now Salem, with planters and
servants, and all the affairs of the colony committed to his care. The patent
from the council of Plymouth, gave a good right to the soil, but no powers of
government. See Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 9.
A charter was obtained from Charles I. which some manuscripts say cost L2000
sterling. 1628. Mar. 4.
Ibid. Vol. II. p. 1.
The patentees were constituted a corporation or body politic, entitled to all
the privilege^ of any other corporation in England, under the name of "the
governor and company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England." The charter
empowered the freemen of the company to choose a governor, deputy governor,
and eighteen assistants, annually, on the last Wednesday of Easter term. Mr.
Cradock was the first governor, and Mr. Goffe deputy governor. See the
Charter of Massachusetts Bay, in Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. p. 255.


At the first court, held the 13th of May 1628, it was determined, that every
one of the company, who had subscribed fifty pounds, should have 200 acres of
had assigned, and in proportion for a greater or lesser fem, as the first
dividend. The names of all the adventurers, and the sums subscribed, were sent
over to Mr. Endicot, who was appointed their governor in the plantation.
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 10.
The first undertakers of this settlement were Puritans; of whose principles
some account has been given already. A cloud arose very early upon the affairs
of the colony; the expense of transportation was very great, and subscriptions
were slowly paid; but it was soon dispelled by a proposal from Johnson,
Winthrop, and several other Puritans of good families and estates to remove to
America; provided they might carry the charter with them, and manage the
affairs of the colony without any dependence upon such of the company as should
remain in England. This, by some, was thought irregular; but, after
consultation, it was agreed to. The removal of so many persons of character,
induced a great number of others, of the same opinions, who were not of the
company, to remove with or follow them, and put themselves under their
protection and government. They complained of the reigning prince, that he
deprived his subjects of their just rights, and had no regard to the great
charter of the kingdom. And the second year after their removal, they were
convinced that this charter was an insufficient security; an attempt being then
made to vacate it. Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 2.


It is evident from the charter, See Hazard's Hist: Coll. Vol. I. p. 255.
that the original design of it was to constitute a corporation in England,
like to that of the East India and other great companies, with power to
settle-plantations within the limits of the territory, under such forms of
government and magistracy as should be fit and necessary. The first step in
sending out Mr. Endicot, appointing him a council, giving him a commission,
instructions, etc. was agreeable to this construction of the charter.

In 1629, John Winthrop was elected governor, and was sent over with the
patent, accompanied by several of the assistants. After they had embarked, at
(...) court on board the Arabella, Mr. Dudley was chosen deputy governor, in
the room of Mr. Humphrey who staid behind. The members of the corporation,
which remained in England, were to retain a share in the trading stock and the
profits of it, for the term of seven years. All other powers and privileges
were to remain with the planters upon the spot. We have no account of any
dividend ever made, nor indeed of any trade even carried on for the company.
Hutchinson's Hist. of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 13, 17.


Before we give an account of the governor's proceedings on his arrival, we
shall mention a few circumstances of the advance of the colony before that
period.

Mr. Endicot sent three brethren, Ralph, Richard and William Sprague, 1628.
to explore the country westward. Between Mistick and Charles Rivers they found
a body of Indians settled, called Aberginians, and one English house, thatched,
and possessed by Thomas Walford, a smith. The Indian name of the neck was
Mishawun, now Charlestown. The first travelers, with the consent of the
Indians, took up their abode there. Some of their posterity remain there, and
in other parts (...) the colony to this day. Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. p. 10.


Five ships were provided for the second embarkation of planters and servants.
Mr. Francis Higginson, one of the four ministers who then came over, says in
his journal, that "they arrived at Cape Ann the 27th of June, 1628, and at
Naumkeag the 29th. They found at Naumkeag about 100 planters, eight houses,
besides a fair house built for Mr. Endicot. The old and new planters were about
300, of which 100 removed to Charlestown, where there was a house built; the
rest remained at Salem. Mr. Endicot had corresponded with the settlers at
Plymouth, who satisfied him, that they were right in their judgments of the
outward ^^^m of worship, being much like to that of the reformed churches in
France, etc. On the 20th of July, Mr. Higginson and Mr. Skeleton, after fasting
and prayer, were first elected by the company for their ministers, the first
teacher, the other pastor; each of them, together with three or four grave
members, laying their hands on the other, with solemn prayer. Nothing is said
of any church being then formed; but on the 6th of August, the day appointed
for the choice and ordination of elders and deacons, thirty persons entered
into a covenant in writing, which is said to be the beginning of the church,
and that the ministers were ord^^ed or instituted anew. The repetition of this
form they probably thought necessary, because the people were not in a church
state before. It is difficult to assign any other reason. Messengers, or
delegates, from the church of Plymouth, were expected to join with them, but
contrary winds hindered them in their passage, so they did not arrive till the
afternoon, but time enough to give the right hand of fellowship. Two of the
company, John Brown and Samuel-Brown, one a lawyer, the either a merchant, both
men of good estates and of the first patentees, and of the council, were
dissatisfied; they did not like that the common prayer and service of the
church of England should be wholly laid aside, and therefore drew off, with as
many as were of their sentiments, from the rest, and set up a separate society.
This offended the governo^r, who caused the two members of his council to be
brought before him, and judging that this practice, together with some speeches
they had uttered, tended to sedition, he sent them back to England. The heads
of the party being removed, the opposition ceased. Hutchinson's History of
Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 12.
These transactions were going forward whilst the company in England were
projecting the transfer of the corporation to New England; which has been
already related.

"Eleven ships, which failed from different ports in England, arrived in New
England before the end of July, 1630.
1630. Six more arrived before the end of the year; they brought above 1500
passengers. The Arabella, on board which was governor Winthrop, and several of
the assistants, left Yarmouth between the 7th and 12th of April. On the 7th,
the governor and diverse others on board, signed a paper, directed to their
brethren of the church of England, to remove suspicions or misconstructions,
and to ask their prayers. This paper has occasioned a dispute, whether the
first settlers of the Massachusetts were of the church of England, or not.
However problematical it may be, what they were while they remained in England,
they left no room for doubt after they arrived in America. The Arabella arrived
at Salem the 12th of June. Masconameco, the Sagamore of Cape Ann, came on board
the next morning after the governor's arrival, to bid him welcome -- Hubbard.
The common people immediately went ashore, and regaled themselves with
strawberries, which are very fine in America, and were then in perfection. This
might give them a favorable idea of the produce of the country, but the
gentlemen met with enough to fill them with concern. The first news they had,
was of the general conspiracy, a few months before, of all the Indians as far
as Narraganset, to extirpate the English. Eighty persons out of about 300, had
died in the colony the winter before; and many of those that remained were in a
weak, sickly condition. There was not corn enough to have lasted a fortnight,
and all other provisions were very scarce. They were obliged to give all the
servants they had sent over, their liberty, that they might shift for
themselves, although they had cost from 16 l. to 20 l. a head; they were in
number 180. Being destitute of the necessary accommodations, the colonists
dropped away one after another. Among others, the lady Arabella, daughter of
the earl of Lincoln, who, to use Mr. hubbard's words, "came from a paradise of
plenty and pleasure, in the family of a noble earl, into a wilderness of wants;
and although celebrated for her many virtues, yet was not able to encounter the
adversity she was surrounded with; and, in about a month after her arrival, she
ended her days at Salem, where she first landed." Mr. Johnson, her husband,
died at Boston, shortly after, to the great loss of the colony. Before
December, they had lost 200 of their number, including a few who died upon
their passage.

The governor and some of the principal persons left Salem the 17th of June,
1630.
and traveled through the woods to Charlestown, about 20 miles, to look out
for a convenient place for their chief town, which they had determined should
be in some part of the bay or harbor between Nantasket and Cambridge. At
first, they pitched upon the north side of Charles river, or rather northwest,
by the major voice; but a number of the principal gentlemen having fixed their
cottages, or shelters, intended for one winter only, upon the opposite side of
the river, the governor and most of the assistants removed to them in November.

They found when they arrived, a few families scattered about in several parts
of the bay. Mr. Maverick lived on Noddles Island, a grant or confirmation of
which he afterward obtained from the court. He had built a small fort, and had
four cannon mounted there. At a point upon Shawmut or Trimontaine, since
Boston, Said to be called so from respect to Mr. Cotton, minister of Boston in
England, who they expected would follow them.
lived Mr. Blaxton, who had left England, being dissatisfied there, and not a
thorough conformist; but he was more dissatisfied with the nonconformity of the
new comers. He told them he came from England because he did not like the
lord's bishops, but he could not join with them because he did not like the
lord's brethren. He claimed the whole peninsula upon which Boston is built,
because he (...) the first that stepped upon it. He had a grant of a very
handsome lot at the west part of the town, but he chose to quit all, and
removed to the southward, at, or near what is since called Providence, where he
lived to old age. There were also several families at Mattapan, since called
Dorchester, or rather Dorchester neck; here Mr. Ludlow and Mr. Rossiter
pitched, with two ministers, Mr. Warham and Mr. Maverick. On the north of
Charles river (Charlestown) were the remains of those who had moved the last
year from Salem; here Mr. Nowel and some of his friends made their pitch, but
considered themselves and Boston at first, as but one settlement and one
church, with Mr. Wilson for (...) minister. When he went to England, in the
spring, Charlestown became a distinct church and town, and took Mr. James for
their minister. Sir Richard Saltonstall chose a place some miles up Charles
riv^; which has taken the name of Watertown. His company took Mr. Phillips for
their minister. Mr. Pynchon was at the head of another company who settled
between Dorchester and Boston. Their town took the name of Roxbury. They had
Mr. Elliot for their minister. Medford and Mistic were then distinct places,
though not so at present. At Medford, which I take to have been a small village
at the lower part of Mistick river, now called Neck of Land, where a creek also
ran into Charles river, it was intended a settlement should be made for Mr.
Cradock and the people he was sending and had sent over. Here, by his agents,
he built several vessels of burden. At these several places, together with
Salem, the whole company were settled for the first winter. They had little
time enough to provide their huts. As soon as December came their out door work
was over. On the 6th of December, the governor and assistants met, and agreed
to fortify the neck between Boston and Roxbury, and orders were given for
preparing the materials; but at another metting, on the 21st, they laid that
design aside, and agreed on a place, first called Newtown, since Cambridge,
about three miles above Charlestown, and most of them engaged to build houses
there the next year. The weather held tolerable until the 24th of December, but
the cold then came on with violence. Such a Christmas e^e they had never seen
before. From that time, to the 10th of February, their chief care was to keep
themselves warm, and as comfortable in other respects as their scant provisions
would permit. The poorer sort were much exposed, lying in tents and miserable
hovels, and many died of the scurvy and other distempers. They were so short of
provisions, that many were obliged to live upon clams, mussels and other shell
fish, with ground nuts and acorns instead of bread. One, that came to the
governor's house to complain of his sufferings, was prevented, being informed
that even there, the last batch was in the oven. Some instances were mentioned
of great calmness and resignation in this distress. A good man, who had asked
his neighbor to a dish of clams, after dinner returned thanks to God who had
given them to suck of the abundance of the seas and of treasures hid in the
sands. They had appointed the 22d of February for a fast, but on the 5th, to
their great joy, the ship Lion, capt. Pierce, one of the last year's fleet,
returned, laden with provisions from England, which were distributed according
to the necessities of the people. They turned their fast into a thanksgiving.

In the spring of 1631, they pursued their design of a fortified town at
Newtown. 1631.
The governor set up the frame of a house; the deputy governor finished his
house and removed his family. About this time, Chicketawbut, the chief of the
Indians near Boston, came to visit the governor, and made high professions of
friendship. The apprehensions of danger lessened by degrees, the design of a
fortified town went off in the same proportion, until it was wholly laid aside.
The governor took down his frame and carried it to Boston. Mr. Dudley, the
deputy, was offended, and persisted for some time in his first determination of
residing at Newtown, but at length removed to Roxbury.

The first court of assistants was held at Charlestown, August 23, about two
months after their arrival. The first general court, was held the 19th of
October 1630, "not by a representative, but by every one, that was free of the
corporation in person." None had been admitted freemen since they left England.
The governor and assistants having great influence over the court, it was
ordered, that, for the future, the freemen should choose the assistants, and the
assistants from among themselves, choose the governor and deputy governor. The
court of assistants were to have the power of making laws and appointing
officers. This was a departure from their charter. One hundred and nine freemen
were admitted at this court. Maverick, Blackstone, and many more, who were not
of any of the churches, were of this number.

The next general court was the court of election for 1631. 1631.
The scale was now turned, and the freemen resolved to choose both governor,
deputy governor and assistants, notwithstanding the former vote, and made an
order, that for the time to come, none should be admitted to the freedom of the
body politic but such as were church members.

This law continued in force until the dissolution of the government; it being
repeated, in appearance only, after the restoration of Charles II. Had they
been deprived of their civil privileges in England by an act of parliament,
unless they would join in communion with the churches there, it might very well
have been the first in the roll of grievances. But such were the requisites to
qualify for church membership here, that the grievances were abundantly
greater. Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. p. 26.


The scarcity of the former year excited the inhabitants to make the greater
improvements by tillage, as soon as the spring advanced; and they had a very
plentiful harvest of Indian corn. It was the year 1633, before they knew they
should be able to raise English grain, if we may credit Johnson. "This year, a
small glean of rye was brought to the court, as the first fruits of English
grain, at which, this poor people greatly rejoiced to see the land would bear
it." Hutchinson's History, Vol. I. p. 24.
After this period, they gradually advanced in population, by the immigration
of new settlers; and their settlements increased accordingly.

In 1634, 1634.
the number of freemen being greatly multiplied, an alteration of the
constitution seems to have been agreed upon or fallen into by the general
consent of the towns; for at a general court for elections, this year, twenty
four of the principal inhabitants appeared as the representatives of the body
of freemen. This was a variation from the charter, which gave no power to admit
representatives. These, with the governor, deputy governor, and assistants,
formed the legislature of the colony, met and voted together in one apartment
till March 1644, when it was ordained, that the governor and assistants should
set apart: and thus commenced the house of representatives, as a distinct body.
Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. Gordon's Hist. of the American Revolution, Vol. I.
p. 29.


For the first 30 years, although the governor and assistants were annually
chosen by the body of the people, yet they confined themselves to the principal
gentlemen of family, estate, understanding and integrity. Hutchinson's Hist.
Vol. II. p. 3.


The general court, about this time, assumed spiritual jurisdiction. 1636.
They pressed colonial uniformity in religion until they became persecutors.
Whatever apology may be made for the treatment given to Episcopalians,
Baptists, and Quakers, the colony cannot be cleared from the charge of
persecuting. Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. Gordon's Hist. of the American
Revolution, Vol. I. p. 36.
"It was not peculiar to the Massachusetts people, to think themselves bound in
conscience, to cut (...) heretics, that so they might not infect the church,
^^^jure the public peace." Mr. John Calender's Century Sermon.
They followed the au^^^^ties in most other states, and in most ages of the
(...) who with like absurdity have supposed every (...) could and ought to
think as they did, and with (...) like cruelty have punished such as differed
from (...). But it ought to be remembered that Massachusetts ^ay and the other
colonies, before the late war, ^^ssed the mother country in a regard for the
civil (...) religious rights of mankind.

"The government was in diverse respects absolute. ^^^7.
Both magistrates and general court often judged and punished, in a summary
way, (...) a jury, according to discretion, as occasions (...). It was four
years before it was enacted or (...) that no trial should pass upon any for
life or punishment, but by a jury of freemen: It appears there was a trial by a
jury, in 1630, for murder, and the person charged was acquitted: Hutchinson's
Hist. Vol. I. p. 25.
and within three years after, that law was violated even by the general court.
They exercised, whilst sitting, legislature, judicial, and executive powers: a
practice, which (...) ever be dangerous to the rights of a people, even (...)
allowed to their own annual representatives.

"The country at length grew uneasy at these proceedings; were suspicious that
the general court af^^^ted arbitrary government; and earnestly expected a ^^dy
of laws to direct and protect them in all their (...) rights and privileges.
Massachusetts Records, quoted by Gordon, Vol. I. p. 31.
It was not till 1648, that the body of laws was digested and printed."

Notwithstanding the great vari^^y of ^^^taries (...) England, there had been
no divisions or any con^^^quence in the Massachusetts; but from the year (...)
to 1656, they enjoyed in general great quietne^^^ their ecclesiastical affairs,
discords in particular ch^^^^es being healed and made up by a submission to
(...) arbitrament of neighboring churches, and sometimes the interposition of
the civil power. The reput^^^ not only of the constitution of the churches, but
(...) of the New England clergy, had been for some (...) very great in England,
and the opinions of Mr. (...) Mr. Hocker, Mr. Davenport, and others, (...)
authorities by many English divines. An account of the cruel persecution of the
Friends, or (...) and the unhappy de^isions respecting witcheraft, which took
(...) subsequent to this, may be seen in Hutchinson's Hist. of Mass^^setts.


In 1638, a formal demand was made of the su^^^^der of their charter, which was
refused, and (...) proceedings followed, which would have ended in (...) loss
of their charter, and probably have proved (...) the plantation, had not the
change of affairs in (...) prevented. Hutchinson's History, Vol. II. p. 2.

"The growth of several parts of the colony, at different per^^^ will be
thought by some worth observing. In 1642, a tax of (...) was apportioned as
follows: Hingham 20 l. Weymouth 14 l. Bra^^^ 14 l. Dorchester 58 l. ^0 s.
Roxbury 50 l. Bosten 120 l. Dedham (...) Concord 25 l. Watertown 55 l.
Cambridge 6^ l. 10 s. Charlestown (...) Salem 75 l. Lynn 45 l. Ipswich 82 l.
Newbury 30 l. Salisbury 12 l. (...) Hampton 5 l. Med^^^ ^0 l. Clocester 6 l. 10
s. Hutchinson's History, Vol. I. p. 114.


From 1640 to 1660, they appro^^ very near to an independent commonwealth.
(...) New England.]

The political sentiments of the people are thus ^^^scribed. "The change of
place and circumstand prevented their keeping to the charter in certai^^^
stances, though not in others; but they could (...) satisfy themselves as to
any violations;" for "they ^^prehended themselves subject to no other laws or
(...) government, than what arose from natural reason (...) the principles of
equity, except any positive rules (...) the word of God." Hutchinson's Lette^
of December 7, 1762.
"Persons of influence (...), them held, that birth was no necessary cause of
(...); for that the subject of any prince or state, (...) a natural right to
remove to any other state or (...) of the world, when deprived of liberty of
con^^^ce; and that upon such removal his subjection (...). They called their
own a voluntary civil sub^^^^, arising merely from a mutual compact between
(...) and the king, founded upon the charter. By this (...) they acknowledged
themselves bound; ^o that (...) could not be subject to, or seek protection
from, (...) other prince, neither could make laws repugnant (...) of England,
etc. but, on the other hand, they ^tained, that they were to be governed by
laws (...) by themselves, and by officers of their own e^ing." Hutchinson's
History of Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 251 and 252.
"They meant to be inde^endent of the Eng^^^^ parliament, and therefore, when
their intimate (...) were become leading members in the house of (...), and
they were advised, on account of the (...) liberty to which king Charses left
the parliament, (...) over some to solicit for them, and had hopes (...) that
they might obtain much, the governor and (...), after meeting in council upon
the occasion, (...) the motion, for this consideration, that, if (...) put
themselves under the protection of the (...), they must then be subject to all
such laws (...) should make, or at least such as they might im(...) them, in
which course, though they should (...) their good, yet it might prove very
prejudicial (...) them." Governor Winthrop's History. Gordon's History of the
Am. (...). Vol. I. p. 27, 28.


Upon the restoration, the Episcopalians, Quakers, ^^tonists, etc. preferred
complaints against the colony; and although by the interest of the earl of
Ma^^chester and lord Say, their old friends, and of secre^^ Morris, all
Puritans, king Charles confirmed (...) charter, yet he required a toleration in
religion, (...) an alteration in civil matters, neither of which (...) fully
complied with. The heirs of Ferdinando ^^^^ges and of John Muson also
complained, that, (...) liberal construction, the Massachusetts had exte^^^
their bounds to comprehen, the Provinces of (...) and New Hampshire.
Commissioners were sent (...) in 1665, It appears in an account of the state of
the colony, given (...) royal commissioners in 1665 -- That "the annual charges
of ^^^ment were about 1200 l. For their ecclesiastical constitution, the^ none
imposed by civil authority; all that was enjoined by that attendance on public
wo^ship on Lord's days and other occasional (...) The people, who maintained,
also chose their ministers, whose (...) ^^^trations were known, and they hoped
consonant to the word of (...) and if any deviated, in such case they made use
of a synod a^^ civil authority. The militia consisted of about 4000 foot and
(...) horse. They had a fort at the entrance of Boston harbor, (...) 6 guns;
two batteries in the harbor, and one at Charle^^^ The number of their ships
and vessels as follow: about 80, fr^^ (...) to 40 tons, about 40 from 40 to 100
tons, and about a dozen ship^ (...) love 100 tons." -- Hutchinson's Hist. Vol.
I. p. 244,
to settle the bounds of the colonies, and (...) make inquiry into their state
in general. The (...) chusetts denied their authority, and pronounced (...)
commission a violation of their charter.

Notwithstanding the acts of parliament for reg^^^ing and restraining the
plantation trade, a con^^^ traffic was carried on with foreign countries for
(...) traband and enumerated commodities. This (...) great offense. There was
no custom house. (...) governor was the naval officer, with whom, or (...)
deputy, all vessels entered and cleared. The gover^our, being annually chosen
by the people, was (...) more easily disposed to comply with popular opini^^ It
seems to have been a general opinion that ac^^ parliament had no other force,
than what they de^^^ from acts made by the general court to establish or (...)
(...) them. This could not consist with the charter; (...) necessary it might
appear to the colonists, for (...) security of their liberties. By it they
could (...) no laws repugnant to the laws of England. This clause has been
construed, by some, in another colony, (...) Island) to intend the common law
only, and not statut^^, (...) not such as were made after the date of their
charter. (...), Vol. II. p. 4.

The common law of England, properly defined, consists of those (...) laws to
which the English have been accustomed, from time, (...) there is no memory to
the contrary: and every law deriving (...) from such immemorial custom, must be
carried back as far (...) reign of Richard I. whose death happened on the 6th
of (...) ^199.

(...) suppose all the laws of England, without (...), obligatory (...) every
new colony, at its implantation, is absurd; and would effectually prevent the
subjects from undertaking so hazardous an ad^^^e. To use the words of sir
Dudley Ryder, attorney general, ^^^wards lord chief justice of the king's
bench, "It would be act^^ the part of an unskilful physician, who should
prescribe the same (...) to every patient, without distinguishing the variety
of distempers ^^^ constitutions." These were his words, in an opinion against
the (...) of the statute of frauds and perjuries." -- Smith's History of New
York, p. 241.


Had (...) corporation continued within the realm, as was (...), the company,
and every member, must ^^^^edly have been subject to the law of the land. The
first act of the English parliament that imposed (...) on the colonies alone,
was passed in 1672; by (...) the customs were to be regularly collected by
(...) revenue officers. Four years after, sir Edward ^^dolph came over, and was
unwearied in soliciting (...) the colony.

In 1679, several addresses were made to the (...), king, from the general
court, whilst the agents (...) were in England; and the court made several
(...) to remove some of the exceptions which were (...) in England,
particularly an act to punish high. (...) with death; another, requiring all
persons, (...) 16 years of age, to take the oaths of allegiance, on pain of
fine and imprisonment; "the governor, deputy governor and magistrates having
first (...) the same, without any reservation, in the words (...) to them by
his majesty's orders." The king's (...) were ordered to be carved and put up in
the (...) house. But it was a more difficult thing to (...) to the acts of
trade. They acknowledge, in their ^^^ter to the agent, they had not done it.
They ^^prehend them to be an invasion of the rights, (...) ties, and properties
of the subjects of his majesty in (...) colony, they not being represented in
parliament, (...) according to the sayings of the learned in the law (...) laws
of England were bounded within the (...) and did not reach America; however, as
his (...) had signified his pleasure that those acts should (...) served in the
Massachusetts, they had made provi^^^ by a law of the colony, that they should
be strictly ^^tended from time to time, although it greatly dis^^aged trade,
and was a great damage to his maje^^ plantation."

Randolph renewed his complaints from time (...) time, that the laws were not
complied with; and (...) general court, by repeated addresses and agencies,
(...) deavoured to exculpate themselves, but to no p^rp^^ In 1684, by a
judgment or decree in chancery, (...) charter was declared forfeited, and their
liberties (...) seized into the king's hands. From that time the (...) England
colonies were forced to submit to sup^^ power, and to such form of government
as (...) Charles, and his successor James, thought fit to ^^^ablish. See
Hutchinson's Hist. for the preceding articles, Vol. I. (...). Vol. II. p. 3 and
4.


During the short and arbitrary reign of James II (...) colony suffered
increased hardships. The people however, upon the first news of the landing of
(...) prince of Orange, in England, gave a signal inst^^^ (...) their love of
liberty and abhorrence of despotic ^^^^ment. In April 1689, a gentleman from
Vir^^^^^ brought a printed copy of the declaration of the (...) upon his
landing. Notwithstanding the uncertain^^ what might be the issue of the
invasion, the people of (...) and the neighboring towns, no longer able to
(...) the despotic rule of their governor, sir Edmond (...), seized and
imprisoned him; and soon after (...) him to England. The government, in the
mean (...), was vested in the hands of a committee, for the (...) of the
people; of which, Mr. Bradstreet was (...) president.

On the 26th of May, they were relieved from their (...) and fears, by the
advice of the proclamation of (...) William and queen Mary. This was the most
(...) news they had ever received in New England; (...) next day the
proclamation was published in Boston (...) great ceremony and rejoicing.
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 3.


The colony earnestly solicited a reestablishment of (...) charter, with some
necessary additional powers: (...) the king could not be prevailed to consent
to it.

Two years after they obtained a new charter from king William and queen Mary.
(...).
It was complained of, as being not much more than ^adow of the old; seeing
that the appointment of (...) governor, lieutenant governor, secretary, and
all (...) officers of the admiralty, was vested in the crown; (...) the power
of the militia was wholly in the hands (...) his majesty's governor as captain
general; that all judges, justices, and sheriffs, were to be nominated by the
governor with the advice of the council; that the governor had a negative
upon the choice of counsel^^^; that all laws enacted by the general assembly,
(...) to be sent home for the royal approbation or disallowance; and that no
laws, ordinances, elections, or acts of government whatsoever, were to be of
any validity, without the consent of the governor signified in writing. The
new charter, however, conferred (...) the inhabitants a number of very
important privilege^, and was to be prefered to the old in many respect^^. They
were informed by the best civilians, that their religious liberties were
forever secured; and that they could be touched by no tax or law, but of their
(...) making; which had a good effect in quieting them under the variations to
which they objected.

The new province contained the whole of the (...) colony, without any
deduction or reserve; and to th^^ were added the old colony of New Plymouth,
the Province of Maine, the Province of Nova Scotia, and a^^ the country between
the Province of Maine and No^^ Scotia, as far northward as the river St.
Lawrence, also Elizabeth Islands, and the islands of Nantucket and Martha's
Vineyard. A vast exposed frontier bring^ heavy expenses on a government. In the
course of 60 years, the Province of Massachusetts Bay had been at greater
expense, and lost more of its inhabitants than all the other colonies on the
continent taken together.

The two colonies of Massachusetts Bay, and New Plymouth, were tolerably well
peopled; but the Province of Maine had never been stocked with inha^^tants, and
just before the new incorporation, had been depopulated by the wars with the
French and Indians. The whole Province of Nova Scotia was destitute of British
inhabitants; and although there were several thousand French, who had been
lately conquered, yet they were a burden, and there could be no dependence
placed upon their fidelity. From the time of the conquest of Nova Scotia, the
Massachusetts colony had considered the inhabitants as part of the colony, and
had given commissions and instructions to certain person^ (...) the exercise of
government there. In 1695, "the general court, from a sense of their inability
to (...) it, petitioned the crown, that the province might be freed from any
farther expense in the defense of Port Royal (now called ^^napolis Royal) or
St. John's, and that garrisons might be kept in lo^^ these places at the charge
of the nation. This might perhaps be deemed a refusal to exercise jurisdiction
over that part of the province, and a renunciation of their right; and,
accordingly, after the treaty of Utrecht, when possession was returned to the
crown, it was settled a distinct province." -- Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. II. p.
9^.
All the lands, ^^^ween the Province of Maine and Nova Scotia, were ^^ahabited,
except at and near Pemaquid, where there (...) a few English scattered about
the country; and (...) the principal rivers, the Penobscot, Machias, and
^^^lgewock Indians had their wigwams. See Hutchinson's History of
Massachusetts, Vol. II. p 5 and 6.


The first act of the Massachusetts legislature, after the arrival of the
charter, (...).
was a kind of ^^gna Charta, asserting and setting forth their general ^^leges,
and this clause was among the rest, "No aid, (...), tallage, assessment,
custom, loan, benevolence, or imposi^^ whatsoever, shall be laid, assessed,
imposed, or levied on (...) of his majesty's subjects, or their estates, on any
pretense ^^ever, but by the act and consent of the governor, coun^^^, and
representatives of the people assembled in general (...)." The general court
passed others favorable to ^^^ty, which were perused by the ministers of
Eng^^^ at a distant period; and with the preceding dis^^^ed of by the regency
in 1695. In December the (...) of this dissent were transmitted to the
governor (...) council. The following extract from the letter (...) by the
committee of plantations is subjoined, be^^^se of its being so extraordinary
and decisive: Whereas, by the act for securing the liberty of the ^^^ject, and
preventing illegal imprisonments, the writ a habeas corpus is required to be
granted, in like manner as is appointed by the statute of 31st Charles II.
(...) England, which privilege has not as yet been grant^^ in any of his
majesty's plantations; it was not thought in his majesty's absence, that the
said act should be continued in force, and therefore the same has been
repealed."

The extract makes this a proper place for mentioning, that the ancient
colonists being destitute of personal ^^curity, for want of an habeas corpus
act, were in some provinces grievously oppressed. Edward Randolph, surveyor
general during the reign of William III. represented their condition to the
board of trade, March, 1700; and among other benefici^ial regulations,
recommended "That it being the practice of governors to imprison the subjects
without bail, the hab^^^ corpus act should be extended as fully to the colonies
a^ it is in England." It was accordingly soon after co^ferred on Virginia by
queen Anne.

The extension of the habeas corp^s act to the plan^^tions by queen Anne,
appears to have been only by instructions to the governors, and not by any act
(...) parliament. By what ^^erogative could she ext^^^ that act to the
colonists, were they not before entitled to its benefit (...) if entitled, it
was unjust in any (...) to deny them the advantage of the act; and the roy^^
favor to the Virginians, consisted solely in the queen^^ ^sserting to her
subjects their legal rights and properties, (...) giving suitable directions on
the business.

An act was passed by the parliament, declaring (...) "the laws, bye laws,
usages and customs, which shall be in practice in any of the plantations,
rep^^^nant to any law made, or to be made in the kingdom, relative to the said
plantations, shall be void and of none effect."

There might be no design of the ministry of ta^ing any of the colonies; but
about 1696, a pamphlet was published, 1696.
recommending the laying a parliamentary tax on one of them. It was answered by
two others, much read; which totally denied the power of taxing the colonies,
because they had (...) representation in parliament to give consent. No answer,
public or private, was given to these pam^^^ts; no censure passed upon them;
but men were not startled at the doctrine, as either new, or illegal, (...)
derogatory to the right of parliament." Lord Camden's speech in April, 1766.


Though the parliament might not then claim the right of taxing, they claimed
the right of punishing ^^^bedience to their laws, with the loss of charter
privileges. 1^99.
In she 11th of William III. an act was passed for the trial of pirates in
America, in ^^ich is the following clause "Be it further declared, (...) if any
of the governors, or any person or persons in authority there, shall refuse to
yield obedience to this act, such (...) is hereby declared to be a forfeiture
of all and ^^y the charters granted for the government or propri^^ of such
plantation."

^^verity is stamped upon the very face of the act, in ^^king the disobedience
of a governor, the forfeit^^ of a charter, meant to secure the liberities of
thousness, who might not have any the least power of pre^^ting such
disobedience. The proprieties and (...) colonies were so disinclined to admit
of appeals (...) majesty in council, and were thought so to thirst after
independence, that these and other objections against them were laid before the
parliament, (...).
and a bill thereupon brought into the (...) of lords for reuniting the right
of government in those colonies to the crown: but better councils pre^^^ed, and
matters were left unaltered.

The house of assembly attempted to take from colo^^l Shute those powers in
matters relative to the war, which belonged to him by the constitution, and to
vest them in a committee of the two houses. They by degrees acquired, from the
governor and council, the keys of the treasury; and no moneys could be issued,
not so much as to pay an express, without the vote of the house for that
purpose; whereas, by the charter, all moneys were to be paid out of the
treasury, "by warrant from the governor, with advice and cons^^ of the
council."

The ministry were greatly offended at the governor's being made uneasy; for
colonel Shute (...) known at court, and by the officers of state, under (...)
character of a very worthy gentleman, of a sing^^ good temper, fitted to make
any people under his ^^mand happy. When, therefore, they found the ^^trary in
the Massachusetts, they concluded, that (...) people wished to have no
governor from Great ^^^ain, but wanted to be independent of the crown. The cry
of the city of London ran exceedingly again^ them; and a scheme, that had been
long planned (...) taking away the charter, had nearly been executed; but was
fortunately frustrated by the indefatigable (...) of Mr. Dummer, their then
agent. Their own ^^^cil at home were obliged to a confession of their illeg^
proceedings. An explanatory charter (...) prepared, 1725. Jan. 15.
proposed, and accepted. H^^ (...) not been accepted, the design was to (...)
submitted to the consideration of the Br^^ legislature, "what farther provision
may be neces^^^^ to support and preserve his majesty's authority in the colony,
and prevent similar invasions of his preroga^^^^ for the future." Hutchinson's
History, Vol. II. p. 271, 290, 294, 321, and gov. Burnet's Speech to the
Massachusetts general court in the Massach^setts Records for 1728.


In diverse instances, they showed such a disposition (...) encroach upon the
prerogative, to wrangle with their governors, and to dispute with the crown,
that the ministry, and other persons in public offices, as is natural for those
who look for submissive compliance, ^ere much irritated; and improved to the
utmost, all advantages to excite prejudices against them.

It was suggested, that they were aiming at independence; and jealousies were
raised in the minds of some, that there was danger of the colonies setting up
for themselves. Nevertheless, it was certain that such a ^^eme appeared to the
whole country, wild and extrav^^nt; because of the universal loyalty of the
people, ^^ond what was to be found in any other part of the ^^ish dominions,
together with the infancy of the col^^es, and their being distinct from one
another in (...) of government, religious rites, emulation of (...), and,
consequently, their affections; so that it was (...) supposable, that they
could unite in so dangerous ^enterprise. Massachusetts Records for 1729 and
1731. Hutch^nson's History. Vol. II. p. 355, 36^ -- 363.


However, when the Massachusetts petitioned the ^^se of commons, praying that
they might be heard (...) counsel on the subject of grievances, the house took
(...) opportunity of discovering how jealous it was of the kingdom's supremacy,
and uncontrollable authority (...) the colony: for the commons having
considered the matter, resolved "that the petition was frivolous (...)
groundless, a high insult upon his majesty's government, and tending to shake
off the dependency of the said ^^ony upon this kingdom, to which, in law and
right, (...) ought to be subject."

The sugar colonists combined together, and obtained an act against the trade
carried on from the British northern provinces to the Dutch and French
colonies, for foreign rum, sugar, and molasses. The act passed in 1733, and
laid a duty of nine pence a gallon on run, six pence a gallon on molasses, and
five pounds on every hundred weight of sugar, that came not from the British
West India islands, and were brought into the northern colonies. It was
professedly designed as a prohibition from the foreign islands; but did not
answer. It was found expedient, and for the general benefit, to admit of the
molasses, etc. being mostly run into the colonies, without insisting upon the
duties, or making frequent seizures. The act unhappily produced an i^^gal
spirit of trading; but was continued by subsequent ones down to 1761; when the
duty on the molasses was reduced to three pence, to prevent its being run any
longer. The act did not appropriate the moneys to be raised by the duties, so
that when, in length of time, there was a sum in the hands of the receiver
world remitting, a demur ensued as to the application of (...).

The moneys produced by this and other acts, (...) not considered as real
taxes, either by the colonies (...) the mother country. But some persons wished
to have taxes imposed upon them, which would necessarily produce many good
posts and places in America for co^tiers; and during the war with Spain, which
bro^e out in 1739, a scheme for taxing the British colonies was mentioned to
sir Robert Walpole. 1739.
He smiled, and said, "I will leave that to some of my successors, who have
more courage than I have, and are less friends to commerce than I am. It has
been a maxim with me, during my administration, to encourage the trade of the
American colonies in the utmost latitude; nay, it has been necessary to pass
over some irregularities in their trade with Europe: for, by encouraging them
to an extensive growing foreign commerce, if they gain 500,000 l. I am
convinced, that in two years afterward, full 250,000 l. of their gains will be
in his majesty's exchequer, by the labor and produce of this kingdom, as
immense quantities of every kind of our manufactures go thither; and as they
increase in their foreign American trade, more of our produce will be wanted.
This is taxing (...) more agreeably to their own constitution and (...). See
Gordon's Hist. Vol. I. and Hutchinson's Hist. Vol II. for the preceding
passages.


The foregoing are some of the principal transactions (...) declarations
expressive of the political sentiments of the people. The subsequent disputes
between the ^^^ony and the mother country were not of any con^^erable
consequence; until the fatal strife arose, con^^ning taxation, which will be
described, when we (...) to the history of the revolution.

Massachusetts may be considered as the parent of all (...) other colonies of
New England. There was no ^^ortation of planters from England to any part of
(...) continent, northward of Maryland, except to Massachusetts, for more than
fifty years after the colony (...).

In 1760 the number of inhabitants in this colony ^^^^nted to 268,850. There
were in that year 365 ^^gregations; of which number 306 were Congrega^^lists.
The others were Friends, Baptists, Episco^^lians and Presbyterians. Morse's Am.
Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 378.


The number of vessels entered at the custom house of Boston alone, in 1749,
were 489. In 1773, 517. See American Museum, Vol. IV. p. 283.
^ee New England, for an account of the fisheries, im^^ts and exports, and
other particulars relating to this colony.

The PROVINCE of MAINE, belorging to MASSACHUSETTS.
THE first attempt to settle this country, was made in 1607, but it proved
abortive. It does not appear that any farther attempts were made until between
1620 and 1630.

The Dutch formerly had a settlement, at the place which is now called
Newcastle, under the jurisdiction of the governor of New York: it was then
called Manhadoes; and some parts of its ruins are still to be seen.

Sir Ferdinando Gorges is supposed to be the first who instituted government in
this province. 1635.
He obtained a grant from the council of Plymouth, of the tract of country
between the rivers Piscataqua and Sagadahock, and up Kenebeck so far as to form
a square of 120 miles. In 1639, he obtained of the crown^ charter of the soil
and jurisdiction, containing as ^^ple powers, perhaps, as the king of England
ever granted to any subject.

After the death of Gorges, several change took place. 1647.
The people combined, and agreed to be under civil government, and to elect
their officers annually. Government was administered i^ this form, until 1652,
when the inhabitants submitted to Massachusetts Bay, who by a new construction
of their charter, which was given to Rosewell and others in 1628, claimed the
soil and jurisdiction of the ^^vince of Maine, as far as the midde of Casco^^^
Maine then first took the name of Yorkshire; and county courts were held in the
same manner they were in Massachusetts, and the towns had liberty to send their
deputies to the general court at Boston.

This country, from its first settlement, has been greatly harassed by the
Indians. In 1675, all the settlements were in a manner broken up and destroyed.
From about 1692, until about 1702, was one continued scene of killing, burning
and destroying. The inhabitants suffered much for several years preceding and
following the year 1724. And so late as 1744 and 1748, persons were killed and
captivated by the Indians in many of the towns next the sea. Since this period
the inhabitants there have lived in peace. Morse's Geog. abridged, 3d edition.


After the incorporation of Maine with Massachusetts, it was governed as the
other parts of that colony; and is now denominated the District of Maine.

From the first settlement of Maine until the year 1774 or 1775 the inbabitants
generally followed the lumber trade to the neglect of agriculture; and had
their supplies of corn and grain from Boston and other places. The exports were
chiefly masts, lumber, and dried fish.

In 1750, the inhabitants did not amount to 10,000; (...) did they exceed
13,000 in the year 1763. For a particular account of the district, the reader
is re^er^ed to Judge Sullivan's history, published (...) this by (...).


CONNECTICUT.
THE Dutch had a trading house on Connecticut River as early as 1603, in
consequence of Hudson's discoveries.

In 1630, the Plymouth council made a grant to the (...) of Warwick, of "all
that part of New England which lies west from Narragansett River, 120 miles on
the sea coast; from thence in the latitude and breadth ^^^esaid, to the South
Sea;" which grant was confirmed by the king in council the same year. The year
following, the earl assigned this grant to lords Say and Seal, lord Brook, and
nine others. Smaller grants from these patentees were afterward made to
particular people; in consequence of which, Mr. Fenwick made a settlement at
the mouth of Connecticut River, 1634.
called Saybrook, in honor of the lords Say and Seal, and Brook. Soon after,
Mr. Haynes and Mr. Hooker left Massachusetts Bay, 1636.
and settled Hartford; near which, on the bank of the Connecticut, the remains
of a Dutch settlement are yet to be seen. Two years after, Messrs. Eaton,
Hopkins, and Davenport, of London, men noted for distinguished reputation and
abilities, seated themselves at New Haven. This domini^^, as Connecticut,
formed a government, much like the Massachusetts, by a voluntary agreement,
without any charter or authority from the crown. See the (...) of this (...) in
the forg^ing account of New (...)


Connecticut and New Haven continued two distinct governments for many years.
At length, John Winthrop, esquire who had been chosen governor of Connecticut,
1662.
was employed to solicit a royal charter. In 1662, a charter was obtain^^,
constituting the two colonies for ever one body ^^rporate and politic, by the
name of "the governor and company of Connecticut." New Have^^ took the affair
ill; 1665.
but, at length, difficulti^^ were amicably adjusted.

Every power, legislative, judicial and executive, was vested in the freemen of
the corporation, or their delegates. This charter established a pure democracy;
and still continues to be the basis of their government. In 1684, they saved
their charter, by an artful expedient, when the charters of Massachusetts and
Plymouth we^^ vacated by a quo warranto.

The colony was laid out in small farms, from 50 (...) 300 or 400 acres, which
were held by the farmers it see simple.

It is said, "actual calculation has evinced, that any given quantity of the
best mowing land in Connecticut, produces about twice as much clear profit, as
the same quantity of the best wheat land in the state of New York. (...) of the
(...) in the (...) account of (...).


The inhabitants, who are mostly of English descent, ^^ounted in 1756, to
130,611; and in 1774 to 197,856. Their exports, in the latter year, amounted
(...) the value of 200,000 l. lawful money. The bulk of the people were
industrious and sagacious husbandmen, who, like the other New England
proprietors, before the late war, had most of the conveniences, and but (...)
of the luxuries of life. Morse's Geog. and Smith Hist. of New York.


RHODE ISLAND and PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS.
THIS colony owed its rise to persecution. Mr. Roger Williams, pastor of the
church at Salem, being banished from Massachusetts for his religious opinions,
1635.
repaired with twelve compan^^^ ^o the Narragansett country. He was kindly
re^^^ed by the Indian sachem Canonicus; and, soon after, purchased of him the
tract of land lying between ^awtucket and Pawtuxet rivers; which he named
Pro^idence, "from a sense of God's merciful providence (...) him in his
distress." The authority and power of ^^ntonomy, another sachem, and his uncle
Canoni^^, awed all the Indians in the vicinity, to assist him and his few
associates.

When the determinations of the Massachusetts general court banished many
people, on account of what they called Antinomian opinions, 1636.
and induced others to leave the colony, the heads of the party were
entertained in a friendly manner by Mr. Williams, who by the assistance of sir
Henry Vane, jun. procured for them, from the Indians, Aquidneck, now Rhode
Island. Here, in 1638, the people, eighteen in number, formed themselves into
body politic, and chose Mr. Coddington their leader, to be their judge or chief
magistrate.

The plantations there and at Providence increased apace, owing to the liberal
sentiments of the first settlers: Mo^^^ Geography.
and, in 1643, Mr. Williams went to England as agent, and obtained from the
earl of Warwick (th^^ governor and admiral of all the plantations) and his
council, a free and absolute charter of incorporation "of Providence
Plantations in the Narragansett Bay, i^ New England." They were authorized to
choose "such a form of civil government, as by voluntary consent of all, or the
greater part of them, they (...) find most suitable to their estate and
condition." Hazard's Hist. Coll. Vol. I. p. 540.
They agreed upon a democratic form, which still contin^^^ to be the basis of
their government.

Mr. Williams justly claims the honor of having been the first legislator in
the world, in its latter ages, who effectually provided for, and established a
(...), full, and absolute liberty of conscience. The principle upon which this
colony was first settled, was, that "every man who submits to the civil
authority, may peaceably worship God, according to the dictates of his own
conscience, without molestation."

When the colony was applied to, in 1656, by the four United Colonies, "to join
them in taking effectual methods to suppress the Quakers, and prevent their
pernicious doctrines being propagated in the country;" the assembly returned
(...) answer, "we shall strictly adhere to the foundation principle on which
this colony was first settled."

In 1663, an ample charter was granted to the colony by Charles II. by the name
of the "governor and company of the English colony of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations in New England, in America." The charter reserved only
allegiance to the king, without the smallest share of the legislative or
executive powers.

A writ of quo warranto was issued out against the colony, which was brought
June 26, 1686. The assembly determined not to stand suit. 1686.
After the revolution, they were allowed by government to resume their charter,
no judgment having been ^^en against it. See Gordon's Hist of the American
Revolution, Letter I.


So little has the civil authority to do with religion ^^ere, that no contract
between a minister and a socie^^, is of any force, unless incorporated for that
purpose. Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 391.


In 1738, there were above 100 sail of vessels belonging to Newport. And long
before that time the pop^^^ of the colony amounted to 17,935 souls; including
985 Indians and 1648 Negroes. Morse's Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. p. 392.
In 1774, there were 59,678 souls; including 1482 Indians, and ^^61 Negroes.
American Mus^um; Vol. VI p. 305.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.
Soon after the settlement of Plymouth, in Massachusetts, 1621.
captain John Mason, obtained from the council, a grant of land, from the river
Naumkeag, now Salem, round Cape Ann, to Mer^^ack River, and from the sea to the
heads of those ^^vers; with the islands lying within three miles of the coast.
This district was called Marianna. The next (...), another grant was made to
Mason and sir Ferdi^^^do Gorges, jointly, of the whole territory, from Menimack
to Sagadahock River, and from the ocean, to the lakes and river of Canada. This
district, which includes the other, was called Laconia.

Under the authority of this grant, a settlement was made near the mouth of
Piscataqua River, 1623.
at a place called Little Harbor, about a mile from Portsmouth, the present
capital of New Hampshire. Six years afterward, a purchase was made of the
natives, 1629.
who gave a deed of the tract of land, lying between the Merrimack and
Piscataqua Rivers.

The same year, Mason procured a new patent, under the common seal of the
council of Plymouth, of the lands between the same rivers; which patent covered
the whole Indian purchase. This district is called New Hampshire.

Some years after the settlements on Piscataqua, 1641.
New Hampshire was, by agreement, united to the government of Massachusetts. It
continued under this jurisdiction, till the heir of John Mason set up his claim
to it, and procured a confirmation of his title. It was then separated from
Massachusetts and erected into a distinct government. The heirs of Mason sold
their title to the lands in New Hampshire, 1679.
to Samuel Allen of London, for two thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds.
This produced new controversies, concerning the property of the lands, 1691.
which embroiled the province for many years.

"It was finally determined that New Hampshire should be under the same
governor with the Massachusetts, but not with the same privileges."
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts, Vol. II. p. 6.


The inhabitants, about this time, suffered extremely by the cruelty of the
savages. The towns of Exeter and Dover, were frequently surprised in the night
-- the houses plundered and burnt -- the men killed and scalped -- and the
women and children, either killed o^ led captives into the wilderness. The
first settlers i^ other parts of New England, were also harassed by the
Indians, at different times; and it would requi^e volumes to enumerate their
particular sufferings.

The advantages of early education were not so generally enjoyed here, before
the revolution of America, as in the neighboring parts. The colony in most
other respects comes under the general description given of New England.

In 1767, the colony contained 52,000 people; and ^ 1775, 82,200. See
Hutchinson's History of Massachusetts. Dr. Belknap's Hist. of New Hampshire,
and Morse's Geography.


NEW JERSEY.
THE tract of land which now includes New York, New Jersey and part of
Pennsylvania, was called New Netherlands when in the hands of the Dutch; and
the ^^ale, as has been already mentioned, passed first by request, and
afterward by treaty into the hands of the English.

That part which lies between the Hudson and the Delaware, was granted to lord
Berkely and sir George ^^^teret, and called New Jersey, or Nova Caesarea. The
first grant, however, was merely a lease for one year. 1664.
The proprietors appointed Philip Carteret the first governor, 1672.
and directed the land to be purchased of the Indians.

After the New Netherlands had been conquered by the Dutch, and again restored
to the English by treaty, the grants both of king Charles to his brother, the
duke of York, 1673.
and of the duke to the proprietors, were renewed. Lord Berkely had sold his
share of the territory, to John Fenwick, esquire who soon after conveyed it to
William Penn, 1674.
Gawen Lawry, and Nicholas Lucas.

Two years after, the proprietors divided their property, 1676.
which they had before held, as joint tenants. Sir George Carteret had the east
division, called East New Jersey: Penn, Lawry, and Lucas, took the west
division, called West New Jersey. The line of division was drawn from Little
Egg Harbor, to Hudson's River, at the forty first degree of latitude. Each
party gave to the other quit claim deeds of its own division.

Two years after this partition, Carteret, by his last will, 1678.
vested all his property in East Jersey, in certain trustees, to be sold for
the payment of his debts. The trustees conveyed it to twelve proprietors, who
disposed of their rights at pleasure. 1682.
The government continued in the proprietors, till the reign of queen Ann,
wh^^^ it was resigned to the crown. 1702.
The government was then annexed to New York; the pe^^^^ chose their
assemblies; but the governor of New York, used to attend them. The government
(...) however, detached from that of New York, before (...) late revolution,
when the two Jerseys became an ^^^^pendent state.

A considerable part of the state, still remains in (...) heirs or assigns of
the proprietors. New Jersey tak^ its name from the island of that name in the
English channel, where sir George Carteret had considerable possessions.

In 1664, lord Berkely and sir George Carteret, (...) upon such constitutions
of government as were (...) well relished, that the eastern parts were soon
considerably peopled. Full liberty of conscience was established, to all who do
not actually disturb the civil (...) of the province. The lords proprietors
farther agree^ "for the better security of the inhabitants in the province --
that they are not to impose, nor suffer to be in^^^ed, any custom, tax,
subsidy, tallage, assessment, or any other duty whatsoever, upon any color or
pretense upon the said province and inhabitants thereof, oth^^ than what shall
be imposed by the authority and (...) sent of the general assembly." Smith's
History of New Jersey, p. 577.
In West Jersey, (...) 1676, it was agreed upon that elections should be
determined by "putting balls into balloting boxes, (...) the prevention of all
partiality, and whereby every man may freely choose according to his own
judgment and honest intention." Smith's History of New Jersey, p. 536.


Soon after the year 1676, many Quakers resorted to (...) Jersey from England,
and the country filled apace. (...) the people early experienced the dreadful
effects (...) arbitrary power. Major Andros, the governor of New York, imposed
10 per cent. on all goods important the Hoar kill, and demanded 5 per cent. of
the (...) at arrival or afterward, though neither West (...), nor the Hoar
kill, was legally under his jurisdiction. They complained of the hardship from
the first, but bore it patiently, till about 1680, when application was made to
the duke of York, ^^^0.
who referred the matter to the council, where it (...) for a considerable
time, and then was reported their favor, and the duty ordered to be
discontinu^^^^. Among the arguments used by Messrs. William (...), George
Hutchinson and others, chiefly if not all ^akers, in the paper presented to the
duke's commissioners, were these: "Powers of government are expressly granted,
in the conveyance lord Berkely made (...) for that only could have induced us
to buy it; and the reason is plain, because to all prudent men, the government
of any place is more inviting than the soil; (...) what is good land without
good laws; the better, (...) worse. And if we could not assure people of an
(...) and free, and safe government, both with respect (...) their spiritual
and worldly property, that is, an unin^^rrupted liberty of conscience, and an
inviolable possession of their civil rights and freedoms, by a just and (...)
government, a mere wilderness would be no encouragement; for it were a madness
to leave a free, (...), and improved country, to plant in a wilderness; and
there adventure many thousands of pounds, to give an absolute title to another
person to tax us at will and pleasure. Natural right and human prudence oppose
such doctrine all the world over, as says "that people, free by law under their
prince at home, are at his mercy in the plantations abroad." The king's grant
(...) the duke of York, is plainly restrictive to the laws and government of
England. Now, we humbly conceive^ it is made a fundamental in our constitution
and government, that the king of England cannot justly (...) his subjects'
goods, without their consent: this (...) no more to be proved than a principle:
it is jus indig^^^, (...) home born right, declared to be law by diverse ^^^utes;
as in the great charter, chapter 29, and 34. Ed. (...) chapter 24 again 25 Ed. chapter 7.
The manuscript copy contains a number of authorities from B^acton, Fortesque,
the Petition of Right, etc. See Smith, p. 180, the note.
To give up the (...) of making laws is to change the government, to fell (...)
rather resign ourselves to the will of another; and (...) for nothing: for we
buy nothing of the duke, if (...) the right of an undisturbed co^^^ining, with
no diminution, but expectation of some increase of (...) freedoms and
privileges enjoyed in our own count^^. We humbly say, that we have not lost any
part (...) our liberty, by leaving our country; but we transplant to a place,
with express limitation to erect no polish contrary to the established
government of England but as near as may be to it; and this variation (...)
allowed, but for the sake of emergencies; and the latitude bounded with these
words, for the good of (...) adventurer and planter. This tax is not to be
found (...) the duke's conveyances, but is an after business. (...) the
planters foreseen it, they would sooner have taken up in any other plantation
in America -- [a plain ^^^mation that no such tax was imposed in any other
American plantation.] Beside, there is no end of (...) power; for since we are
by this precedent assessed with out any law, and thereby excluded our English
right (...) common assent to taxes; what security have we of any thing we
possess? We can call nothing our own, but (...) tenants at will, not only for
the soil, but for all our (...) estates; we endure penury, and the sweat of
(...) brows, to improve them at our own hazard only. ^^is is to transplant from
good to bad. This sort of (...) has destroyed government, but never raised one
to (...) true greatness." Smith, p. 117 -- 123.


The paper presented to the duke's commissioners, ^^^ently proves, that it was
the opinion of these gentle^^^, who were Quakers, that no tax could be justly
(...) used upon the inhabitants, without their own con^^^^ first had, and by
the authority of their own general assembly. The report of the council in
favor of (...) aggrieved, and the relief that followed, were virtual
concessions to the same purport.

Before 1688, this large country contained only (...) inhabitants. The faults
of government, under (...) preceding arbitrary reigns, stopped the progress and
occasioned the indigence of this small colony. Even before the American
revolution, it did not contain (...) 50,000 white men, united in villages, or
dispers^^ among the plantations, and 20,000 blacks. Raynal, Chap XVII.
Its ^^^ductions were usually sold at Philadelphia and New York. It had,
however, as far back as 1751, fitted (...) 38 vessels bound to Europe or to the
southern isles (...) America. The cargoes consisted of 168,000 quin^^ls of
biscuit, 6420 barrels of flour, 17,941 bushels of corn, 314 barrels of salt
beef and pork, 1400 quin^^^^ of hemp; together with a pretty large quantity of
(...), butter, beer, flax seed, bar iron and wood for (...). Ibid.
It is imagined that this direct trade may (...) increased one third before the
commencement of the way.

PENNSYLVANIA.
THE first grant of Pennsylvania was designed by Charles II. for the famous
admiral Penn, 1680.
as a reward for his services. His son William Penn, presented a petition to
the king, in June 1680, stating (...) only his relationship to the late
admiral, but that he (...) deprived of a debt due from the crown, when the
exchequer was shut. He prayed for a grant of lands, lying (...) the northward
of Maryland, and westward of the Delaware; and added, that, by his interest, he
should be able to settle a province, which might, in time, (...) his claims.
Having a prospect of success, he (...) from the charter of Maryland the sketch
of a pate^^ which, in November, was laid before the attorney general for his
opinion.

Mr. Penn had the same object in view as lord (...) more had, viz. the guarding
against the exertions (...) prerogative, which experience had taught both,
(...) very inconvenient. The attorney general declared (...) exception from
taxation illegal; and chief justice (...) being of the same opinion, and
observing its (...) added the saving of the authority of the English (...)
ament, so that it was stipulated by the king, for (...) self and his
successors, "that no custom or other contribution shall be laid on the
inhabitants, or (...) estates, unless by the consent of the proprietary, (...)
governor and assembly, or by act of parliament (...) England."

The next year the patent was granted, (...) consideration of "the merits of
the father, 1681.
(...) the good purposes of the son, in order to intend the English empire, and
to promote useful commodities." It was provided by fit clauses, that the
^^^ereignty of the king should be preserved; and that acts of parliament,
concerning trade and navigation and the customs, be duly observed. Penn was
empowered to assemble the freemen, or their delegates, in such (...) as he
should think proper, for raising money for (...) of the colony, and for making
useful laws, not (...) to those of England, or to the rights of the ^ingdom. A
duplicate of the acts of the assembly (...) to be transmitted within five years
to the king in (...); and the acts might be declared void with^^^ (...) months,
if not approved.

The Pennsylvanians, it may be noted, were not declared by the patent to be
English subjects. There was (...) express stipulation, as had been inserted in
all other ^^^tial patents, "that the Pennsylvanians and their ^^^^endents
should be considered as subjects born with^^^ the realm;" for the lawyers who
revised it, considered such declarations as nugatory, since they were in^^^^d
by law. Chalmer's Political Annals, under the head of Pennsylvania.
If the right of the English parliament to tax the colonies could also have
been inferred (...), why was not the express reservation of that (...)
considered likewise as nugatory?

The grant to Mr. Penn included a tract of land ex^^^ing from twelve miles
north of New Castle along (...) Delaware, to the beginning of the 43d degree of
(...), and from the Delaware, westward, five degrees (...) ^^gitude.

William Penn who was distinguished as a good as (...) as a great man, took
care to acquire the best of (...) to his lands, by legal purchases from the
natives, (...) sole proprietors of the soil. He introduced into (...)
settlement a most liberal plan of civil and religious (...). He tolerated all
religious sects, and thus in^^ed not only his own sect, the Friends, to remove
(...) England, but also vast numbers of all denominations from Ireland and
Germany.

Before the war, Pennsylvania fabricated a great quantity of ordinary linen,
from flax and hemp of her own growth, and of cotton imported from the West
Indies. The wool she imported from Europe was manufactured into coarse cloths.
Whatever articles her own industry was not able to furnish she purchased wi^e
the produce of her territory.

Her produce and exports were much of the same nature as those of New England;
but her fisheries were inconsiderable; the annual exports of all kinds of fish,
did not exceed 6,000 barrels. See American Museum, Vol. IV. p. 280.


In 1723, the value of goods sent from England was only 10,937 l. 10 s. Raynal.
In the following years, the value of her exports to England, alone, and her
imports from thence, were as under: Exports. Imports. 1763 L.38,288 L.284,152
1766 26,851 327,314 1768 59,406 432,107 1771 31,615 728,774 1773 36,652 426,448
American Museum, Vol. VI. p. 402.


At the beginning of the year 1766 the population of the colony, amounted to
150,000 white people, and 30,000 blacks. Abbe Raynal observes that the
subjection of the negroes had not corrupted the morals of their masters; their
manners were still pure and austere.

The trade of Pennsylvania, before the late war, seem to have been in its
greatest height from 1771 to 1773; even in the former year, to instance a few
articles, there were exported from Philadelphia, 51,699 bushe^s of flour,
252,744 barrels of flour, 38,320 barrels of bread, 259,441 bushels of Indian
corn, 2,358 tons of iron, 110,412 bushels of flax seed, 5,059 barrels of beef
and pork, 52,611 gallons of molasses, 204,456 gallons of rum, 64,468 bushels of
salt, 258,376 lbs. of rice, 161 tons of pot^^sh, 136 tons of pearl ash, and
^,^78 barrels of fish. American Museum, Vol. IV. p. 279.


Semi^aries of learning were established here upon the most enlarged and
liberal principles. The college in Philadelphia was first founded in 1749. And
the elegant public library in that city was founded by the celebrated Dr.
Franklin seven years before.

The government continued in the descendants of William Penn, till the late
revolution, when the people assembled, formed a republican constitution of
government, and gave the proprietors 130,000 l. sterling, in lien of all quit
rents: and they still possess valuable estates in Pennsylvania. See Morse's Am.
Un. Geog. for an account of the religion and manners of the Friends, Moravians,
Dumplers, etc.


DELAWARE.
THE Swedes and Dutch had planted themselves on the banks of the Delaware, many
years before William Penn obtained his grant, and their descendants remain
there to this day. Their settlements were comprehended in the grant to the duke
of York; and when William Penn came to take possession of his lands in America,
he purchased the three counties, now state of Delaware, of the duke, and united
them to his government. They were afterward separated, in some measure, from
Pennsylvania. They had their own assemblies, but the governor of Pennsylvania
used to attend, as he did in his own proper government. At the late revolution,
the three counties were erected into a sovereign state. Other particulars
respecting Delaware are included in the foregoing account of Pennsylvania.

MARYLAND.
DURING the reign of Charles I. lord (...) more applied for a patent of lands
in Virgini^ and obtained a grant of a tract upon Chesa^^^ Bay, 1632.
containing nearly one hundred and forty (...) square. This tract was named
Maryland, in (...) of queen Henrietta Maria.

Lord Baltimore was a Roman Catholic, and with (...) number of that
denomination, began a settlement (...) Maryland. The rigor of the laws in
England, against this religion, drove many of the best families from (...)
country, and greatly promoted the settlement of M^^^land.

The charter of Maryland is the most explicit against foreign taxation of any
in the colonies. It decl^^^ "that the inhabitants shall not be subject to any
^^^^sition or taxes, but such as their house of burgesses (...) consent to."
Continuation of Hume's History of England, Vol. VI. p. (...) Edinburgh, 1791.


Lord Baltimore procured an act of assembly, given free liberty for all
denominations of christians to (...) their religious opinions. But, upon the
revo^^^^ England, the penal laws against the ^atholics, (...) extended to the
settlements in Maryland^ and (...) Episcopal church was established, both here
and (...) Virginia. This establishment continued till the (...) revolution.

Maryland was a proprietary government, and at (...) commencement of the late
wa^, was in the hand^^ lord Harford, a natural s^^ of the late lord Balti^^^
But upon the revelation in America, the people (...) ^sembled and formed a
constitution of civil government similar to those of the other states.

Lord Harford was an absentee during the war, and his property was confiscated.
Since the war, he (...) ^^ed to the legislature for his estate, but could not
(...) even a compensation, or the quit rents which (...) due before the
commencement of the war.

^heat and tobacco are the staple commodities. The (...) exports of the latter
were about 30,000 hogs^^s. The other articles were flour, pig iron, lumber,
(...), beans, pork, and flax seed.

The population, sometime before the war, amounted (...) ^^,000 white men and
60,000 blacks. Ra^nal.


(...) 1773, Maryland exported 84,500 barrels of flour, ^^33 barrels of bread,
4,500 bushels of rye, 266,000 (...) of wheat, and 233,000 bushels of Indian
corn. Mc Henry's observations relative to a commercial treaty with Great
Britain.


The CAROLINAS.
CAROLINA was discovered by Sebastian Cabot, in the (...) of Henry VII. but the
settling of it being neg^^ed by the English, a colony of French Protestants, by
the encouragement of admiral Coligni, (...).
were transported thither about the year 1564; and nam^^ (...) settlement
Carolina, in honor of their prince, ^^les IX. In a short time, that colony was
destroy^^ by the Spaniards, and no farther attempts were (...) by the French to
effect a settlement; nor were (...) made by the English, until sir Walter
Raleigh pro^^ed an establishment, which, it is said, was attempt^^ within the
present limits of of North Carolina.

In the reign of Charles II. the earl of Clarendon, (...) ^^^3.
the duke of Albemarle, and others, obtained a grant of the lands between the
thirty first and thirty sixth degrees of latitude; they were ^^^^tituted lords
proprietors, and invested with powers to settle and govern the country.

They began a settlement between Ashley and Cooper ^^ers, and called it
Charleston. The model of a constitution, and the body of laws, which they
intro^^^ were framed by the celebrated Mr. Lock.

This constitution was aristocratical; establishing ^^ders of nobility. The
landgraves, or first rank, had forty eight thousand acres of land -- the
cassiques, (...) second order, had twenty four thousand acres -- the ^^^ons, or
lower rank, had twelve thousand acres. The lower house was to be composed of
representati^es, chosen by the towns or counties, and the whole legi^^ture was
denominated, a parliament. The lord proprietors stood in the place of king.

They gave unlimited toleration of religion, but (...) Episcopalians, who were
the most numerous, attempte^ to exclude the Dissenters from a place in the
legis^ture. This produced tumults and disorder among the settlers, and finally
between the people and the lords proprietors. These dissensions checked the
progress of the settlement, and induced the parliament of England to take the
province under her immediate care. The proprietors accepted about twenty four
thousand pou^^ sterling for their property and jurisdiction; except (...) earl
Granville, who kept his eighth of the property.

The constitution was new m^deled, 1728.
and the district divided into North and South Caroli^^ These remained separate
royal governments, till they became independent by the late revolution. Before
which, the Presbyterians, Baptists, and Methodists became the majority.

In 1723, according to Abbe Raynal, the whole colony consisted only of 4000
white people and 32,000 blacks. Its exports to other parts of America and to
Europe, did not exceed 216,562 l. 10 s.

The staple productions are rice, and indigo. The other chief articles are
tobacco, deer skins, pitch, (...) turpentine, lumber, cor^, butter, pork and
beef; pink, snake and ginseng root, sassafras, sarsaparilla, green and (...)
hides, leather and wax. The exports to England (...), and imports from thence,
for the following (...) as submitted to the British parliament, were val^^, in
sterling money, as follows.

(...) Exports. Imports. 1^63 L.382,366 L.250,132 1664 341,727 305,808 1665
385,918 334,709 1666 291,519 296,732 1667 395,027 244,093 1668 508,108 289,868
1669 387,114 306,606 1770 278,907 146,273 1771 420,311 409,169 1772 425,923
449,610 1773 456,513 344,159 American Museum, Vol. VI. p. 402.


GEORGIA.
(...) whole territory between the rivers Savannah and Altamaha was vested by
the parliament of Great Britain, 1732. June 9.
in trustees, who were to promote a settlement of the country, for the
accommodation of poor people in Great Britain and Ireland, and for the farther
security of Carolina. The generosity of individuals, and public spirit,
promoted the benevolent design. The settlement was named Georgia, in honor of
king George II. who encouraged the plan.

By the beginning of November, about 116 colonists presented themselves, most
of them laboring people, and were furnished with working tools of all kinds,
stores and small arms.

Mr. Oglethorpe, one of the trustees, generously attended the first set of
emigrants to Carolina, where they arrived in good health in January 1733. The
Carolinians made them a present of one hundred breeding cattle, besides hogs,
and twenty barrels of rice; and furnished them with a party of horse, and with
scout boats, by the help of which they reach^^ the Savannah, where Mr.
Oglethorpe, ten miles (...) the river, pitched upon a spot for a town, which
(...) called Savannah, and in February the building of (...) first house
commenced. Before the end of the (...) the number of colonists was increased to
618, (...) whom 127 had emigrated from Britain at their (...) expense.

Mr. Oglethorpe was waited upon by a numer^^ deputation from the lower Creek
nation, with (...) he concluded a treaty, and carried some of their (...) with
him to England.

The settlement was increased in 1735, by the an^^al of some Scotch
highlanders, who were induced (...) accept an establishment offered them upon
the bord^^ of the Altamaha, to defend the colony, if necess^^ against the
attacks of the neighboring Spani^^ Here they built the towns of Darien and
Frederi^^ and several of their countrymen came over to se^^ among them.

In the same year a number of Protestants, driven (...) of Saltsburg by a
fanatic priest, arrived and built Eb^^ezer, at the mouth of the Savannah. Some
Swit^^ followed the example of the former, although not ^^^secuted, and settled
at a place called Purysburg, fr^^ the name of Pury their leader.

From these colonies some few men separated fr^^ the rest, to carry on the
peltry trade with the sava, (...) and founded Augusta, 236 miles distant from
the oce^^. In 1739, six hundred people were employed in the commerce.

The generous views of the trustees were acknowledged, but the original plan of
the settlement was extremely injudicious, and proved pernicious to the co^^ny.
The grant to the trustees was therefore revoke^, and the province was erected
into a royal government. 1752.


The colonists, at first, were not allowed to have ne^^ slaves; but as the
unhappy system had obtained in (...) neighboring colonies, it was in a manner
neces^^^ that Georgia should have slaves likewise. Several the colonists
remonstrated against the importation of ^^^es; The Saltzburghers, who settled
at Ebenezer, with their two ^^isters, John Martin Bolzius and Israel Christian
Grona^^, and (...) the inhabitants of Frederica, pathetically remonstrated
against (...) introduction of slaves into their settlements, or near their
^eigh^^^hood. In answer to the assertion, that it is impossible and dan^^^us,
for white people to cultivate and manufacture rice, "as being (...) ^ork only
for negroes, not for European people," they said that (...) having experience
to the contrary, we laugh at such talking, seeing that several of us have had a
greater crop of ^ice last year than we wanted for our own consumption."

The Highlanders from Scotland, who had settled at New Inverness, ^^ressed
general Oglethorpe as follows: "We are informed that our neighbors of Savannah
have petitioned for the liberty of having ^aves. We hope and earnestly entreat
that before such proposals are ^^arkened to, your excellency will consider our
situation, and of wh^^^ ^anger and bad consequences such liberty would be to
us." The^, after reciting some of these, they proceed: "It is shocking to hum^^
nature, that any race of mankind, and their posterity, should be sentenced to
perpetual slavery; nor in justice can we think otherwise of i^ than that they
are thrown among us to be our scourge, one day or other, for our sins: and as
freedom must be as dear to them as unto (...), what a scene of horror must it
bring about! and the longer it is unexecuted, the bloody scene must be the
greater. We therefore, for our own sakes, our wives and children, and our
posterity, beg your consideration, and entreat, that instead of introducing
slaves, you would put us in the way to get some of our own countrymen, who,
with their labor in time of peace, and our vigilance if we are invaded (with
the help of these) will render it a difficult thing to hurt us, or that part of
the province we possess." January 3, 1788-9. Signed by 18 freeholders. --
Inquiry into the State and Utility of the colony of Georgia, printed in London,
in 17^1.


but they were soon after introduced at the ^^ire of the majority.

From the time Georgia became a royal government, (...) 1752, till the peace of
Paris in 1763, she struggled ^^th many difficulties, arising from want of
credit from friends, and the frequent molestations of enemies. From this time
it began to flourish.

The staple commodities are rice, indigo and tobaceo. She likewise exported
lumber of various kinds, nav^^ stores, leather, deer skins, snake root, myrtle
and bee^ wax, corn and live stock. The culture of silk, and the manufacture of
sago employed a few hands.

"The tea plant was introduced into Georgia, by Mr. Samuel Bowen, about the
year 1770, from Indi^^ The seed was disseminated, and the plant now grows in
most of the fenced lots in Savannah."

A judgment may be formed of the growth of (...) colony, from the following
table of its shipping, and the value of exports for ten years.

Sq. rig. vess. Sloops. Tons. Exp. sterling. M^^. 1763 34 58 4,761 L.47,551 1764
36 79 5,586 55,025 1765 54 94 7,685 73,426 1766 68 86 9,974 81,228 1767 62 92
8,465 67,008 1768 77 109 10,406 92,284 1769 87 94 9,276 86,485 1770 73 113
10,514 99,383 1771 64 121 9,553 106,337 1772 84 133 11,246 121,677 See Morse's
Am. Un. Geog. Vol. I. for many of the preceding articles; likewise Raynal's
Hist. of the E. and W. Indies, and Hewett's Hist. of S. Carolina, and Georgia.


HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
CHAP. XIV.
A Summary View of the State and Character of the British Colonies, within the
present limit, of the United States.

ABOUT eighty years after the first permanent settlement in Virginia, the
territory granted in the (...) original patents to the London and Plymouth
com^^^ies, was divided into twelve distinct and separate ^^lonies; and, in
about fifty years afterward, Georgia (...) added to the southern extremity of
these provinc^^ being the only colony which was settled at the ex^^se of the
crown. The greatest part of the first ad^^turers bought of the natives the
lands on which ^ey settled. Some of them, without doubt, made his agreement
from the purest motives -- from a con^^^usnefs that the Indians were the true
proprietors of the soil; to which no charter from their own sovreign could, of
itself, confer a just title. Other setters entered into this convention with
the Indians ^erely from motives of personal security, whatever might have been
their opinion concerning the validity of the charters from the crown; this
inference may justly be drawn, from their subsequent quarrels with the natives,
and encroachment upon their grounds.

The aboriginal inhabitants were divided into numerous tribes, who were
frequently at war with one another. In these quarrels, the Europeans generally
took part with the weaker side, in such a manner as to waste the strength of
both parties: the short sighted natives preferring the present pleasure of
revenge upon their mortal enemies, to the future happiness of themselves and
their posterity. An eminent instance of this occurs in the history of the
Pequod and Narraganse^^ Indians in New England. There was a fixed enmity
between the two tribes. The Pequods were the most warlike among all the
neighboring nations, and p^^ceiving themselves unable, alone, to combat the
English were willing to bury their animosity, and offered to ^^ter into a
treaty with the Narragansetts against (...) common enemy. They urged that the
English (...) come to dispossess them of their country; and, altho^^ they had
never heard the story of Polepheme and U^ses, told the Narragansetts, that all
they could (...) from the friendship of the English was, the favor (...) being
last devoured. The Narragansetts were dea^ (...) their remonstrances; and the
prophesy of the Peq^^ was at length fulfilled. Hutchinson's History of
Massachusetts, Vol. I. p. 59.


Indian fidelity is proverbial in America, as the (...) says was in Italy. The
Narragansetts are said to (...) kept the treaty they made with the English,
until (...) Pequods were destroyed, and then they grew insol^^ and treacherous.
Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. p. 60, 300, 307. Vol. II. 478.


Notwithstanding the frequent ruptures of the I^^ans with the colonies, very
few, comparatively, (...) perished by war. Famine, and its companion the
p^^tilence, frequently destroy whole tribes. Their (...) dominant passion for
spirituous liquors, in which (...) have been initiated by the whites, proves
likewise (...) pugnant to population. They waste, they mo^^ away, and, as
Charlevoix says of the Indians of C^^da, they disappear.

Each of the colonies, after many changes, attai^ a form of government
essentially resembling that (...) the mother country; wherein ample provision
(...) made for the liberties of the citizens. The royal p^rogative and
dependence on the British government ^^d no great impression on that of the
colonies. Even (...) those provinces where the governors were most de^^dent on
the crown, they had no higher prerogatives love their fellow subjects, or power
over the provin^^^ legislative assemblies, than the king was constitu^^^ally
vested with, over the people and legislature in England.

The colonization of North America began at a pe^^d when the dread of arbitrary
government was the ^edominant passion of the English nation. Excepting (...)
modern colony of Georgia, which received its ^^rter in 1732, all the English
colonies obtained their charters, and their greatest number of European
set^^ers, in the period between the year 1603 and 1688, when the great struggle
commenced between privilege ^^d prerogative, which, in its progress, brought
king Charles I. to the block, and ended in the expulsion of (...) family from
the throne.

The founders of the colonies, in general, adopted the wisest policy in
settling the vacant lands; by granting them to those only who personally
cultivated their purchases. In New England, especially, this equal di^ision of
lands was more steadily adhered to, than in ^^y of the other provinces. Instead
of dispersing the inhabitants over an extensive country, they successively
formed settlements in townships of about six miles square: And arrangements for
religious instruction and the education of youth, kept equal pace with the
en^argement of the colony. A spirit of liberty and independence gave vigor to
industry, and a free constitution guarded their civil and religious rights. Few
individuals were either very ri^^ or very poor. They enjoyed that happy state
of mediocrity, which is equally favorable to strength of body and vigor (...)
mind.

The New England, or northern, colonies, particularly, were settled by a
people, who, during the reign of the Stuarts, had been galled by the yoke of
despotism; and were, for the most part, adverse to the prerogative of kings,
but friendly to republicanism. It would have been very astonishing if such
colonists, after having tasted the sweets of liberty in a new hand, had not
^^stilled into the minds of their children a love of freedom and an abhorrence
of arbitrary government: accordingly, their descendants cherished that jealousy
(...) their rights, which is the true characteristic of freemen.

When the British constitution was renovated by the revolution, in the year
1688, the colonists participat^^ in the blessings of that happy era. It was
then that the distinct boundary was fixed between the privilege^ of the subject
and the prerogatives of the sovereig^. It was then recognized, to be essential
to the constit^tion of Great Britain, that the people could not be co^^pelled
either to pay taxes or be bound by any laws but (...) as had been granted or
enacted, with the consent of themselves or their representatives; and that they
could not (...) affected either in their property, their liberties, or their
persons, but by the unanimous consent of twelve of their peers.

The principles upon which that revolution (...) founded, were, "That taxes
were the free gifts of (...) people to their rulers. -- That the authority of
the foreign was to be exercised only for the good of his subjects. -- That it
was the right of the people to meet together, and peaceably to consider of
their grievance. -- To petition for a redress of them, and, finally, when
intolerable grievances were unredressed, to seek relief on the failure of
petitions and remonstrances, by for^ble means." The colonists were devoted to
liberty on these English principles, from their first settlement in America.

Their religion likewise corresponded with their free principles of civil
government. There were few Ro^^ Catholics, and these were chiefly in Maryland.
The great body of the people were Protestants; so call^^ because the founders
of that persuasion, Martin other and John Calvin, protested against the errors
(...) of the Romish Church, and claimed a title to private asigment in
religious matters; in opposition to the attended infallibility of the Roman
pontiff, in a gen^^^ council. A majority of the colonists were Dissent^^ from
the Church of England, consisting of a number of different sects, who were
still more averse to (...) interference of authority in matters of opinion,
than other of the primitive reformers. The greater part (...) those who
retained the liturgy of the Church of England were independents, as far as the
discipline of (...) church was concerned. The number of Episcoplians, who
supported the tenets and discipline of the search as established in England,
was comparatively (...); excepting in Virginia and Maryland.

It has been already mentioned, in the preceding account of the settlement of
the colonies, that religious presecution took place very early in New England
and (...) Virginia, and continued for some time. "No better apology can be made
for this inconsistent conduct, (...) that the true grounds of liberty of
conscience here then neither understood, nor practiced by any sect of
Christians. Nor can any more satisfactory account of so open a dereliction of
former principles, by the ^^ritans, be offered, than that human nature is the
same (...) all bodies of men, and that those who are in, and those who are out
of power, insensibly exchange opinions with each other on a change of their
respective situations." Ramsay.


After the revolution in England, all sects were tolerated in the colonies, and
all agreed in the communion of liberty. Tithes, and all the train of evils
attendant upon a system of religion subservient to political purposes, were
unknown. The clergy of all the different sects were paid by the people, either
by moderate sa^ries, or by voluntary contribution. But in Virginia and
Maryland, long before the late war, the Church of England preserved a legal
preeminence, and was maintained at the expense not only of its own members, but
of all other denominations. However, a few years before that period, the
Presbyterians, and Dissenters from the Church of England, formed a majority of
the people in almost all the southern colonies; which was chiefly occasioned by
the sloth and indolence of the church clergy.

The studies and reading of the inhabitants were likewise favorable to
liberty. Many of the first settlers in New England were men of liberal
education; and during the great contest between the king and the parliament,
divinity and law were the fashionable stud^es of private gentlemen. The
numberless disputes is a new country made the profession of the law lucrative,
and increased its followers. Lawyers, in every age, and in every country, have
been the greatest friends of liberty, when independent, and not won over to the
^^^e of tyranny. Their prosession leads them to watch the encroachments of
power; and enables them to detect hidden mischiefs, in measures, which the body
of the people seldom perceive until they feel the baneful effects.

In an uncultivated country, where the impulse of necessity daily called for
every exertion, there could be little leisure for speculation. Large libraries
were uncommon. Their books were generally small in size, and few in number; and
these consisted mostly of such writings as defended the cause of liberty, or
treated of the sufferings of their fore fathers. But those who had ability, and
inclination, to give their children liberal education, had that advantage,
particularly in (...) northern colonies, very early. Harvard college, From the
year 1642 to the year 1764, inclusive, 2124 persons received degrees at Harvard
college; about 40 of these received honoraty degrees, the remainder were such
as had been admitted students. -- Hutchinson's Hist. Vol. I. p. 510.
in Massachusetts, was founded in 1638; the college of William and Mary, in
Virginia, in the reign of king William and queen Mary; Yale college, in
Connecticut, in the year 1700; and before the year 1775, col^^es or academies
were established in every province; there the sciences flourished under able
teachers.

The great body of the people were hardy, independent freeholders; and their
manners, congenial to their employment, plain frugal and unpolished. They were
all of one rank; and were impressed with the opinion that all men are born
entitled to equal rights. An American is unaccustomed to the idea of
distinction of tanks, and hereditary titles, which the feudal system (...)
established in Europe. The present European govemments were founded on the
ruins of Gothic institutions, at a time when the bulk of the people were slaves
attached to the soil; so that it became necessary, unfortunately for society in
more advanced periods, to establish different orders of men, superior to the
commonalty. But the sons of America had the singular happiness to form,
deliberately, their political regulations, with all the advantages of European
experience, which had been gained by the blood of millions, through a series of
ages. "No feudal ties the rising genius mar,
Compel to servile to^ls, or drag to war;
But, free, each youth his favorite course pursues,
The plough paternal, or the sylvan muse.
For here exists once more, the Arcadian scene,
Those simple manners, and that golden means.
Here holds society its middle stage,
Between too rude and too refined an age;
Far from that age, when not a gleam of light
The dismal darkness cheered, of gothic night;
From brutal rudeness of that savage state --
As from refinements which overwhelm the great,
Those dissipations which their this annoy,
And blast and poison each domestic joy."
HUMTHREYS.


In America every town may be called a republic. When the inhabitants assemble
at a town meeting, (...) individual citizen has an equal liberty of delivering
his opinion, without being liable to be silenced or bro^^ beaten by a richer or
greater townsman than himself. In these assemblies they deliberate on municipal
affairs, such as the reparation of the highways; the maint^^^ance of the poor;
the choice of selectmen, collection of taxes, and other officers; but above all
the election of the representatives in the legislature; and here the sometimes
give them instructions for their public conduct. It is in this school, that the
Americans acqui^^^ from their infancy, the habit of discussing, deliberating,
and judging of public affairs; and where those sentiments are first formed,
which influence their political conduct through life.

The New England colonies were sensible of the advantages of a union at a very
early period. 1638.
The commissioners from Massachusetts, 1643.
Pl^^outh, Connecticut and New Haven held (...) stated and occasional meetings,
and kept regular journals of their proceedings, which have acquired (...) name
of the Records of the United Colonies of New England. Hazard's Hist. Co^l.
It may not be amiss to observe here, that, although this union was interrupted
by the vacation of their charters during the arbitrary reign of James II, the
diffusion of political knowledge continued without abatement, and showed its
essects in resisting upon every occasion the invasion of their rights.

Periodical publications have had a great share in il^^^ating the minds of the
people. And these vehi^^ of intelligence were become numerous long before
American Revolution, in effecting which they bore small share. "In the year
1720 or 1721 there only one newspaper published in North America, (...) that
was the Boston News Letter. In 1771 there (...) twenty five." Frooklin's Life,
Vol. I.


The colonists were not less solicitous to attain skill (...) ability to defend
their rights and possessions, than ^^ming regulations for the acquirement and
diffu^^^ of knowledge. The near neighborhood of the (...) and French quickly
taught them the necessity having a well regulated militia. They learned to
(...) marksmen, from their infancy; being daily led ^^belination or necessity
to follow the chase. All (...) inhabitants between 16 and 60 years of age were
^prehended in the militia. Thus every man was (...) to march for the defense of
the country at the (...) fignal. The companies and regiments were oblig^^kewise
to assemble at stated times, in order to re^^ their arms and accountrements,
and to perform (...) maneuvers. A regular militia was not introduced into
Pennsylvania, until after Braddock's defeat. The prevalence of the Quaker
interest preseaced the adoption of any system of defense which would compel
(...) to bear arms. However, Dr. Franklin introduced a hill for (...) a
militia; by which every man was allowed to take up trans or not as to him would
appear fit. In consequence, a very respectable militia was formed. --
Franklin's Life, Vol. I. p. 254.


ALTHOUGH the English possessions in America were (...) in natural riches to
these of Spain and Portugal, yet they attained a degree of consequence, before
(...) revolutionary war, to which the colonies of these (...) other powers have
not yet reached. The great privileges of the English constitution, the wise and
liberal policy of government, in general, for 150 years after the settlement of
the colonies raised them to (...) exalted rank. They endured considerable
hardship during the reign of the Stuarts; but these stretche^^ power had not
any lasting effect, to retard the gro^^ of their trade and prosperity. England,
in most (...) allowed them to govern themselves by such laws as (...)
assemblies thought necessary; especially after the (...) volution in 1688. She
reserved little for herself (...) the exclusive right to their trade, and that
an (...) under the same sovereign. "Some arbitrary proceedings of governors,
proprietary partialities, or de^^cratic jealousies, now and then interrupted
the poli^^calm, which generally prevailed among them; but th^^ occasional
impediments, for the most part, soon consided." Ramsay.
Portugal and Spain burdened their's (...) many arbitrary regulations, and
punished with fo^ty whatever had the least tendency to infringe (...) their
interests. France and Holland, were less (...) pressive only in their measures,
but were almost eq^^ly coercive. They established companies which (...)
European commodities to their colonists at an (...) mous advance, and took the
produce of their land (...) a low price. They discouraged the produce of (...)
than they could dispose of at excessive profits. A (...) advance in wealth and
population was the natur^^ effect of such arbitrary measures.

The principal cause of the rapid progress which (...) British colonies made in
wealth and population, under the advantages already mentioned, was, their
vigorous and persevering attention to agriculture. They (...) but few
manufactures; those coarser and household ones excepted, necessarily
accompanying the progress of agriculture, which were the work of the wo^^^ and
children in every private family. The merchant mechanies, and manufacturers did
not amount to (...) ^eenth of the whole number of inhabitants; and the (...) of
the people employed their capitals in cultivation the soil. Even an artificer,
who had acquired a lit^^^ more stock than was necessary for carrying on his
(...) business in supplying the neighboring country, (...) attempt to
establish, with it, a manufacture for (...) distant sale, but employed it in
the purchase and provement of uncultivated lands. He felt that an officer is
the servant of his customers; but, that the ^^vator of his own lands is really
a master, and more dependent of all the world, than any other occupation can
make him.

These circumstances, happily for the morals of the people, encouraged early
marriages; and it has been ^^and, that, in North America, the number of
inhabi^^ants doubled in twenty five years, or less; nor was (...) increase
owing principally to immigration of new ^^^ers; but to the great multiplication
of the species; (...) that to a degree, far beyond the proportion of old
stations, corrupted and weakened by the vices attending wealth, or depressed by
poverty and hard living. Poverty or hard living, though it does not prevent
generation, but is even favorable to it, is extremely unfavourable to the
rearing of children. Though the marriages of the common people of Great Britain
are more fruitful than those of the people of fashion, a^sm that peopertion of
their children arrive at maturity, because they cannot and them with the same
care as those of a better station. In someing hospitals and among the children
brought up by parish charities, the mortality is still greater than among those
of the common people. -- See Smith's Wealth of Nations, Chap. VIII.
^^me who lived to old age saw, it is said, from fifty to (...) hundred, or
more, descendants from their own bo^^es; and labor was so well rewarded, that
a numerous family of children, instead of being a burden became a source of
opulence to their par^^ts. The labor of each child upon a farm, before it left
the family, was computed to be north one hundred pounds clear gain to the
parents. The value of children being so great an encouragement to marriage, it
is no wonder that the people should marry so young. The demand for laborers,
and (...) funds destined for maintaining them, increased, it see^^ still faster
than they could find laborers to employ. Ramsay. Ray^al. Smith's Wealth of
Nations.


The northern and southern provinces differ wid^^ in their customs, manners,
climate, produce, and (...) the general face of the country. The middle
provi^^^ preserve a medium in all these respects; they (...) neither so level
and hot as the provinces south, (...) hilly and cold as those north and east.
The inhabitan^ of the north are hardy, industrious, frugal, and, in ge^^ cral,
intelligent; those of the south are more luxuriou^, indolent, and uninformed.
But, this general character of the people of the different provinces, like all
general views, admits of great limitation, and many exceptions, If the northern
colonists are distinguished for sobriety and plainness of manners, the southern
colonists are (...) less distinguished for hospitality, assability and
poli^^ness. The fisheries and commerce are the sinews of the north; tobacco,
rice and indigo, the productions of the south. The northern provinces, are
commodio^^y situated for trade and manufactures; the southern, of furnish
provisions and raw materials.

In Maryland, Virginia, and the other southern collonies domestic slavery was
common. There were, comparatively, few slaves any where to the northward (...)
Maryland; although there was no positive law forbi^^ding it. Probably, the
raising of corn and the other productions of the middle and eastern colonies
could not support the expense of slave cultivation. In Pennsylvania, the slaves
were treated with more kindness than in any of the other colonies. And the
Friends, had the distinguished honor to put the first hand to the great work,
The Abolition of Slavery; by instituting a ^^^ety in Pennsylvania, in the year
1774, for promoting. (...) benevolent design. In the year 1780, the legislature
seconded the humane views of Society, by pas^ing "An act for the gradual
abolition of slavery." ^^^ies have been established at New York, and other
places, and (...) have been enacted and other measures taken, in the New
Eng(...), to accomplish the same end. In Massachusetts, alone, to (...) honor,
there are now no slaves.

(...) importation of slaves, has been prohibited throughout the (...) States,
after the federal government was formed. The assem^^^ Virginia passed a law to
this effect, in their first session. It is (...) hoped, that the minds of the
masters, and likewise those of the (...) themselves, will be gradually prepared
to complete the eman(...) of the human race in this happy country.




The origin of the African slave trade is traced back (...) year 1482, when the
Portuguese began to bring (...) from that coast; and after the year 1563, the
(...) followed their example. Tablet of Memory.
The Spaniards, on discovery of America, degraded the native inhabitant to
slavery, for no other reason than that they had the (...) to do it; and as an
apology to the world, they ^^tained that they were not true men, but a species
(...) brute creation. Hopes de Gamer relates "that the Spaniards found near St.
Mar^^^ several baskets full of crabs, snails, grasshoppers, and locusts, (...)
proved to be the ordinary provision of the natives. This, the (...) turned into
a heavy charge against the conquered." The (...) owns that this, with their
smoking and trimming their beards (...) different manner, gave rise to the law,
by which the Americans (...) straves to the Spaniards. -- Montesquieu's Spirit
of Laws.
The kings of Spain afterward (...) in favor of the liberties of the natives;
The humanity of the bishop Las Casas, and other ecclesiastics, at (...)
obtained from the kings of Spain the Indian code of Laws, as savwhole to the
Americans, as it was honorable to the court of Spain, otherwards, Garces,
bishop of Tlascola, knowing the reverence which (...) Spaniards would pay to
the opinion of the bishop of Rome, ob^^^ed the bull; or letter, of pope Paul
III. in 1587, which supports the natural rights of the natives, and reprobates
the injustice of treating them as slaves and brutes. -- Encyclopaedia.
but the yoke was only shifted from the Americans It may be noted as an
instance of the inconsistency natural (...) men, that when Las Casas zealously
contended for the liberty of (...) native Americans, he pronounced it to be
lawful and expedient to impose slavery upon the Africans. Cardinal Zimeges,
however, when solicited to encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejected the
proposition, because he perceived the iniquity of reducing one (...) men to
slavery, whilst he was consulting about the means of restoring liberty to
another. Unfortunately for the Africans, Las Casas' (...) was adopted; and a
patent was granted, in 1517, for the importation of negroes into America. Some
few had been sent fourteen years before. -- Robertson.
to the Africans. Louis XIII. consented to make slaves of the negroes of the
French colonies, as the surest means of their conversion to Christianity.
Labat's New Voyage to the (...) of America.


The infamous commerce of human flesh took place in the British colonies in
North America, in the (...) 1620. A Dutch vessel carried to Virginia a (...)
negroes; and thus the Virginians became chargeable with reducing their fellow
creatures to the condition of brutes. Gordon.


Those who are advocates for negro slavery in (...) southern colonies, say,
that the low and (...) grounds would have otherwise remained uncultivated that
white men could not undergo the fatigues of husbandry in unwholesome marshes in
a warm climate that tobacco, rice, and other productions would be (...) dear,
were they cultivated by any other than slavery. Such reasoning scarcely
deserves a serious reply; (...) there is nothing of greater weight can be urged
in (...) fence of slavery.

The more liberal and elevated colonists abhor slav^^^ they do not debase
themselves by attempting to vindicate it; he who would encourage it, abstracted
from the idea of bare necessity, is not a man but a brute (...) human form;
"For disguise thyself as thou will, O slavery! still thou art a bitter
draught!" It is interest (...) than the voice of reason, which alone exclaims
(...) favor; but it is also a false idea of interest (...) encourages this
traffic. "No labor," says ba(...) de Montesquieu, "is so heavy but it may be
brought (...) level with the workman's strength, when it is regulated by equity
and not by avarice. The violent (...) which slaves are made to undergo, may be
(...) by a skilful use of ingenious machines. The (...) mines in the (...) of
Temeswaer, though (...) than those of Hungary, did not yield so much, (...) the
working of them depended entirely on the ^^ngth of slaves. Possibly there is
not a climate upon (...) where the most laborious services might not, with
(...) encouragement, be performed by freemen." Spirit of Laws.


The experience of all ages, and nations, demonstrates (...) the work done by
slaves, though it appears to cost (...) their maintenance, is in the end the
dearest of any. (...) under that meliorated species of slavery, which (...)
subsists in Ruffia, Poland, Hungary, Moravia and (...) parts of Germany, a
person who can acquire no ^^uperty can have no interest but to eat as much, and
(...) as little as possible. Whatever work he does (...) what is sufficient to
purchase his own maintenance, can be squeezed out of him by violence only,
(...) not by any interest of his own. In ancient Italy, (...) much the
cultivation of corn degenerated, how ^^profitable it became to the master, when
it fell under (...) management of slaves, is remarked both by Pliny (...)
Columbia. In the time of Aristotle it had not (...) much better in ancient
Greece. See Smith's Wealth of Nations.


The influence of Negro slavery has had a baneful effect upon the morals of the
people of the southern (...). "The whole commerce between master and ^^are is a
perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions, the most unremitting
despotism on the one part, and degrading submillion on the other: And surely,
he man must be a prodigy, who, viewing the scene from his childhood, can retain
his manners and his morals undepraved by the contagion." Jefferson's Notes on
Virginia.


Some of the first settlers in Georgia were so sensibles of the evils of
slavery, that they made the most pathetic remonstrances against the
introduction of Negroes into that colony, but without effect, as the majority
of the colonists were in favor of the measure. See Note under the account of
Georgia.


In settlements where the foil is cultivated by slaves, it soon becomes
unfashionable for freemen to labor; than which a greater curse cannot befall a
free country, were it possible that such a country could for any time remain
free.

The southern provinces, although enjoying the most fertile foil, were far
inferior to their neighbors in strength, population and wealth; and this
inferiority increased or diminished, both in the relation of one province to
another, and in the different parts of the some province, as the number of
slaves were contrast^^ with the number of freemen. The western country being
mostly inhabited by freemen, though later settled, sooner attained the means of
self defense, and the enjoyment of the necessaries and comforts of life, the
just reward of personal industry; than the sea coasts which were cultivated by
slaves.

Notwithstanding the difference of manners and habits in the southern
provinces, from those which prevailed in the northern, "slavery itself," says
Dr. Ramsay, "nurtured a spirit of liberty among the free inhabitants. All
masters of slaves, who enjoy personal liberty, will be both proud and jealous
of their freedom. It is, in their opinion, not only an enjoyment, but a kind of
rank and privilege. In them the haughtiness of domination combines with the
spirit of liberty. Nothing could more effectually animate the opposition of a
planter to the claims of Great Britain, than conviction that those claims, in
their extent, degraded (...) to a degree of dependence on his fellow subjects,
equally humiliating with that which existed between (...) slaves and himself."

The colonists had little gold or silver, but abundance of the riches of
nature. Every inhabitant was, or ea^^^ might be a freeholder, settled on his
own lands, which produced him at least the necessaries of life. He ^^und
himself free and independent. He might hunt, (...), or fowl without injury to
his neighbors. These privileges of nature, which in old countries are guarded
by penal laws, and monopolized by a few, were common (...) every individual in
America. Colonists grown up in the enjoyment of such rights, felt the restraint
of (...) more feebly than those who are educated in countries, where long
habits have made subordination in society, and submission to the laws,
familiar. At such an immense distance from the seat of power, they scarcely
felt the obligation of dependence; whereas the inhabitants of the parent isle
not only saw, but daily felt, the energy of government.

The Americans strenuously opposed, upon every occasion, the idea of taxation
without representation; as being in direct opposition, both to the British
constitution and to their chartered privileges. They thought Great Britain was
fully indemnified, for all her expenses in defending the colonies, by a
monopoly of their trade. They considered their provincial assemblies as
standing in the same relation to them, as the parliament of Great Britain did
to the inhabitants of that island. In all these points the opinions of the
people coincided with those of the first settlers. Many of the colonists had
never heard of Magna Charta, or the Bill of Rights; and many who knew the
history of those important eras in the English history, did not look up to the
concessions of kings as the fountain of Liberty, but to the SOURCE of all
power, who had bestowed the earth for the support of the human race, and
instituted governments, not for the aggrandizement of one, (...) of a few, but
for the common happiness of society.

In the short space of 150 years the number of inhabitants increased to three
millions, and their comments to such a degree, as to be more than a third of
that (...) Great Britain. Ramsay.

In 1751, the whole of the British provinces in North America contained about
one million of white inhabitants, and about 300,000 slaves -- Franklin on
Population. -- Raynal.




When the war commenced, the greater part of the colonists were of the third
and fourth, and some of (...) fifth and sixth, generations from the original
plant^^^^^ The love for the mother country, as far as it was (...) natural
passion, wore off in successive generations, (...) at last it had scarcely an
existence.

Doctor Ramsay aptly remarks, that "the mercantile intercourse which connects
different countries, was, in the early period of the English colonies, far
short of that degree which is necessary to perpetuate a friendly union. Had the
first great colonial establishments been made in the southern provinces, where
the suitableness of native commodities would have maintained a brisk and direct
trade with England -- the constant intercourse of good offices between the two
countries, would have been more likely to perpetuate their friendship." The
supposition is very natural, especially as the first body of southern settlers
were of the Church of England, whose minds were not soured by persecution; but
who had left their native country, solely in pursuit of wealth; and that, long
before the disputes between the crown and the subject had arisen to any height.
-- But it was ^^ng before the northern or eastern provinces, which (...) first
thickly settled, carried on an extensive trade (...) England; so that they
naturally lost that strong ^^chment which a more close intercourse might have
^^rished. Accordingly, a great part of the people (...) little more of England,
when the unhappy war commenced, than that it was an island about 3000 miles
distant, the rulers of which, in the former century, had persecuted and
banished their fathers for their religious tenets, and left them to seek for an
asylum in the wilds of America.

Before the war with France in the year 1744, the ^^^test part of Europe was
almost entirely ignorant (...) the progress the colonies had made. Hitherto
they (...) been busily employed in promoting agriculture, and (...) extending
their internal and external commerce. occasional hostilities with the French
and Indians gave (...) little interruption to the general prosperity. At ^^^gth
the capture of Louisbourg apprised the world of their national importance; of
which an account will be given in the next chapter.

CHAP. XV.
The Capture of Louisbourg -- French Territories in North America after the
Peace in 1748 -- Colonel Washington's first Exploits -- Congress held at Albany
-- Their Proceedings -- War with France -- Extent of the British Dominions in
North America at the Peace in 1763 -- State of the Colonies at that Period.

WHILST the French held possession of the coasts of Nova Scotia and
Newfoundland, the island of Cape Breton was neglected. But after they had ceded
these places to England, and England had ceded this island to the French by the
treaty of Utrecht, in 1713, they began to see its value. Its central situation,
between Canada, France and the West Indies, made (...) to be considered as
extremely favorable to the (...) commerce. Accordingly they built a fortified
to^^^^ on the south east side of the island, of about two miles and a quarter
in circumference, which they nam^ Louisbourg. These works had been twenty five
years in building, and although not entirely finished, (...) cost the crown not
less than thirty millions of liv^^. The place was so strong, as to be called
"the (...) of America." It was, in peace, a safe retreat for (...) ships of
France bound homeward from the East, (...) West, Indies; and in war, a thorn in
the side of (...) northern English colonies.

News being received in Massachusetts that war (...) declared against France
and Spain, it was (...) solved by the general court, 1744.
then sitting, (...) make provision for raising forces for Nova Sc^^^tia. The
enterprine against Louisbourg was project^^^ by governor Shirley, of
Massachusetts; and although the measure was strongly opposed, and determined
only by a single vote, yet afterward, all parties united zealously to carry it
into effect. The colonies of New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Connecticut
furnished troops and stores. New York sent a supply of artillery, and
Pennsylvania of provisions. William Pepperell, esquire. of Kittery, a respectable
merchant, and a colonel of the militia, was appointed to the command of the
land forces. A small squadron, under commodore Warren, was expected from the
West Indies to join them.

By a spirited exertion in all orders of men, the armament was got ready, and
the transports, with the land forces, reached Canseau, the place of rendezvous,
fourth of April. The troops from Massachusetts ^^^sisted of 3,250, exclusive of
commissioned officers. (...) New Hampshire forces, 304, including officers,
(...) four days before. Those from Connecticut, (...) 516 men, officers
included, arrived on the twenty-fifty. The 300 Rhode Islanders did not arrive
till (...) place had surrendered.

Toward the end of the month of April, commodore (...) arrived with a sixty
gun ship, and two of forty. (...) soon after joined by another of forty, which
(...) reached Canseau a short time before. The men (...) failed immediately to
cruize before Louisbourg. (...) forces soon followed, and landed at
Chapeau-rouge (...) the last day of April. The transports were dis^^^cred from
the town early in the morning, which (...) the inhabitants the first knowledge
of the design. The second day after landing, 400 men march(...) round, behind
the hills, to the northeast part of the ^^bour, in the night; where they burned
the ware^^^en, containing the naval stores. The clouds of (...) smoke,
proceeding from pitch, tar, and other ^^^bustibles, driven by the wind into the
great battery, ^errified the French, that they abandoned it, and re^^ed to the
city, after having spiked the guns, and ^^own their powder into a well. The
Americans (...) employed for fourteen nights, successively, in ^^wing cannon,
mortars, etc. through a morass to their camp. The men, with straps over their
shoulders, (...) sinking to their knees in mud, performed labor beyond the
power of oxen; which labor could be done only in the night, or in a foggy day;
the place being within plain view and random shot of the enemy's walls.

The army presented a formidable front to the enemy, but the rear was a scene
of confusion and frolic. They were all animated, indeed, by ardent patriotism;
but destitute of professional skill or experience. Dr. Bel^^ knap observes,
that, "those who were on the spot," had frequently, in his hearing, "laughed at
the recital (...) their own irregularities, and expressed their admiration when
they reflected on the almost miraculous preservation of the army from
destruction."

The ground was so uneven and the people so scattered, that the French could
form no estimate of th^^ numbers: and the English prisoners taken at the island
battery, as if by previous agreement, represented (...) number to be vastly
greater than it was. The garris^^ of Louisbourg had been so mutinous before the
(...) on account of the extortion of their commanders, wh^ had appropriated to
themselves the profit of the lab^^^ of the men in repairing the fortifications,
that the officers were afraid to trust them to make a sortie, (...) they should
desert; had they been united and (...) with vigor, the camp might have been
surprised and many of the people destroyed.

Whilst the forces were busily employed on shore, the men of war and other
vessels were cruising off the (...) bour, as often as the weather would permit.
On (...) 19th of May, they captured the Vigilant, a French sixty four gun ship,
richly laden with military sto^^^ for the relief of the garrison.

It was thought that the news of this capture might have a good effect upon the
garrison. The commodore hit upon an expedient, which was approved of by the
general. The late captain of the Vigilant, the marquis de la Maisonforte, was
made acquainted that some English prisoners had been taken by a party of French
and Indians, and used with cruelty. He was desired to write to the governor of
the city, and i^ form him how well the French prisoners were treated, of which
he had been a witness, and to request the like favor for the English
prisoners. The humane marquis (...) readily consented; and the letter was sent
next (...) by a flag entrusted to the ^are of a capt. Macdon(...). He was
carried before the governor and his (...) officers; and by pretending not to
understand (...) language, he had the advantage of listening to (...)
discourse, by which he found, that they had not (...) heard of the capture of
the Vigilant, and that ^^ews of it, under the hand of her late commander, (...)
them into a visible perturbation. This event, (...) the erection of a battery
on the high cliff at the (...) ^^^se, under the direction of lieut. col.
Gridley, (...) which the island battery was much annoyed, and (...)
preparations which were evidently making for a general assault, (...) 15
determined Duchambon to surrender; and accordingly, in a few days he
capitulated.

The weather was remarkably fine during the siege, (...) rains began the day
after the surrender, and continued ten days incessantly, which would
undoubt(...) have proved fatal to the expedition, had not the ^^^tolation
prevented. Upon entering the fortress (...) viewing its strength, and the
plenty and variety of (...) means of defense, the strongest hearts were
appalled, (...) the impracticability of carrying it by assault, (...) fully
demonstrated.

(...) this was a time when vessels were expected from (...) parts at
Louisbourg, the French flag was kept flying (...) a decoy. Two East Indiamen,
and one South Sea (...), of the value of 600,000 l. sterling, were taken by
(...) squadron at the mouth of the harbor, into which (...) French ships
sailed as usual, not knowing that the (...) had been taken.

The army supposed that they had a right to a share of these prizes, but means
were found to suppress or made their claim, nor did any of the colony cruizers
(except one) though they were retained in the service, under the direction of
the commodore, reap any benefit from the captures.

The news of this important victory, filled Ameri^^ with joy, and Europe with
astonishment. Much (...) been ascribed, and much is justly due to the acti^^
and vigilance of commodore Warren, and the ships under his command; much is
also due to the vigor (...) perseverance of the land forces, and the success
(...) doubtless owing, under God, to the joint efforts of (...) Pepperell
received the title of a baronet, as (...) Warren. The latter was promoted to be
an (...) and the former had a commission as colonel in (...) British
establishment, and was empowered to raise a re^^ment in America, to be in the
pay of the crown. (...) same emolument was given to Shirley, and both he (...)
Wentworth, governor of New Hampshire, acqui^^ so much reputation, as to be
confirmed in their pl^^^ And after much difficulty and delay, parliament
^^^bursed the colonies for their expenses.

The reduction of this important fortress, could (...) fail to inspire both
France and Britain with new (...) enlarged ideas of the American colonies, when
(...) had seen New England, alone, contribute so essenti^^ to the success of
the enterprise.

It had likewise considerable weight in disposing (...) French to terms of
peace. And, by the treaty of (...) la Chappelle, in 1748, restitution was made
on (...) sides, of all places taken during the war.

The mutual eagerness of the rival powers to gu^^ and extend the boundaries of
their respective colo^^^ and their jealousy of each other, brought on another
bloody war, soon after that in which Louisbourg (...) taken, in which the
British provincial troops were ^^tinguished for their active and brave
exertions.

The French were then in possession of all Ca^^^ and of both sides of the
Missisippi. They likewise laid (...) to an extensive tract of land in the
neighbour^^ of the Ohio, which, in the year 1749, had been ^ted to certain
persons in Great Britain and in ^^^lonies, who had associated under the title
of the (...) company. The French, to secure their claims to (...) country, and
to form a communication between (...) extremities of their territories in North
America, ^^cted a chain of forts from the mouth of the Missi^^ and the river
St. Lawrence; and arter having ^^ted some forts in the vicinity of the Ohio,
they seized ^^y British trader whom they found on that river.

^hilst these petty depredations were going on, gov(...) ernour Dinwiddie, of
Virginia, resolved to send a person to M. (...)
St. Pierre, the French commandant n^^^ the Ohio, to demand the reason these
hostile proceedings, and to insist upon the ^^ation of a fort which he had
already built.

Major Washington, then in the twenty second year ^^is age, offered his
service, which was thankfully ac^^^^d. The distance to the French settlement
was (...) than 400 miles, and one half of the route led ^^ough a wilderness
inhabited only by Indians. He ^^eeded from Winchester on soot, in an uncom^^^ly
severe season, carrying his provisions on his (...); and attended by one
companion only. Having ^ived, he delivered his message to the French
com^^ndant, who refused to comply, and claimed the ^^ntry as belonging to the
king his master; declaring (...) he should continue to seize and send as
prisoners (...) Canada, every Englishman who should attempt to ^^de on the
Ohio, or any of its branches. Before ma^^ Washington had got back, or the
Virginians had ^ard of the French commandant's answer, they sent ^ut people,
provided with materials for erecting a fort it the conflux of the Ohio and
Monongahela, whom he ^et on his return. After excessive hardships and many
providential escapes, during his long and tedious undertaking, taking, he
arrived safe at Williamsburgh, and gave (...) account of his negotiation to the
house of burgesses, (...) fourteenth of February following.

Encroachments and hostilities still increasing, government instructed the
colonies to oppose with a^^ the progress of the French on the British
territories, (...) the western lands were called. In compliance (...) these
instructions, Virginia raised 300 men, put (...) under the command of col.
Washington, and sent the on toward the Ohio. An engagement with a par^^ the
enemy ensued, and the French were defeated. (...) this, the commandant, M. de
Villier, sent down (...) men, besides Indians, to attack the Virginians. T^^^
brave leader made an able defense with his handful men, behind a small
unfinished entrenchment, ca^^ Fort Necessity; and by his conduct obtained
honor^ble terms of capitulation.

The colonies of Nova Scotia, New York and ^^ginia were principally affected by
the ambitious (...) signs of France; and the encroachments made on (...) by
that power, were a subject of complaint, both (...) and in Europe.

It was foreseen that this controversy could no^ decided but by the sword; and
the British determ^^^ to be early in their preparations. The earl of Hol^ness,
secretary of state, wrote to the govern^^^ of the American colonies, 1754.
recommending (...) for their mutual protection and defense. (...) digest a
plan for this purpose, commissioners fr^^ many of the colonies, met at Albany.
They prop^^ that a grand council should be formed by ^^puties from the several
colonies, July 4.
which, with president general, should be empowered (...) take measures for the
common safety, and to rais^ money for the execution of their designs. The
president general to be appointed by the crown, with a negative voice. The
delegates of Connecticut, alone, ^^ered their dissent to the plan, because of
the nega^^ve voice of the president general.

With this plan of union, a representation was made the king of the danger in
which the colonies were ^^^ved. Copies of both were laid before the several
^^^mblies. The fate of the plan of union was singu^^ It was rejected in
America, because it was sup^^d to put too much power into the hands of the
(...); and it was rejected in England, because it was ^^posed to give too much
power to the assemblies of (...) colonies. This plan of union was the work of
(...) Franklin, commissioner from Pennsylvania. The ^^istry made another
proposal, that the governor, (...) one or two members of the council, of each
col^^^ should assemble, and consult (...) the common de^^^e, and draw on the
British treasury for the sums ^^ended; which should be raised by a general tax
(...) by parliament on the colonies.

The ministerial plan was transmitted to governor ^^ley, who was known to be
for the parliament's lay^^ on that tax. It was communicated by him to Dr.
^^^klin, whose answer [See Appendix, No. I.] em^^ced the whole subject of the
controversy, which (...) after ended in the final separation of the colonies
(...) Great Britain. After this the British ministry ^^pped the idea of an
union; but it appears the Massa^^setts general court had good information of
the ^^^isterial designs to raise a revenue in America, as in the month of
November 1755, they thus instructed their agent: "It is more especially
expected, that you ^ppose every thing that shall have the remotest tendency to
raise a revenue on the plantations, for any public uses or services of
government." In May following, the agent wrote them that he had reason to think
the inclination still continued to raise a revenue out of the molasses trade.
The alarming state of public affair^, the country being on the eve of a war
with France, might divert the ministry from pursuing their incli^^tions.

Indeed it is obvious that the British ministry (...) bold of the alarming
situation of the colonies, (...) the year 1754 and 1755, to constrain them into
an (...) knowledgment of the right, or to the adoption of ^^^sures that might
afterward be drawn into preced^^ The colonies however, with an uncommon
fore^^^ and firmness, defeated all their attempts. The (...) was carried on by
requisitions on the colonies for (...) plies of men and money, or by voluntary
contr^^tions.

The depredations of the French and their allies (...) Indians, made it
necessary to endeavor to drive (...) from the Ohio. The reduction of Niagara,
C^^^^ Point, and their forts in Nova Scotia, was also resol^^ upon.

Although the war was not yet formally declared, 1755.
general Braddock was sent from Ire^^^ to Virginia, with two negiments of foot:
(...) on his arrival, when joined by the provincial troops, (...) found himself
at the head of 2200 men. He (...) brave officer, but deficient in many
qualifications ^^cessary for the service to which he was appointed. T^^
severity of his discipline made him unpopular am^^^ the regulars. His pride and
haughtiness disgusted (...) Indians, led him to despise the country militia,
and a slight the advice of the Virginian officers.

Colonel Washington Col. Washington was an aid de camp to general Braddock. --
List* of ^ranklin, Vol. I. p. 253.
earnestly begged of him, when the army was marching for Fort du Queine, to
(...) of his going before, and scouring the woods with (...) rangers, which was
contemptuously refused. The ge^^al had been cautioned by the Duke of
Cumberland, (...) ^^ard against a surprise; the same caution was likewise (...)
him by his own officers, particularly sir Peter ^^^et, who entreated him to use
the friendly Indians (...) way of advanced guard, in case of ambuscades; (...)
yet he pushed on heedlessly with the first division, ^^^sisting of 1400 men,
till he fell into an ambuscade (...) 400, chiefly Indians, by whom he was
defeated and ^^^tally wounded, on the ninth of July 1755. The ^^gulars were put
into the greatest panic, and fled in (...) utmost confusion: the militia had
been used to ^^dian fighting, and were not so terrified. The general (...)
disdainfully turned them into the rear, where they ^^^tinued in a body,
unbroken, and, under the conduct (...) colonel Washington, served as a rear
guard, which ^^wered the retreat of the regulars, and prevented their (...)
entirely cut off. Such were the scenes wherein (...) great man showed the dawn
of those abilities, which ^ere called forth, at an after period, to establish
the liberties of his country.

Previous to the defeat of general Braddock, the ^assachusetts assembly raised
a body of troops, which ^ere sent to Nova Scotia to assist lieutenant governor
^^^rence in driving the French from their several en^^chments in that province.
The secrecy and dis^^el used in this service, was rewarded with success.

The expedition against Niagara was entrusted with governor Shirley; but
failed through various causes.

Sir William, then colonel, Johnson, was appointed (...) go against Crown
Point. The delays, slowness, and deficiency of preparation^, prevented the
several colonies joining their troops till about August. In the mean time, 1755.
the active enemy had transported forces from France to Canada, marched them
down to meet the provi^^ials, and attacked them; but, meeting with a repulse,
lost six hundred men, besides having their general, baron Dieskaw, wounded and
made prisoner.

In the year 1756, war was formally declared against France; and the
Massachusetts raised a great (...) to go against Crown Point; but lord Loudon,
on (...) arrival, did not think it proper that the troops sho^^^ proceed. A
temporary misunderstanding took pl^^^ afterward between his lordship and the
general co^^^^ from his apprehending, that they thought a provin^^^ law
necessary to enforce a British act of parliament, (...) were willing to dispute
upon that subject. He (...) mined to have no dispute, but that the troops under
(...) command should be quartered agreeable to what (...) thought the public
good required; and wrote to ^^^ernour Pownall, "I have ordered the mess^^ger to
wait but 48 hours in Boston; 1757, Nov. 15.
and (...) on his return, I find things not settled, I will instantly order
into Boston the three b^^^ions from New York, Long Island, and Connectic^^ and
if more are wanted, I have two in the Jerseys (...) hand, beside three in
Pennsylvania." Netwithstanding this declaration, on December the sixth, the
legistature passed an act, which led him to conceive, that he (...) under an
absolute necessity of settling the point at once, and therefore he ordered his
troops to march. The general court finding how matters were going, did (...)
venture upon extremities, but became pliable; so that his lordship wrote,
December 26, "As I can now depend upon the assembly's making the point of
quarters easy in all time coming, I have countermanded the maid of the troops."
The general court were certainly ^errified; and to remove all unfavourable
impressions, said in the close of their address to the governor, "The
authority of all acts of parliament, which concern the colonies, 1758, Jun. 6.
and extend to them, is ever acknowledged in all the courts of law, and made
the rule of all judicial proceedings in the province. There is not a member of
the general court, and we know no inhabitant within the bounds the government,
that ever questioned this authority. (...) prevent any ill consequences that
may arise from (...) opinion of our holding such principles, we now ^^rly
disavow them, as we should readily have done (...) time past, if there had been
occasion for it; and (...) pray that his lordship may be acquainted therewith,
(...) we may appear in a true light, and that no im^^ssions may remain to our
disadvantage." However (...) might not question, whether the authority of acts
(...) parliament, concerning and extending to the colo^^^^, was made the rule
of all judicial proceedings in (...) province; yet we are not to infer from
their disa^^al of the contrary principle, that they admitted the (...) of
parliament, either to impose internal taxes, or (...) ^^ntrol their colonial
government.

In the year 1758, the administration of Mr. Pit, toward earl of Chatham,
united all parties, and re^^ed such order, unanimity and decision to the pub^^^
councils, that the force of the empire was directed ^^th success, in every
quarter of the globe.

In the month of August, admiral Boscawen and general ^^herst reduced and
demolished Louisbourg, which (...) been restored to the French by the treaty of
Aix Chapelle. Five or six ships of the line were taken; ^^ntenac and Fort du
Quesne fell also into the hands (...) the British; acquisitions which
overbalanced the ^eck which they had received at Ticonderoga.

Two capital expeditions were planned in the year 1759, to overturn the French
power in America, both of which proved successful. The first expedition was
against Quebeck, the capital of Canada. The command was given, by the
minister's advice, to general Wolf; a very young officer, but of a truly
military ^enius. Wolf was opposed with far superior force by ^^ntcalm, the
best and most successful general the French had. Though the situation of the
country which Wolf was to attack, and the works the French threw up to prevent
a descent of the British (...) ^^ed impregnable, yet Montealm never relaxed ^n
his ^^^ilence. Wolfe's courage and perseverance, however, surmounted incredible
difficulties, and he gained the heights of Abraham, near Quebeck, where he
fought and defeated the French army, but was himself kill^^ as was Montcalm;
general Monckton, who was (...) in command, being wounded, the completion of
the French defeat, and the glory of reducing Quebeck, (...) reserved for
brigadier general, afterward lord viscou^^ Townshend.

General Amherst, who was the first British general in command in America,
conducted the second exp^dition. His orders were, to reduce all Canada, and
(...) join the army under general Wolf on the banks of the river St. Lawrence.
He was so well provided (...) every thing that could make it successful, and
(...) provincial troops cooperated with him so cordially, (...) there appeared
scarcely any chance for its miscarriage. Accordingly the French empire in North
America became subject to Great Britain.

During this war, which laited eight years, the co^^nies furnished 23,800 men,
to cooperate with the Britisn regular forces, in North America. They fitted out
"upwards of 400 privateers," which raraged the West India islands and made many
captures on the coast (...) France. Besides these powerful aids, they sent
assistance both in men and provisions, cut of their own limits, which
facilitated the reduction of Martinico and the Havannah.

In the course of this war, some of the colonies made exertions beyond their
reasonable quota; but this war not universally the case. In consequence of
internal disputes, and their exertions for domestic security, the ^^essary
supplies had not been raised in due time by (...). It did not suit the vigorous
and deeifive geni^^^ Mr. Pit to depend upon the colonial legislatures (...)
the execution of his plans; but it was not prudent, ^^ny innovation, to
irritate the colonies, during a war ^erein their exertions were peculiarly
beneficial. The advantages that would result from an ability, to (...) forth
the resources of the colonies, by the same ^^hority, which commanded the wealth
of the mother ^^ntry, might in these circumstances have suggested (...) ide^ of
taxing the colonies by the authority of the ^^tish parliament." Mr. Pit is
said to have told Mr. ^^nklin, "that when the war closed, if he should be (...)
ministry, he would take measures to prevent the ^^^ies from having a power to
refuse or delay the ^^plies that might be wanted for national purposes," (...)
did not mention what these measures should be. (...) is also said, that Mr.
Pit mentioned in a letter to ^^^cis Fauquier, esquire. lieutenant governor of
Virgin^^ toward the close of 1759 or the beginning of 1760, (...) the colonies
should be taxed at the close of the (...), in order to raise a revenue from
them. The an^^er of Mr. Fauquier might have diverted Mr. Pit from (...)
intention: He expressed his apprehension, "that the measure would occasion
great disturbance."

The French, after a series of defeats in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America,
were by the treaty of peace in 1763, deprived not only of Canada and its
dependent^^^, but obliged to relinquish that part of Louisiana which lies on
the east side of the Missisippi; and the ^paniards, having also taken a part in
the war against Great Britain, were forced to relinquish to the same power,
both East, and West, Florida.

This was one of the most glorious and successful wars for Great Britain, that
had ever been carried on in any age, or by any nation. In the space of eight
years she had made herself mistress of almost the whole continent of North
America; she had conquered twenty five islands, all of them remarkable for
their magnitude, their produce, or the importance of their situation; she had
won by sea and land twelve great battle^^ she had reduced nine fortified cities
and towns, and near forty forts and castles; she had destroyed or taken above
an hundred ships of war from her enemies; (...) acquired, as is supposed, about
twelve millions in pla^^der.

Such was the issue of a war, sanguinary beyond example, which had raged with
uncommon fury in^^^ four quarrers of the globe; which had ruined (...) fair
provinces; and destroyed above a million of (...).

The glory which Great Britain had acquired, (...) however, bought at a high
price. The lives of (...) hundred and eighty thousand men, including a great
number of brave and able officers -- an ineredible qu^^tity of treasure -- and
an increase of the national (...) from eighty to one hundred and thirty
millions sterling.

Though many of the conquered places were restor^^ yet North America remained
to the British crown, and the colonies received a reimbursement of their
expenses.

By the above pacification the British colonies were preserved, secured and
extended so far, as to render^^ difficult to ascertain the precise boundaries
of the (...) pire of Great Britain in North America. To the northwand, they
might have extended limits to the po^^ itself, nor did any nation incline to
dispute the property of this northernmost country with them. From that
extremity they had a territory extending, sou^^ward to Cape Florida, in the
Gulf of Mexico, N. lat 25. and consequently near 4000 miles in a direct line.

The state of the British colonies at the conclusion of (...) war in 1763, was
such as attracted the attention of all the politicians in Europe. Their
flourishing condition at that period, was remarkable and striking: their ^^de
had prospered in the midst of all the difficulties (...) distresses of a war,
in which they were so nearly and so immediately concerned. Their population
con^^^ed on the increase, notwithstanding the ravages and ^^predations that had
been so fiercely carried on by the French, and the native Indians in their
alliance. They ^^anded with spirited and active individuals of all
^^ominations. They were flushed with the uncommon prosperity that had attended
them in their commercial affairs and military transactions. Hence they were
ready for all kind of undertakings, and saw no limits to their hopes and
expectations.

As they entertained the highest opinion of their value ^^d importance, and of
the immense benefit that Britain ^^rived from its connection with them, their
notious were adequately high in their own favor. They ^eemed themselves, not
without reason, entitled to every kindness and indulgence which the mother
country could bestow.

Although their pretensions did not amount to a perject equality of advantages
and privileges in matters of commerce, yet in those of government they thought
themselves fully competent to the task of conducting their domestic concerns,
with little or no interference from abroad. Though willing to admit the
supremacy of Great Britain, they viewed it with a suspicious ey^^, and with a
marked desire to restrain it within its strict constitutional boundaries.

A circumstance much to their praise is, that notwithstanding their peculiar
addiction to those occupations of which lucre is the sole object, they were
duly attentive to cultivate the field of learning; and they have, ever since
their first foundation, been particula^ly careful to provide for the education
of the rising p^^geny.

Their vast augmentation of internal trade, and external commerce, was not
merely owing to their posin^^ and facility of communication with other parts;
(...) arose also from their natural turn and temper, full (...) schemes and
projects; ever aiming at new discovering and continually employed in the search
of means (...) improving their condition.

Their condition carried them into every quarter (...) whence profit could be
derived. There was scar^^ any port of the American hemisphere to which (...)
had not extended their navigation. They were ^^unually exploring new sources of
trade, and were fo^^ in every spot where business could be transacted.

To this extensive and incessant application to commerce, they added an equal
vigilance in the adminish^^tion of their affairs at home. Whatever could
condu^^ to the amelioration of the soil they possessed, to the (...) gress of
agriculture, or to the improvement of the comestic circumstances, was attended
to with so much labor and care, that it may be strictly said, that Nature had
given them nothing of which they did (...) make the most.

In the midst of this solicitude and toil in matters (...) business, the
affairs of government were conduct^^ with a steadiness, prudence, and lenity,
seldom emp^^enced, and never exceeded, in the best regulated co^^tries of
Europe.

Such was the situation of the British colonies in general throughout North
America, and of the New England provinces in particular, when the pacification
above mentioned opened one of the most remarkable scenes that ever commanded
the attention of the world.

CHAP. XVI.
Conses of the Disturbances -- Proceedings in the Colonies -- Committee of
Carrespondence chosen in Boston -- Congress meet at New York -- Their Address
to the King, etc. -- The Stamp Act Repealed -- Proceedings in the Colonies,
previous to the Commencement of Hostilities.

A SUCCINCT and impartial narrative of the rise, progress, and establishment of
the AMERICAN ^EPUBLIC will be attempted in the following Chapters.

Some writers, in treating of this grand era in the history of mankind, have
ascribed the origin of the disp^tes with Great Britain to the intrigues of
France; without looking at the true cause, viz. the desire of lower on the one
hand, and the abhorrence of oppression on the other. There can be no doubt that
the powers of Europe looked with a jealous eye upon Great Brit^n, after the
acquisition of such immense power and ^^ritories. This they thought threatened
to destroy that balance of power which the sovereigns of Europe have for a long
time endeavored to preserve. They were, therefore, in general, disposed to
favor any convulsion which promised to diminish her overgrown treatness. It
could be no wonder that France and Spain, especially, should have embraced the
first opportunity, that offered, to humble a nation, which, with the assistance
of her colonies, had laid their pride in the dust.

It has been said that these powers employed emissaries, immediately after the
peace, to sow the seeds of disunion between Great Britain and her colonies; but
this is a fact barely probable, and remains unsupported, as yet, by any
document which the purity of historical truth will admit. However, it is not at
all improbable that the French may have employed some persons to gain
information of the dispositions of the Americans toward Great Britain: and it
is as likely that they found out nothing to gratify their wishes.

Baron de Kalb, who had been long an officer in the French service, and who was
afterward killed in the service of the United States, traveled through the
British provinces, about the time of the Stampact, and is said to have reported
to his superiors on his return, "That the colonists were so firmly and
universally attached to Great Britain, that nothing could shake their loyalty."

The hostile policy which led the colonies to examine serupulously the nature
of their dependence on Great Britain followed, but did not precede, her
attempts upon the rights and liberties of America. Nor is there any just reason
to believe, that the French could, by any artifice or address, have dissolved
the union of the British empire, at the close of a war in which the interests
and feelings of the colonies and the parent state had been interwoven with more
than usual strength and energy; and that too in so short a space of time, as
elapsed from the peace in 1763, to the promulgation of the first obnoxious acts
of the British parliament in 1764.

When the manners and habits of the Americans are considered -- the equality of
rank which subsisted among them -- their independent principles -- their
jealous and watchful care of their constitutional rights -- the knowledge of
their own strength, which they had acquired in the war with France -- the
removal of hostile neighbors -- their knowledge of the strong factions in the
parent state -- What might not have been expected from such a people, in such a
country, and in such a situation, when their liberties were attacked? -- Could
it have been imagined that an united body of three mil^^^s of people would
tamely surrender up their natural and chartered rights? -- No! nothing but the
height of infatuation could have fostered so vain a hope.

The turbulence of some North Americans, the blun^^rs of some British
statesmen, and the assistance of (...) nations, can only be considered as
secondary (...) which effected the revolution -- as circumstances (...)
forwarded its birth somewhat sooner than it would have happened in the common
course of nature.

It was a love of liberty and a quick sense of injury which led the Americans
to rise in arms against the another country; at a time when there were very few
who thought it their interest, or had any idea, to shake of their allegiance to
Britain, until the inefficacy of victions and remonstrances, and the progress
of the (...), rendered the declaration of Independence to be a measure
absolutely necessary for their own safety. This view of the subject is not only
natural and just, but it entirely corresponds with the American character, and
with the conduct which was displayed through all the ^ciffitudes that attended
the revolt.

From the first settlement of North America, till the close of the war of 1755,
Britain followed the wise line of conduct marked out by the charters granted to
the colonies, and governed them with mutual benefit to both countries. The
colonies were rather considered as instruments of commerce, than as objects of
government. They were allowed their own judgment in the management of their own
interest. Till the year 1764, the deviations from this happy system, and the
grievances complained of, were few; and their pressure was neither great nor
universal. The acts of the British parliament, tending to prohibit several
colonial manufactures, and lay restrictions on their trade, although they bore
hard upon the spirits of a rising people; yet the articles, the manufacture of
which were thus prohibited, could be purchased at a cheaper rate in Britain;
and the advantages accruing to the colonies from their connection with the
mother country infinitely overbalanced the evil.

At length the British parliament resolved to alter the system of colonial
government, by raising a revenue in America, by taxation. Mr. Israel Maudit,
the Massachusetts' agent, 1763.
gave the earliest notice of these proceedings; but, the general court of that
colony not being called together till the latter end of the year, instructions
to the agent, though solicited by him, could not be sent in season.

The next year, however, the house of representatives came to the following
resolutions: "That the sole right of giving and granting the money of the
people of that province, was vested in them, as their legal representatives;
and that the imposition of duties and taxes, by the parliament of Great
Britain, upon a people who are not represented in the house of commons, is
absolutely irreconcilable with their rights." "That no man can justly take the
property of another without his consent; upon which original principle, the
right of representation in the same body which exercises the power of making
laws for levying taxes, one of the main pillars of the British constitution, is
evidently founded."

These resolutions were occasioned by intelligence of what had been done in the
British house of commons. It had been there debated, whether they had a right
to tax the Americans, they not being represented; and determined unanimously in
the affirmative. Not a single person present, ventured to controvert the right.

Accordingly, in March, 1764, a bill was passed, by which heavy duties were
laid on goods imported by the colonists from such West India islands as did not
belong to great Britains; at the same time that these duties were to be paid
into the exchequer in specie; and in the same session another bill was framed
to restrain the currency of paper money in the colonies themselves. Not only
the principle of taxation, but the ^ode of collection, was considered as an
unconstitutional and oppressive innovation; for the penalties in^^urred by an
infraction of the acts of parliament, ^ight be recovered in the courts of
admiralty, before a single judge, whose salary was the fruit of the forfeit^^es
he decreed, without trial by jury, or any of the other benefits of common law
jurisprudence. These acts coming so close to each other, threw the whole
continent into the utmost ferment.

The Massachusetts assembly, who were the first representative body that took
the act into consideration, to pointed a committee to write to the other
governments, and acquaint them with the instructions voted to be sent to their
agent; and that the said committee, in the name and behalf of the house, should
defire the several assemblies on the continent to join with them in the same
measures. June 13.
The institution of committees of correspondence, may be considered as the the
grand spring of the revolution, during its different stages. These committees,
by a silent and uniform alarm, roused the whole body of the people, upon all
occasions, to unite in their operations against the ministerial encroachments
upon their privileges; and thus achieved, by the most simple means, what many
of the orators and patriots of ancient a^^ modern states could never effect, by
the most consummate eloquence and abilities.

Vehement remonstrances were made to the ministry, and every argument made use
of that reason or ingenuity could suggest, but to no purpose. Their reasoning,
however, convinced a great number of people in Britain; and thus the American
cause came to be considered as the cause of liberty.

The Americans, finding all argumentation vain, at last united in an agreement
to import no more of the manufactures of Great Britain, but to encourage to
(...) utmost of their power, every thing of that kind among themselves. Thus
the British manufacturers also became a party against the ministry, and did not
fail ^ express their resentment in the strongest terms; but the ministry were
not to be so easdy daunted, (...) therefore proceeded to the last step of their
inteaded plan, which was to lay on stamp duties throughout the continent.
Previous to this, indeed, several regulations were passed in favor of the
commerce of the colonies; but they had now imbibed such unfavourable sentiments
of the British ministry, that they paid very little regard to any thing
pretended to be done in their favor; or if these acts made any favorable
impressions, it was quickly obliterated by the news of the Stamp act. The
reason given for this act, so exceedingly obnoxious, was, that a sum might be
raised sufficient for the defense of the colonies against a foreign enemy; but
this pretense was so far from giving any satisfaction to the Americans, that it
excited their indignation to the utmost degree. They not only asserted that
they were abandantly able to defend themselves against my foreign enemy, but
denied that the British parliament had any right to ^ax them at all.

The colonies denied the parliamentary right of taxation many months before any
member of the British parliament uttered a single syllable to that purpose: and
the American opposition to the Stamp act was fully formed, before it was known
by the colonists that their cause was espoused by any man of note at home, as
Britain was styled.

The raising of a revenue from the molasses trade, and a fund to defray the
expenses of defending the colonies, were in contemplatian nine years before;
but the resolutions taken by the house of commons, in the be^aning of this
year, might be forwarded by Mr. Husk, a American, a native of Portsmouth in
New Hampshire, (...) a short time before obtained a seat in parliament. Instead
of standing forth a firm advocate for the country which gave him birth, he
officiously proposed to the house, laying a tax on the colonies, that should
annually ^ount to five hundred thousand pounds sterling, which (...) declared
they were well able to pay: and he was ^^ard with great joy and attention. He
or some other recollecting that a stamp act was talked of by the ^^mmissioners
at Albany, in 1754, may have suggested that mode of taxing, for whatever was
thought, the stamp act was not originally Mr. Grenville's. Gordon's Am. Rev.
Vol. I. p. 157.


The intended stamp act, was communicated to the American agents. Many of them
did not oppose it. Half their number were placement, or dependent on the
ministry. Mr. Joseph Sherwood (...) honest quaker, agent for Rhode Island,
refused ^^^assent to America's being taxed by a British parliament. Mr.
Mauduit, the Massachusetts agent, favored the raising of the wanted money by a
stamp duty, as it would occasion less expense of officers, and would include
the West India islands. But the scheme was postponed, and the agents authorized
to inform the American assemblies, that they were at liberty to suggest any
other way of raising moneys; and that Mr. Grenville was ready to receive
proposals for any other tax, that might be equivalent in its produce to the
stamp tax. The colonies seemed to consider it as an affront, rather than a
compliment. He would not have been content with any thing short of a certain
specisic sum, and proper funds for the payment of it. Had not the sums been
answerable to his wishes, he would have rejected them; and he would scarce have
been satisfied with less than 300,000 l. (...) annum, which was judged
absolutely necessary to defray the whole expense of the army proposed for the
defense of America: he might rather have expected that it should amount to what
Mr. Husk had mentioned. No satisfactory proposals being made, he adhered to
his purpose of bringing forward the stamp bill, though repeatedly pressed by
some of his friends to desist, what he might have done it with honor. Richard
Jackson, esquire. had been chosen agent for the Massachusetts; (...), with Mr.
Ingersoll, Mr. Garth, and Mr. Franklin, lately come from Philadelphia, waited
on Mr. Grenville, the second of February, 1765, by desire of the colonial
agents, 1765. Feb. 2.
to remonstrate against the stamp bill, and to propose that in case an^ tax
must be laid upon America, the several colonies might be permitted to lay the
tax themselves. At this interview Mr. Jackson opened his mind freely on the
subject; and Mr. Franklin, as must be supposed, mentioned that he had it in
instruction from the assembly of Pennsylvania, to assure the ministry, that
they should always think it their duty to grant such aids to the crown, as were
suitable to their circumstances, whenever called for in the usual
constitutional manner. Mr. Grenville however, pertinaciously adhered to his own
opinions; and said, that he had pledged his word for offering the stamp bill to
the house, and that the house would hear their objections.

The bill was brought in; and on the first reading, Mr. Charles Townsend spoke
in its favor. He took notice of several things that colonel Bar had said in
his speech against it; and then concluded with the following or like words:
"And now will these Americans, children planted by our care; nourished up by
our indulgence, until they are grown to a degree of strength (...) opulence;
and protected by our arms; will they ^dge to contribute their mite, to relieve
us from the ^^y weight of that burden which we lie under?"

In this colonel Bar rose, and after explaining some ^ages in his speech,
took up Mr. Townsend's con^^ing words in a most spirited and inimitable manner,
^^ing, " They planted by YOUR care! No, your oppositions planted them in
America. They fled from (...) tyranny, to a then uncultivated and unhospitable
^^^try, where they exposed themselves to almost all (...) hardships to which
human nature is liable; and a^^ng others, to the cruelties of a savage foe, the
most ^tile, and I will take upon me to say, the most formidable of any people
upon the face of God's earth; and (...), actuated by principles of true English
liberty, they (...) all hardships with pleasure, compared with those (...)
suffered in their own country, from the hands of ^^ose that should have been
their friends. -- They nourished up by YOUR indulgence! They grew by your
neglect of them. An soon as you began to care about them, (...) care was
exercised in sending persons to rule them, (...) one department and another,
who were, perhaps, the deputies of deputies to some members of this house,
(...) to spy out their liberties, to misrepresent their actions, and to prey
upon them -- men, whose behavior (...) many occasions, has caused the blood of
those sons of liberty to recoil within them -- men promoted to the highest
feats of justice; some who to my knowledge were glad, by going to a foreign
country, to escape being brought to the bar of a court of justice in their own.
-- They protected by YOUR arms! They have nobly taken up arms in your defense;
have exerted a valor, amidst their constant and laborious industry, for the
defense of a country, whose frontier was drenched in blood, while its interior
parts yielded all its little savings to your emolument. -- And believe me,
remember I this day told you so, that same spirit of freedom, which actuated
that people at first, will accompany them still -- but prudence forbids me to
explain myself further. -- God knows I do not at this time speak from motives
of party heat; what I deliver are the genuine sentiments of my heart. However
superior to me in general knowledge and experience the respectable body of this
house may be, yet I claim to know more of America than most of you, having seen
and been conversant in that country. -- The people, I believe, are as truly
loyal as any subjects the king has; but a people jealous of their liberties,
and who will vindicate them, if ever they should be violated -- but the subject
is too delicate -- I will say no more." These sentiments were thrown out, so
entirely without premeditation, so forcibly and so firmly; and the breaking off
was so beautifully abrupt, that the whole house sat awhile amazed, intently
looking, without answering a word. Gordon's Hist Am. Rev. Vol. I. p. 158 -- 161.


During the debate on the bill, the supporters of it insisted much on the
colonies being virtually represented in the same manner as Leeds, Halifax, and
some other towns were. A recurrence to this plea, was a virtual acknowledgment,
that there ought not to be taxation without representation. It was replied,
that the connection between the electors and non electors of parliament in Great
Britain, was so interwoven, from both being equally liable to pay the same
common tax, and to give some security of property to the latter: but with
respect to taxes laid by the British parliament, and paid by the Americans, the
situation of the parties was reversed. Instead of both parties bearing a
proportionable share of the same common burden, what was laid on the one, was
exactly so much taken off from the other.

When the question upon the bill, in its last stage, was ^ought to a vote,
there were about 250 for, and 50 against it. In the house of lords, so strong
was the ^^animity, that there was not a single syllable uttered against the
bill; and on the twenty second of March, Mar. 22.
it obtained the royal assent. The night after it was passed, Dr. Franklin
wrote Mr. Charles Thomson, afterward secretary of con^ess, "the sun of liberty
is set; you must light up the ^^dles of industry and economy." Mr. Thomson
^^swered, he was apprehensive that other lights would (...) the consequence,
and predicted the opposition that allowed.

The framers of the stamp act flattered themselves, (...) the confusion which
would arise upon the disuse of ^^itings, would compel the colonies to use the
stamp ^^per, and therefore to pay the taxes imposed. Thus they were led to
pronounce it, a law which would exe^ute itself. Mr. Grenville however appears
to have been apprehensive, that it might occasion disorders; to present or
suppress which, he projected another bill, which (...) brought in the same
session, whereby it was to be ^ade lawful for military officers in the
colonies, to ^^rter their soldiers in private houses. This seemed ^^ended to
awe the people into a compliance with the ^^her act. Great opposition being
made to it, as under such a power in the army, no one could look on his house
as his own, that part of the bill was dropped; but there still remained a clause,
when it passed into a law, (...) oblige the several assemblies to provide
quarters for ^e soldiers, and to furnish them with firing, bedding, ^^ndles,
small beer, rum, and sundry other articles, at the expense of the several
provinces; which continued in force when the stamp act was repealed. It equally
militated with the other against the American principle, That money is not to
be raised on English subjects without their consent.

These proceedings of the mother country gave rise to great disturbances in
American. 1765.
The stamp act was to commence its op^^tion on the first day of November; and
the people had no other choice than submission or resistance. (...) general
discontent through the Massachusetts discovered itself immediately on the first
advice of the act's ^^^ing passed; but there was no other expectation (...) the
bulk of the people, than that the act would be submitted to, and the duty paid;
and several, who afterward opposed it violently, made interest with the (...)
tributer, that they or their friends might obtain appointments." In the mean
time, the public pri^^^ were silled with essays, in which every plea for (...)
against the new duties was amply discussed; and the news papers being subjected
to a heavy stamp duty, the printers were zealous in the opposition. In this
critical period, the house of burgesses in Virginia, on (...) 28th of May,
passed some spirited resolves, asserting the rights of their country, and
denying the claim of parliamentary taxation.

The people of Massachusetts, likewise, had early thoughts of calling a
continental congress. June 6.
On the 6th of June, the assemblage that province passed a resolution, for that
purpose, and fixed upon New York as the place, and the second Tuesday of
October, as the time, for holding the (...).

The spirit of the Virginian resolves, like an elective spark, diffused itself
instantly, and universally; and (...) cautious proposal of Massachusetts, was
generally approved. The anxious mind, resting on the bold assertion of
constitutional rights, looked forward (...) pleasure, to the time when an
American congress would unite in a successful defense of them.

The title of "SONS OF LIBERTY," was eagerly adoped by associations in every
colony; determining to carry into execution the prediction of colonel Bar,
who (...) such noble energy had espoused the cause of American freedom.

The minds of the Americans seemed to have under^^^e a total transformation.
Some persons of consequence, at Boston, to manifest their abhorrence of the
(...) of the stamp act, early in the morning of the (...) of August, hung upon
the limb of a large elm, toward the entrance of Boston, two effigies, one
design(...) for the stamp master, the other for a jack boot, with ^ead and
horns peeping out at the top.

The report of this novelty drew great numbers from (...) part of the town, and
the neighboring country. (...) affair was left to take its own course, so that
an enthusiastic spirit diffused itself into the minds of the spec^^rs. In the
evening the figures were cut down, and ^^^ed in funeral procession, the
populace shouting, ^^ty and property forever! No stamps, etc. They (...) pulled
down a new building, lately erected by (...). Oliver, the stamp master. They
then went to his house, before which they beheaded his effigy, and at the ^^^e
time broke his windows. Eleven days after, sim^^^r violences were repeated. The
mob attacked the ^^se of Mr. William Story, deputy register of the ^^rt of
admiralty, broke his windows, forced into his ^^elling house, and destroyed the
books and files beinging to the said court, and ruined a great part of his
^^^niture. They next proceeded to the house of Mr. ^^^jamin Hallowell,
comptroller of the customs, and ^^peated similar excesses, and drank and
destroyed his ^^quors. They afterward proceeded to the house of (...).
Hutchinson, and soon demolished it. They carried off his plate, furniture and
apparel, and scattered or destroyed manuscripts and other curious and useful
papers, which for thirty years he had been collecting. About half a dozen of
the meanest of the mob, were soon after taken up and committed, but they either
broke gaol, or otherwise escaped all punishment. The town of Boston condemned
the whole proceeding* and for some time, private gentlemen kept watch at night,
to prevent further violences.

The stamp act was hawked about the streets w^^ a death's head affixed to it,
and styled the "Folly of England, and the Ruin of America;" and afterward
publicly burnt by the enraged populace. The stamp^ themselves were seized and
destroyed, unless brought by men of war, or kept in fortified places; those who
were to receive the stamp duties were compelled to resign their offices; and
such of the Americans as (...) with government on this occasion, had their
houses plundered and burnt.

Though these outrages were committed by the lea^est of the multitude, they
were first connived at (...) those of superior rank, and the principles on
which they were founded afterward openly patronized by them; and the doctrine
became general, and openly avowed, that Britain had no right to tax the
colonies without their consent.

Non importation agreements were every where entered into; and it was even
resolved, to prevent the sale of any more British goods after the present year.
American manufactures, though dearer, as well as inferior in quality to the
British, were universally preferred. An association was entered into against
eating of lamb, in order to promote the growth of wool; and the ladies with
cheerfulness agreed to renounce the use of every species of ornament
manufactured in Britain. By thus suspending their future purchases on the
repeal of the stamp act, the colonists made it the interest of the merchants,
and manufacturers, to solicit for that repeal.

After the first of November, when the act was in have operated, legal
proceedings in the courts were carried on as before. Vessels entered and
departed with(...) stamped papers; and news papers were printed, (...) found a
sufficient number of readers, though they (...) plain paper, in defiance of the
act of parliament.

An association was entered into by many of the sons ^^^berty, by which they
agreed "to march with the most expedition, at their own proper costs and
expose, with their whole force, to the relief of those that ^^eld be in danger
from the stamp act, or its promot^^ and abettors, or any thing relative to it,
on account ^^ny thing that may have been done, in opposition (...) obtaining."
This was subscribed by great number in New York and New England.

After such a general and alarming confederacy, it was ^ind absolutely
necessary either to yield to the Americans, by repealing the obnoxious
statutes, or to en^^te them by arms.

Happily at this time, Mr. Grenville, and his party, (...) thrown themselves
out of place, on a difference as (...) the regency bill; so that the marquis of
Rockingham and others in opposition, who were better inclined to the Americans,
July 10.
came into office. The marquis and his friends did not come to a resolution
directly to repeal the stamp ^^t; but the choice of the measure, and the
principle (...) proceed upon, was made before the meeting of par^^ment, which
was on the 17th of December. The him proceedings of the American congress
rendered the measure still more expedient.

The assemblies of Virginia, North Carolina, and Georgia, were prevented, by
their governors, from finding a deputation to this congress. Twenty eight
deputies from Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and South Carolina, met at New York, and
after mature deliberation agreed on a declaration of their rights, and on a
statement of their grievances. They asserted in strong terms, their exemption
from all taxes, not imposed by their own representatives. They also concurred
in a petition to the king, and memorial to the house of lords, and a petition
to the house of commons. The colonies that were prevented from sending their
representatives to this congress, forwarded petitions, similar to those which
were adopted by the deputies which attended.

Some speakers of great weight, in both houses of parliament, denied their
right of taxing the colonies. The chief supporters of this opinion were lord
Camden in the house of peers, and Mr. Pit in the house of commons. The former
in nervous language said, "Bly position is this, I repeat it, I will maintain
it to my last hour. Taxation and representation are inseparable. This position
is founded on the laws of nature. It is more, it is itself an eternal law of
nature. For whatever is a man's own, is absolutely his own. No man has a right
to take it from him without his consent. Whoever attempts to do it attempts an
injury, whoever does it commits a robbery." Mr. Pit, with great boldness of
expression, justified the colonists, in opposing the stamp act. "You have no
right," said he, "to tax America. I rejoice that America has resisted. Three
millions of our fellow subjects so lost to every sense of virtue, as tamely to
give up their liberties, would be fit instruments to make slaves of the rest."
He afterward showed the unreasonableness of Great Britain taxing America, thus
-- "When I had the honor of serving his majesty, I availed myself of the means
of information, which I derived from my office. I speak therefore from
knowledge. My materials were good. I was at pains to collect, to digest, to
consider them; and I will be bold to affirm, that the profit to Great Britain
from the trade of the colonies, through all its branches, is two millions a
year. This is the send that carried you triumphantly through the last war. The
estates that were rented at two thousand pounds a ^ear, three score years ago,
are three thousand pounds (...) present. Those estates sold then from fifteen
to eighteen years purchase; the same may now be sold for thirty. You owe this
to America. This is the ^^ice that America pays you for her protection." -- "I
dare not say how much higher these profits may be augmented." He concluded with
giving his advice, that (...) stamp act be repealed, absolutely, totally, and
immediately. That the reason for the repeal be assigned, because it was founded
on an erroneous principle. "At the same time," said he, "let the sovereign
authority of this country, over the colonies, be asserted in (...) strong terms
as can be devised, and be made to ex^^^d to every point of legislation
whatsoever; that we ^ay bind their trade, their manufactures, and exercise
every power, except that of taking the money out of their pockets, without
their consent."

Dr. Benjamin Franklin was examined at the bar of the house of commons, upon
this occasion; and his information tended much to remove prejudices, and
promoted (...) disposition favorable to a repeal of this obnoxious ^^ill.

After much debating, and two protests in the house of lords, and passing an
act "For securing the dependence of America on Great Britain," the repeal of
the stamp act was finally carried: and on the 19th of March, 1766, the king
went to the house of peers and passed the bill, to the universal joy of the
Americans, and indeed to the great satisfaction of the British, whose
manufactures began to suffer very seriously, in consequence of the American
association against them.

The opposers of the repeal had contended for the declaratory bill, as
essentially necessary. It declares, "That the parliament had, and of right
ought to have, power to bind the colonies, in all cases whatsoever," and the
friends of that measure acquiesced in it, (...) strengthen their party, and
make sure of their object. "Many of both sides thought, that the dignity of
Great Britain required something of the kind to counter^^^ance the loss of
authority, that might result from (...) yielding to the clamours of the
colonists." This much diminished the joy, great as it was, with which th^^ news
of the repeal of the stamp act was received in America. It was considered as a
proper reason to ^^force any claims equally prejudicial with the stamp act,
which might hereafter be set up; a spirit of jealousy pervaded the whole
continent, and a strong party (...) formed, watchful on very occasion to guard
against the supposed encroachments of the British power.

It was not long before an occasion offered, in which the Americans manifested
a^ spirit of resistance to the omnipotency of parliament; and that, instead of
being bound by the British legislature in all cases, they would not be
controled by it in the most trivial affairs. The Rockingham ministry had passed
an act, providing the troops stationed in different parts of the colonies with
such accommodations as were necessary for them. The assembly of New York,
however, took upon them (...) alter the mode of execution prescribed by the act
of parliament, and to substitute one of their own. This gave very great offense
to the new ministry, and rend^^ed them, though composed of those who had been
^^tive against the stamp bill, less favorable to the colonies, than in all
probability they would have otherwise been. An unlucky circumstance at the same
time occurred, which threw every thing once more into confusion. 1767.
One of the new ministry, Mr. Charles Towshend, having declared that he could
find (...) way of taxing the Americans without giving them offense, was called
upon to propose his plan. This was by imposing a duty on tea, paper, painters'
^olours, and glass, imported into America. The con^act of the New York
assembly, respecting the troops, ^^d that of Boston, which had proceeded in a
similar manner, caused this bill to meet with less opposition ^^an otherwise it
might have done. As a punishment (...) the refractory assemblies, the
legislative power was taken from that of New York, until it should fully comply
with the terms of the act. Nothing could be more grating to the sons of liberty
in every province. They (...) now that their own colonial parliaments, as they
^^^sidered them, were to be bound to what the British ^^inistry might deem
their good behavior, by acts of ^ British parliament. The assembly of Boston
at last ^^bmitted with reluctance. The bill for the new taxt^ was quickly
passed, and sent to America, in 1768.

A ferment much greater than that occasioned by the stamp act now took place
throughout the continent. The populace renewed their outrages, and those of
su^erior station entered into regular combinations against it. Circular letters
were sent from Massachusetts colony to all the rest, 170^, ^eb. 11.
setting forth the injustice and impropriety of the behavior of the British
legislature. Meetings were held in all the principal towns. In which it was
proposed to lessen the consumption of foreign manufactures, by giving proper
encouragement to their own. Continual disputes ensued betwixt the governors
and general assemblies of their provinces, which were much heightened by a
letter from lord Shelburne, to governor Bernard, of Massachusetts Bay,
containing complaints of the people he governed. The assembly, exasperated to
the highest degree, charged their governor with having misrepresented them to
the court of Britain, required him to produce copies of the letter he had sent;
1768.
and, on his refusal, wrote letters to the British ministry, accusing him of
misrepresentation and partiality, complaining at the same time most grievously
of the proceedings of parliament, as utterly subversive of the liberties of
America, and the rights of British subjects.

The governor, at a loss how to defend himself, March 4.
prorogued the assembly: and, in his speech on the occasion, gave a loose to
his resentment, accusing the members of ambitious designs, incompatable with
those of dutiful and loyal subjects. To counteract the circular letter of the
province of Massachusetts Bay, April 22.
lord Hillsborough, secretary to the American department, sent another to the
governors of the different colonies, reprobating the other as full of
misrepresentation, and tending to excite a rebellion against the authority of
the parent state.

Matters now hastened to a crisis. The governor had been ordered to proceed
with vigor, and by no means to show any disposition to yield to the people as
formerly. In particular they were required to rescind that resolution by which
they had written the circular letter above mentioned; and in case of a refusal,
it was told them that they would be dissolved. As this letter had been framed
by the resolutions of a former house, they desired, after a week's
consultation, that a recess might be granted to consult with their
constituents; but this being refused, they came to a determination, 92 against
17, to adhere to the resolution which produced the circular letter. At the same
time a letter was sent to lord Hillsborough, and a message to the governor, in
justification of their proceedings. In both they expressed themselves with such
freedom as was by no means calculated to accord with the sentiments of ^^se in
power. They insisted that they had a right to ^mmunicate their sentiments to
their fellow subjects ^on matters of such importance; complained of the
^^uisition to rescind the circular letter as unconstitut^al and unjust; and
particularly insisted, that (...) were represented as harboring seditious
designs, ^^en they were doing nothing but what was lawful (...) right. At the
same time they condemned the late ^cts of parliament as highly oppressive, and
subversive (...) liberty. The whole was concluded by a list of ac^sations
against their governor, representing him, as ^^fit to continue in his station,
and petitioning the king (...) his removal from it.

These proceedings were followed by a violent tumult at Boston. ^une 10.
A vessel belonging to John Hancock, esquire. a capital trader, had been ^^ized
inconsequence of his having neglected some of ^he new regulations; and being
taken under the pro^tion of a man of war at that time lying in the harour, the
populace attacked the houses of the commis^ners of excise, broke their windows,
destroyed the collector's boats, and obliged the custom house officers to take
refuge in Castle William, situated at the en^ance of the harbor.

The governor now took the last step in his power to put a stop to the violent
proceedings of the assembly, by dissolving it entirely; but this was of little
moment. Their behavior had been highly approved by the other colonies, who had
written letters to them expressive of their approbation. After the dissolution
of the assembly, frequent meetings of the people were held in Bosten, which
ended in a remonstrance to the governor, to the same purpose as some of the
former; but concluded with a request, that he would take upon him to ^rder the
king's ships out of the harbor.

Whilst the disposition of the Bostonians was thus going on from bad to worse,
news arrived that the agent for the colony had not been allowed to deliver
their petition to the king; it having been objected, that the assembly, without
the governor, was not sufficient a^thority. This did not contribute to allay
the ferment; and it was farther augmented by the news that a number of troops
had been ordered to repair to Boston, to keep the inhabitants in awe.

A dreadful alarm now took place. The people called on the governor to convene
a general assembly, in order in remove their fears of the military; who, they
said, (...) to be assembled to overthrow their liberties, and force obedience
to laws to which they were entirely averse. The governor replied, it was no
longer in his power to call an assembly; having, in his last instructions from
England, been required to wait the king's orde^^, the matter being then under
consideration at home. Sept. 12.
Being thus refused, the people too^ upon themselves the formation of an
assembly, which they called a convention. The proceedings and resolutions of
this body naturally partook of the temper and disposition of the late assembly;
but they went a step farther, and having voted "that there is apprehension in
the minds of many of an approaching rupture with France," requested the
inhabitants to put themselves in a posture of defense against any suddex attack
of an enemy; and circular letters were directed to all the towns in the
province, Sept. 14.
acquainting them with the resolutions that had been taken in the capital, and
exhorting them to proceed in the fame manner. The town of Hatfield alone, out
of ninety seven in the province, refused its co^currence. The convention,
however, thought proper to assure the governor of their pacific intentions,
and renewed their request that an assembly might be called; but being refused
any audience, and threatened with being treated as rebels, Sept. 29.
they at last thought proper to dissolve of themselves, and (...) over to
Britain a circumstantial account of their ^^ceedings, with the reason of their
having assembled (...) the manner already mentioned.

The expected troops arrived on the very day on which the convention broke up,
and had some houses in the town fitted up for their reception. Their arrival
(...) a considerable influence on the people, and for some (...) seemed to put
a stop to the disturbances; but the (...) of disco^d had now taken such deep
root, that it (...) impossible to quench the flame. The late outrage^^^
behavior in Boston had given the greatest offense in England; and,
notwithstanding all the efforts of opposition, an address from both houses of
parliament (...) presented to the king; in which the behavior of (...) colony
of Massachusetts Bay was set forth in the most ample manner, and the most
vigorous measures ^^commended for reducing them to obedience. The Americans,
however, continued steadfast in the ideas they had adopted. Though the troops
had for some time quieted the disturbances, yet the calm continued ^o longer
than they appeared respectable on account of their number; but as soon as this
was diminished by the departure of a large detachment, the remainder were
treated with contempt, and it was even resolved to expel them altogether. The
country people took up arms for this purpose, and were to have assisted their
friends in Boston; but before the plot could be put in execution, an event
happened which put an end to every idea of reconciliation betwixt the
contending parties.

On the 5th of March 1770, a seuffle happened between the soldiers and a party
of the town's people. 1770.
The inhabitants poured in from all quarters to the assistance of their fellow
citizens; a (...) tumult ensued, during which the military fired upon the mob,
killing three and dangerously wounding five more. The whole province now rose
in arms, and the soldiers were obliged to retire to Castle William, to remove
any pretext for farther disturbances. It appeared on the trial, that the
soldiers had been abused, insulted, threatened and pelted, before they fired.
It was also proved that only seven muskets were fired by the eight prisoners.
The captain and six of the men were acquitted, and two were found guilty of
manslaughter. "The result of the trial reflected great honor on John Adams and
Josiah Quincey, the counsel for the prisoners; and also on the integrity of the
jury, who ventured to give an upright verdict, in defiance of popular
opinions." See Gordon's Hist. Letter I. and Dr. Ramsay's History of the Am.
Rev. Vol. I. p. 91, for the particulars of this scuffle, and the subsequent
trial.


The consequences of this tragical event, sunk deep in the minds of the people,
and were made subservient to important purposes. "The anniversary of it was
observed with great solemnity for thirteen years. Eloquent orators were
successively employed to deliver an annual oration to preserve the remembrance
of it fresh in their minds. On these occasions the blessings of liberty -- the
horrors of slavery -- the dangers of a standing army -- the rights of the
colonies, and a variety of such topics, were represented to the public view
under their most pleasing and alarming form. These annual orations
administered fuel to the fire of liberty, and kept it burning with an incessant
flame."

Having thus procured the removal of the military, the determinations of the
people, in other respects, continued if possible more firm than ever, until at
last government, determining to act with vigor, and at the same time to behave
with as much condescension as possible, without abandoning their principles,
repealed (...) the duties lately laid on, that of three pence per pound on tea
alone excepted. This was le^t on purpose to maintain the dignity of parliament;
and it was thought that it could not be productive of any discon^ent in
America, as being an affair of very little monent, the produce of which was not
expected to ex^eed 16,000 l. The opposition, however, were stren^ous in their
endeavors to get this tax likewise abrogated; insisting, that the Americans
would consider it only as an inlet to others; and that the repeal of all the
^^st, without this, would answer no good purpose. The event showed that their
opinion was well founded. The Americans opposed the tea tax with the same
violence as they had done all the rest: and at last, on the ^^ws that salaries
had been settled on the justices of the superior court of Massachusetts Bay,
the governor was addressed on the subject; the measure was conlemned in the
strongest terms; and a committee, selected out of the several districts of the
colony; appointed to inquire into it.

The new assembly proceeded in the most formal manner to disavow the supremacy
of the British legislature; and accused the parliament of Britain of having
violated the natural rights of the Americans in a number of lastances. Copies
of the transactions of this assembly were transmitted to every town in
Massachusetts, exhorting the inhabitants to rouse themselves, and exert every
nerve in opposition to the iron hand of oppression, which was daily tearing the
choicest fruits from the fair tree of liberty.

The rigorous execution of the smuggling laws, gave occasion to the first
daring act of violence, which might, with propriety, be called an act of
hostility against government. This happened at Providence in Rhode Island,
where, on the 10th of June 1772, the Gaspee schooner was burnt, and the captain
wounded by a mob, exasperated at the vigilance he had manifested in the
execution of his office. A reward of L.500 was offered for the discovery of
those concerned; but so agreeable was it to the universal voice of the people,
that not one man was found to accept the offered reward.

The disturbances were greatly heightened in Massachusetts by an accidental
discovery that Mr. Hutchinson, governor of Massachusetts Bay, had written
several confidential letters to people in power in England, complaining of the
behavior of the province, recommending vigorous measures against them, and,
among other things, asserting, that "there must be an abridgment of what is
called British liberty." Letters of this kind had fallen into the hands of Dr.
Benjamin Franklin, the agent for the colony at London. They were immediately
transmitted to Boston, where the assembly was sitting, by whom they were said
before ^he governor, who was thus reduced to a very mortifying situation
Losing every idea of respect or friendship for him as their governor, they
instantly dispatched a petition to the king, requesting him to remove the
governor and deputy governor from their places; 1773. June 23.
but to this they not only received no favorable answer, but the petition
itself was declared groundless and scandalous.

The system of committees of correspondence, Nov. 22.
which prevailed in the years 1765 and 1767, was revived in Boston, at this
eventful period; by which a reciprocal exchange of intelligence was kept up,
throughout the whole colonies. The British ministry seem to have been totally
inattentive to the former operations of the committees of correspondence,
occasioned by the stamp act, while their predecessors were in office; else they
might easily have foreseen the unanimous and vigorous opposition their measures
would meet with in the present case. But the weakness of public measures was
equally apparent in the administration of affairs in Britain, as in those
re^ting to America; as will be shown in the next chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
A brief Account of the Political Disputes which convulsed Great Britain, from
the beginning of the Reign of George III. till the Commencement of Hostilities
in America.

NOTWITHSTANDING the just grounds of complaint which led the Americans to
oppose with vigor, the arbitrary designs of the British ministry, it would be
difficult to account satisfactorily for their regular and steady opposition,
from the beginning of the disputes, and even after hostilities commeneed,
without taking a view of the dissensions which agitated Britain during the same
period.

The feuds and animosities which the Middlesex election excited, gave occasion
to sudden changes of the ministry, and resolutions of parliament dangerous to
the liberties of the people; which, probably, would never else have taken
place. As this election is the great hinge upon which the political events of
the reign of George III. for many years turned, every material circumstance
relating to that singular transaction, and even to Mr. Wilkes, the principal
agent concerned in it, shall be particularly attended to, consistently with the
limits of this work.

Till the resignation of Mr. Pit, (October 9, 1761) no material change had
been made in the ministry during the first year of the reign of George III. It
continued nearly the same as it was at the death of the late king; with only
this difference, that lord Bute, who was supposed to be a particular favorite
of the present king, had been introduced into the cabinet, and appointed
secretary of state in the room of the earl of Holderness. A more important
alteration took place in 1762. An opinion had been long entertained, at least
it was industriously propagated by certain persons, that the Pelham family had
been as complete masters of the cabinet during the latter years of the last
reign, as ever the Marlborough family was, during a great part of that of queen
Anne. A resolution, it is said, was therefore taken to get rid of the Pelhams
and all their connections. The duke of Newcastle was made so uneasy in his
situation, that he resigned his post of first lord of the treasury, and was
succeeded by the earl of Bute. This gave occasion to a most furious paper war
between the friends and adherents of these two noblemen, and naturally tended
to revive in the kingdom, that spirit of party, which, during the successful
administration of Mr. Pit, had, in a great measure, been laid asleep. Dr.
Goldsmith observes, that the earl of Bute was believed to be a man of ability
and even of virtue, but deficient in that easiness of address and those
engaging manners, without which no minister can ever expect to be long popular
in England. As he was a man of taste and learning, had he continued groom of
the state, as he was at the time of the king's accession, he might have easily
passed for the Macenas of the age. Every favor which the king might have
bestowed upon men of letters, would have been considered as originating from
his advice; whereas, by plunging into politics, for which, as he was not bred
to them, perhaps he was but ill qualified, he at once destroyed the peace of
his own mind, diminished for a while the popularity of his sovereign, and
distracted and perplexed the councils of his country.

The cry of favouritism, which was raised against lord Bute, immediately upon
his introduction into the ministry, had hitherto been kept up with the utmost
virulence and animosity. Having completed the peace in 1763, he resigned his
place, as first lord of the treasury, in April, in the same year, and was
succeeded by Mr. George Grenville.

The spirit of venality and corruption was remarkably prevalent at this time in
Britain. Licentiousness and riot were become general among the lower ranks; and
tumults, and a spirit of disorder, affected most parts of the kingdom.

During the earl of Bute's administration, the English populace resigned all
their thinking faculties, and even their senses, to the indefatigable
incendiaries of a bold and insolent faction, who were overawed by no authority,
and restrained by no principle; till at length the animosity to the Scotch in
general, and the aversion to the minister in particular, proceeded to an
amazing degree of infatuation.

The jealousy of the English nation, toward their fellow subjects on the other
side of the Tweed, had discovered itself occasionally ever since the union of
the crowns; and the ancient animosities had been kept alive by the two
successive rebellions which began in Scotland; but the common grudge was
founded upon the success of the Scotch, who had established themselves in
different parts of England, and risen from very small beginnings, to wealth and
consideration. In a word, the English looked upon them with an evil eye, as
interlopers in commerce and competitors for reputation. It was not without
murmuring that they had seen them aspire to the first offices in the law, the
army, and the navy; but they were exasperated to find a Sent at the head of the
English treasury, and the chief administration of the kingdom in his hands.
These were topics on which the writers in the opposition did not fail to
expatiate. They revived and retailed with peculiar virulence, all the
calumnies, ancient and modern, that ever had been uttered against the Scotch
nation, some of them so gross and absurd, that they could not possibly obtain
credit but among the very dregs of the people. They enlarged upon their craft,
dissimulation, deceit, and national partiality. They denounced the dangers that
threatened the interests of Old England, from the great numbers of those
northern adventurers, who had wriggled themselves into all the different
departments of civil and military institution; and they insisted upon the
disgrace of acquiescing under the government of a North Briton, a Stuart,
allied by blood to the pretender, who had expelled from court the best friends
of the protestant succession, associated himself with avowed tories, who
prostituted the offices, and squandered away the wealth of England on worthless
favorites of his own country. These bitter remonstrances, in which no regard
was paid either to truth or decency, they reinforced with feigned
circumstances, and forged lists of North Britons gratified with pensions,
appointed to places, or promoted in the service, till at length the populace
were incensed even to the verge of insurrection. Had the natives of North
Britain proved equally combustible, the flames of civil war would have
certainly been kindled; and, in that case, the ruin of a mighty nation might
have been effected by two or three infamous emissaries, equally desperate and
obscure, who either prostituted their pens to a party for hire, or exercised
their talents for abuse, in hope of being bought off by the minister.

All the most virulent papers against government, in former days, seemed to be
but decent compositions compared to those which were circulated through the
nation, after the resignation of Mr. Pit. Had the promulgators of the first
defamatory libels that appeared against the king and his family been
apprehended, and punished in the ordinary course of law proceedings, the
section would have found it a very difficult task, in the sequel, to engage
either printer or publisher in their service; and, in all probability, the evil
would have been crushed in the bud; but they were emboldened by impunity to
proceed in their career, to confirm their calumnies by unrefuted falsehoods,
and to give rein to the most audacious scurrility; until the minds of the
people were so deeply and universally tainted, that it became hazardous to call
the libeliers to account, and very doubtful whether a jury could be found in
the capital, that would surrender those new idols to the castigation of the law.

The new ministry showed the same contempt and disregard of all the abuse
offered to their persons, in the papers and pamphlets published against them,
as their predecessors in office had done, 1763.
although their names were printed at full length in many audacious libels;
especially in a periodical paper called the North Briton. Mr. John Wilkes,
member of parliament for Aylesbury, was at very little pains to conceal that he
was the author of this paper, which in point of wit, language or argument,
could never have attracted the attention of the public, had not the minds of
the people, by the arts of faction, been inflamed to a degree of madness.
Wilkes was lively, but superficial; and, in his morals, he was said to be
dissipated even to profligacy. He had more than once applied to the new
ministers for a post that might repair his shattered fortunes; but
prepossessions, arising from his character, were so strong against him, that
failing of success, he resolved, as he openly declared, to try how far it was
practicable to carry the licentiousness of writing, under pretext of exercising
the liberty of the press. Perceiving the next to stoical indifference of the
ministry with regard to their own persons, he aimed his abuse at the king
himself, and in the forty fifth number of his paper, animadverted upon the
king's speech in parliament, with an acrimony so indecent toward his majesty's
probity as well as person, that the ministers, at length, gave orders for
seizing the printer, and all concerned in the publication. These orders were
contained in a warrant of a general nature, under the hand of lord Halifax,
directed to four of his majesty's messengers, commanding them to apprehend,
without specifying their names, the authors, printers, and publishers of that
seditious and treasonable paper; and the publisher, George Kearsley, being
accordingly apprehended, his examination afforded sufficient ground for fixing
upon Mr. Wilkes as the author. This warrant, though afterward pronounced to be
illegal by a lord chief justice, was, in point of form and substance, the same
that had always been issued by former secretaries of state, and even by Mr.
Pit and the duke of Newcastle, whose party now openly contended, that it was
subversive of the British constitution.

Mr. Wilkes was thereupon committed prisoner to the tower, 1763. April 30.
and his papers being sealed up in presence of the under secretary of state and
the solicitor of the treasury, were seized.

Mr. Wilkes, upon bringing his habeas corpus before the court of common pleas,
was released from the tower by a decision of that court, the judges of which
unanimously declared that privilege of parliament extended to the case of
writing a libel.

In the mean time the personal veracity of Mr. Wilkes received a severe shock,
by his being called upon, in the public papers, to make good an assertion he
^ad advanced in his speech at the court of common ^^^as, that corrupt offers
had been made to him by the government; and to declare when, how, or by whom
^^ch offers were made, and what they were? Neither Mr. Wilkes, nor any of his
friends, thought proper to (...) any notice of this peremptory challenge,
though (...) repeated, and affecting his moral character in the ^ost sensible
manner.

When the affair, in consequence of his majesty's message, came under
consideration in the house of commons, it admitted of great debates. It was
strongly ^ged by the gentlemen in the opposition, that no pe^ter liberties had
been taken by the author of the ^^o^ious paper, with regard to his majesty's
speech, ^an what had been common upon former occasions of (...) same kind; and
that the speech of the king had ^^^er been considered in any other light than
that of the minister, and had always been treated with equal freedom. The
house, however, was of opinion, that under no former opposition such abusive
terms, or so personally disrespectful to majesty, had ever been made use of;
and therefore it was resolved by a great majorty, "That the paper, entitled the
North Briton, No. 45, is a false, scandalous, and seditious libel, containing
expressions of the most unexampled insolence and contumely toward his majesty,
the grossest aspersions upon both houses of parliament, and the most audacious
defiance of the authority of the whole legislature; and most manifestly tending
to alienate the affections of the people from his majesty, to withdraw them
from their obedience to the laws of the realm, and to excite them to traitorous
insurrections." The house likewise determined that the privilege of parliament
did not extend to the case of writing such a libel. A number of members spoke
and voted against the latter resolution, only because they thought it was a
matter founded in the constitution, independent of all party consideration.
Soon after Mr. Wilkes fought a duel with Mr. Martin, a member of parliament,
and late secretary to the treasury, whose character he had attacked in his
writings, in the most barefaced manner. In this engagement both parties behaved
like men of courage; but Mr. Wilkes was wounded in the body so dangerously,
that he was in no condition to appear in the house of commons when the matter
of his complaint of breach of privilege was to be heard.

Whilst this matter was depending, the sheriffs of London, the hon. Mr. Harley
and Richard Blunt, 1763. Nov. 19.
esquire. endeavored to execute the order of the two houses of parliament, by
burning the 45th number of the North Briton, by the hands of the common
hangman, at the Royal Exchange; but the mob proved so riotous on this occasion,
that they rescued the paper from the executioner before it was consumed, pelted
the constables and other peace officers, and even put Mr. sheriff Harley in
danger of his life.

The walls of parliament as yet contained the debates on the whole affair,
which was of far greater importance than the public at first apprehended. The
resolutions of neither house could determine the great points depending on it,
for those were cognizable only in a court of law. In the July preceding, the
journeymen printers, who had been seized and confined on suspicion of printing
the North Briton, brought actions against the messengers on that account. On
the first action that was tried, the plaintiff recovered 300 l. damages, and
200 l. was allowed to each of the others, wh^ (...) thirteen in number. It
appeared from those tri^^, that the plaintiffs were not really guilty of the
fact (...) which they had been seized. That the messengers had been misled by
the general terms of the warrant; and that room was left for contesting their
validity. At the same time the cooler and more judicious part (...) the public
thought the damages, considering the (...) and circumstances of the parties,
were exorbitant; (...) that the verdicts (...) their favor would only serve
(...) exasperate the ministers, when it should be their (...) to prosecute. Mr.
Wilkes, who no doubt was ^^ghly encouraged by the verdicts the printers had
ob^^ned, brought his action likewise against the late sectary of state for
seizing his papers; and, on the 6th (...) December, after a hearing of near
fifteen hours before lord chief justice Pratt, and a special jury, in the ^^^rt
of common pleas, he obtained a verdict, with ^00 l. damages, and costs of suit.
In the charge giv^^ on this occasion by the judge to the jury, his lordship
^^nounced the warrant under which Mr. Wilkes was ^^^ed, illegal; but very
modestly submitted his opinion (...) the other judges and the house of peers,
ending his ^^^ech with the following remarkable words: "If these ^^gher
jurisdictions should declare my opinion erroneous, I submit, as will become me,
and kiss the rod; but I must say, I shall always consider it as a rod of iron
(...) the chastisement of the people of Great Britain."

In the month of January, 1764, Mr. Wilkes was expelled the house of commons;
1764.
and not appearing to the indictments preferred against (...) for publishing
the North Briton, and for some other charges, he was at last run to an utlawry;
and the (...); which he had commenced against the secretaries (...) state for
false imprisonment, fell of course to the ^^ound.

Hitherto the demerits of Mr. Wilkes, whatever private irregularities of life
he might have been accused of, were considered by the public only politically,
and he had many advocates among the virteous, well disposed part of mankind;
when, all of a sudden, a storm broke out upon him in the house of peers which
exposed him in a most unchristian and immoral light. One of the principal
secretaries of ^a^e accused Mr. Wilkes, in the house of lords, of violating the
most sacred ties of religion as well ^^decency, by printing in his own house, a
book or pamphlet, entitled, "A^ Essay on Woman, with notes or remarks." This
complaint could not have properly come before their lordships, had not the name
of a right reverend pre^^^ been most scurrilously introduced, as being the
author of the notes. The book itself, though printed with the utmost secresy,
had been communicated, through Mr. Wilkes's own inadvertency, to the secretary,
by a journeyman printer, who was possessed of a copy, and the very mention of
its contents struck the public with horror. The concern which the pretended
patriot had in printing and correcting the press, was proved beyond all
contradiction; and left upon the minds of the public a strong conviction of his
being the author also. Scarcely any defense was made for him by his friends,
and the house addressed his majesty to give orders that he should be
prosecuted; but neither this address, nor the prosecutions intended to be
brought against him for breach of privilege, had any other effect, than that of
greatly increasing the number of his enemies in the rational unprejudiced part
of the nation. However, many still remained his political friends, who detested
his profligate principles. General warrants were afterward declared to be
illegal by a resolution of both houses; and this, indeed, seems to be the chief
advantage resulting from this violent dispute between Mr. Wilkes and the
ministry.

The spirit of party, which was now so general as well as violent, was attended
with one very great inconvenience. It was productive of such a mutability in
public men, and consequently in public measures and counsels, that a new
ministry and new measures com^^nced almost with every new year. This naturally
^^ded to weaken the authority of government both at ^^^ne and abroad. Foreign
nations were averse to en^^^ into any close connection or alliance with a
people, ^^ose public measures were so very fluctuating; and (...) inferior
ranks of men in Britain lost all that rever^^^e and respect for their rulers
which is so necessary (...) the support of order and good government. The
^^enville administration was now forced to make way for that of the marquis of
Rockingham. The chief business of this ministry was to undo all that their
predecessors had done, 1765.
particularly appealing the stamp and cider acts; as on the other ^^^nd, all
that they now did, was, in its turn, undone (...) their successors in office.

In 1768, the parliament being dissolved, writs were ^^ed for electing a new
one. Mr. Wilkes, who had ^^ained abroad on outlaw ever since the year 1763,
(...) returned home, and even when the outlawry was in full force, offered
himself a candidate for the county of Middlesex, 1768.
for which he was chosen, in opposition to sir William Beauchamp Proctor, one
of the former members, by a very great majority. Great doubts were at first
entertained ^^^ther an outlaw could be chosen a member of par^^^ent; but so
many precedents were produced in the ^^mative, that the legality of the
practice was put be^^^d controversy. Being now secure, as he thought, (...) a
seat in parliament, Mr. Wilkes surrendered himself to the court of king's
bench, by whom the out^^wry was reversed, and he was sentenced to suffer an
imprisonment of two years, and to pay a fine of a thousand pounds. As he was
esteemed by many persons as a kind of martyr in the cause of public liberty, a
subscription was opened by some merchants of London, and other gentlemen of
property, for paying his fine, supporting him whilst in prison, and compounding
his debts, amounting to above twenty thousand pounds; and all these purposes
were, in the end, completely accomplished.

When the new parliament met, the people imagined that Mr. Wilkes would take
his seat along with the other members. In expectation of this, many of them
assembled in St. George's Fields, 1768. May 10.
near the king's bench prison, where he (...) confined, with a view of
conducting him to the house of commons. The furry justices soon came among
them, and the riot act was read; but the people not dispersing, the military
were called in, and were ordered, perhaps unadvisedly, to fire. Several persons
were slightly wounded, two or three mortally, and one was killed on the spot.

Lord Weymouth, one of the secretaries of state, sent a letter to the justices,
thanking them for their spirited conduct in this affair. Mr. Wilkes, who was no
incurious, nor, we may believe, unconcerned spectator of the whole scene, took
this opportunity of expressing his resentment against the ministry, whom he
regarded as the authors of all the persecutions he had suffered. He published
lord Weymouth's letter, with a few remarks of his own prefixed to it, in which
the termed the affair of St. George's Fields a horrid massacre; and this step
was either considered as a (...), or was made a pretense, for expelling him the
house: otherwise it became in a manner impossible to tell for what reason he
had been expelled. The two offenses for which this punishment had been
inflicted, were, the publication of the North Briton, and an obscen^ pamphlet,
called "An Essay on Woman." With respect to the former, he had been punished in
a preceding parliament, and it was contrary to law to try him for it a second
time. As to the latter, he received ^^tence for it from the house of lords in a
former parliament also; but these offenses were not esteemed magnizable by the
commons; and as for the comment (...) lord Weymouth's letter, it was as little
within their ^^^isdiction.

The freeholders of Middlesex, however, seem to have been of a very different
opinion from the commons; for they immediately and unanimously reelected him
their representative. This election was declar^^ void, and a new writ issued.
The freeholders still persevered in their former sentiments; and Mr. Wilkes
(...) elected a third time without opposition. A gentleman indeed, of the name
of Dingley, intended to have opposed him; but the popular current ran so ^trong
in favor of Mr. Wilkes, that he could not find a single person to put him in
nomination. This election was declared void, as well as the preceding; and
(...) the freeholders of Middlesex and the house of ^^mmons should go on
forever, the one in electing Mr. Wilkes, and the other in declaring his
election invalid, ^^^o^el Lutterel, son to lord Irnham, and a member of
^^^liament, was persuaded to vacate his seat by the acceptance of a nominal
place, and to offer himself as a candidate. He did so; and though he had only
296 votes, 1769.
and Mr. Wilkes 1143, yet he was declared in the house, by a great majority,
(...) be the legal member. The majority of the house maintained that expulsion
necessarily implied an incapability of sitting afterward. But most of the
prece^ents brought forth were not to the purpose; as happening either in times
of barbarity, or of internal insurrections in the kingdom. It was urged by the
mi^ority, that the power of the house of commons has never gone beyond
expulsion; nor is it proper^^ should, except in cases of bribery and
corruption. But if the house abuses its power, in the execution of this
privilege, by depriving the constituents of their power of reelecting the
expelled member, there is not any remedy against ministerial oppression, if
they can once prevail so far as to procure a majority in favor of the
expulsion of such members as may be obnoxious to them.

This vote of the house of commons was considered as a fatal blow to the
liberties of the people; at least to the right of election, the most vital and
essential part of those liberties. This poured poison into the political wound,
that rendered it perfectly incurable. The Middlesex election may hitherto be
regarded merely as a common controverted election, in which none but Mr. Wilkes
and his opponents were concerned. From this time forward it assumed a more
dignified air, a more important aspect. Instead of a private, it became a
national concern. A great part of the people took the alarm. They thought they
foresaw, in the destruction of the rights of the freeholders of Middlesex, the
utter ruin and subversion of their own. The consequence was, that petitions
first, and remonstrances afterward poured in from the different counties and
corporations in the kingdom. Many of these were of a very bold, and, as some
thought, of a most daring nature. They not only prayed for a dissolution of
parliament, but they even denied the legality of the present one, the validity
of its acts, and the obligation of the people to obey them. In a word, they
affected that the government was actually dissolved.

The ministry had now brought themselves into a must disagreeable dilemma. They
ought either not to have proceeded so far, 1770.
or they ought to have gone farther. They ought either not to have furnished
the people with a just cause, nor even with ^^^lausible pretense, for
presenting such remonstrances, or they ought to have punished them for daring
to present them. This, however, they did not think it prudent, nor perhaps even
safe, to attempt.

Some of the freeholders of Middlesex even attempted to carry their speculative
principles into practice. They refused to pay the land tax; and the matter was
brought to a trial. But the jury determined, that they were obliged to pay it;
and, in so doing, they discovered more firmness and fortitude than their
rulers. This, however, was but a poor compensation for the want of courage and
consistency in the ministers. It was like endeavoring to support a mighty arch
with a feeble ^^ttress, when the key stone, that held it together, was removed.

In the course of this year a very important act was passed for regulating the
proceedings of the house of commons in controverted elections. 1770.
These used formerly to be determined by the house at large, and by a majority
of votes, so that they were considered merely as party matters, and the
strongest party, which was always that of the ministry, was sure to carry the
point, without paying the least regard to the merits of the question on either
side. By the bill which was now passed, called the Grenville act, they were
ordered for the future to be decided by a committee of thirteen members, chosen
by lot, and under the sacred obligation of an oath; and since the enacting of
this law, no well grounded complaint has been made against the impartiality of
the decisions.

Though the present ministry was supposed to have been originally recommended
to his majesty by lord Chatham, and to have been guided for some time, in all
their measures, by his advice, yet, as they had of late affected to stand upon
their own bottom, and neglected to consult him as usual, he entirely abandoned
them, and resigned his office as keeper of the privy seal, which was bestowed
on the earl of Bristol. Mr. Burke, in his speech on American taxation, April
19, 177^, gives a humourous account of lord Chatham's situation, whilst this
ministry were in power. After an ironical description of the inco^gruous mass
of which it was composed, he says, "In consequence of this arrangement, having
put so much the larger part of his (...) in power, the confusion was such, that
his own principles could not possibly have any effect, or influence in the
conduct of affairs. If ever he fell into a fit of the go^^, or if any other
cause withdrew (...) from public cares, principles directly the contrary were
sure to ^^^dominate. When he had ex^cuted his plan, he had not an inch of
ground to stand upon. When he had accomplished his scheme of administration, he
was no longer a minister. When his face (...) hid but for a moment, his whole
system was on a wide sea, without chart or compass. The gentlemen, his
particular friends, who, wi^^ the names of various departments of ministry,
were admitted, to seem, as if they acted a part under him, with a modesty that
becomes all men, and with a (...) in him, which was justified even in (...)
extravagance by his superior abilities, had never, in any instance, ^^^umed
upon any opinion of their own. Deprived of his guilding influence, they were
whi^led about, the sport of every gust; and eastly driven, into any port; and
as those who joined with them in manning the vessel, were the most directly
opposite to his opinion^, measur^^ and character, and far the most artful and
most powerful of the set they easily prevailed, so as to seine upon the vacant,
unoccupied, and derelict minds of his friends; and instantly they turned the
vessel wholly out of the course of his policy. As if it were to insult as well
as betray him, even long before the close of the first session of his
administration, when every thing was publicly transacted, and with great parade
in his name, they made an act, declaring it highly just and expedient to raise
a revenue in America. ^ -- Dodsley's Annual Register, 1775.
His example was soon followed by the duke of Grafton, who was succeeded as
first lord of the treasury by lord North, and thus, unhappily for the nation,
was formed that ministry which began the American war.

Mr. Wilkes remained in prison during the full time to which he had been
sentenced. But though he still continued to be the darling of the populace,
their admiration was not attended with that violence and ^^roar which had
formerly marked their proceeding^: his importance diminished in proportion as
he was (...) longer persecuted by the ministry; and many of his friends, from
various causes, deserted him. Still, however, his influence was very extensive;
he was chosen one of the Aldermen of London, then sheriff, afterward lord
mayor, and at last fixed in the lucrative of^^^e of city chamberlain; in all
which departments he behaved so well, that his greatest enemies could never lay
hold of any part of his public character that could (...) accounted a fault, or
even represented in a disadvantageous light; and after a long succession of
annu^^ defeats, he triumphed at last, in the year 1782, in getting the
resolution, of the 17th of February, 1769, relative to the Middlesex election,
expunged from the ^^arnals of the house of commons.

The Middlesex election, though the spirit of petitioning, 1771.
had, in some measure subsided, still gave rise to some singular occurrences
that are well worthy of notice. A messenger of the house of commons, having
come into the city to seize a printer, for publishing the speeches of the
members, this last (...) for a constable, who carried both him and the
^^essenger, before Mr. Crosby, the lord mayor. That gentleman, together with
the aldermen Wilkes and ^^liver, not only discharged the printer, but required
the messenger to give bail to answer the complaint of the printer against him,
for daring to seize him in the ^^ity without the order of a magistrate; and
upon his ^efusing to do so, they signed a warrant for his com^^titment to
prison; upon which he consented to give bail, and was suffered to depart. The
commons, fired (...) this contempt of their authority, as they thought it,
ordered the lord mayor and two aldermen, to appear before them. Mr. Crosby and
Mr. Oliver, as members of the house, attended in their place; but Mr. Wilkes
refused to appear, unless he might be permitted to take his seat for Middlesex.
1771, March 27.
The lord mayor and alderman Oliver were sent to the tower, where they
continued in confinement till the end of the session. Other orders were issued
for the attendance of Mr. Wilkes; but as it was well known that he would not
comply with them, the ministry could find no better method of getting rid of
this formidable adversary, than by appointing th^^ eighth day of April for his
attendance, at the same time that the house adjourned to the ninth.

Thus, all the efforts of the ministry, to extend the authority of parliament,
served only to show, that (...) power was really not to be dreaded, by any
subject who had spirit enough to contend with it.

Great Britain was in this manner divided into adverse factions, by the
rashness and pufillanimity of a succession of disjointed administrations; who
at the same time, and by the same means, plunged the nation into the fatal
dispute with her American colonies. Whilst the authority of government was thus
vilified and despised at home, can it be imagined that it was much reverenced
or respected abroad? Whilst it was openly insulted and brow beat in the very
metropolis, and under the eye of the legislature, could it be expected that it
should be able to maintain its usual force (...) vigor in the extreme parts of
the empire? The Americans could easily foresee, that, in resisting the unjust
stretche^ of parliamentary power, their cause would receive great support in
the mother country, from a strong party, who stood forward to resist the arm of
power, whether exercised by the ministry, or by the legislature. See
Goldsmith's History of England, and the Continuation of Hume's History, for the
preceding articles.
A number of this party acted from principle, but others were more influenced
by a spirit of opposition to the ministerial majority, than by a regard to the
constitutional liberties of either country.

CHAP. XVIII.
East India Company empowered to export their own Teas -- The Ten thrown into
the Sea at Boston -- Proceedings of the British Parliament -- Boston Port Bill
-- Massachusetts Bay Bill -- Bill for the Administration of Justice -- Quebeck
Bill -- Chief Justice Oliver -- General Gage arrives in Boston -- Solemn League
and Covenant -- Measures for holding a general Congress -- Boston Ne^k
Fortified -- Inhabitants of Boston reduced to great Distress -- Preparations in
the Colonies for Resistance -- Proceedings of Congress -- Petition to the King,
etc. -- Proceedings of Parliament -- Violent Debates on American Affairs --
Conciliatory Motion by lord Chatham, rejected -- Coercive Measures resolved on
-- Lord North's Conciliatory Plan, called his Olive Branch -- Other
Conciliatory Plans rejected -- Petitions against the obnoxious Acts -- Extent
and Importance of the American Trade -- Memorial from the Assembly of New York,
rejected -- Dr. Franklin's fruitless Endeavors to promote a Con^iliation -- He
returns to America.

GREAT Britain was thus rent by internal dissentions, and factions, whilst
succeeding administrations, with equal weakness and obstinacy, endeavored to
establish parliamentary supremacy over the colonies. Anxious to establish the
system, and at (...) same time afraid to encounter opposition effectively,
they conceded enough to weaken their authority, and yet not enough to satisfy
the colonists. And these causes had operated with redoubled force, upon every
renewal of the dispute.

The declaratory act, and the reservation of the duty upon tea, left the cause
of contention in full force, but the former was only a claim on paper, and the
latter might be evaded by refusing to purchase any tea, on which the
parliamentary tax was imposed. The colonists, therefore, conceiving that their
commerce might be renewed, without establishing any precedent, injurious to
their liberties, relaxed in their associations, in every particular, except
tea, and immediately recommenced the importation of all other articles of
merchandise. Britain might now have closed the dispute forever, and honorably
receded, without a formal relinquishment of her claims. Many hoped that the
contention between the two countries was finally closed. In all the provinces
excepting Massachusetts, appearances seemed to favor that opinion; but in that
province, the unhappy quarrel which has been already mentioned, between the
people and the military force there stationed, proved a fruitful source of
complaint. The continuance of a board of commissioners in Boston, the
constituting the governors and judges of the province independent of the
people, were likewise constant causes of irritation.

The only reason assigned by the British minister for retaining the tea duty,
was to support the authority of parliament; at the same time, he acknowledged
it to be as anticommercial a tax, as any of those that had been repealed upon
that principle. The East India company, feeling the bad effects of the colonial
smuggling trade, by the large quantity of tea which remained in their ware
houses unfold, requested the repeal of the three pence per pound in America,
and offered, that on its being complied with, government should retain six
pence in the pound on the exportation. Thus the company presented the happiest
opportunity that could have been offered for honorably removing the cause of
difference with America. This afforded an opening for doing justice without
infringing the claims on either side. The minister was requested and entreated,
by a gentleman of great weight in the company, and a member of parliament, to
embrace the opportunity; but it was obstinately rejected.

New contrivances were set on foot, to introduce the tea attended with the
three penny duty, into all the colonies. Various intrigues and solicitations
were used to induce the East India company to undertake this rash and foolish
business. It (...) protested against, as contrary to the principle of the
company's monopoly; but the power of the ministry prevailed, and the
insignificant duty of three pence per pound on tea, was doomed to be the fatal
bane of contention between Great Britain and her colonies.

The Americans perceiving that the tax was thus likely to be enforced, whether
they would or not, determined to take every possible method to prevent the tea
from being landed, as well knowing that it would be impossible to hinder the
sale, should the commodity once be brought on shore. For this purpose, the
people assembled in great numbers, forcing those to whom the tea was consigned
to resign their offices, and to promise solemnly never to resume them; and
committees were appointed to examine the accounts of merchants, and make public
tests, declaring such as would not take them, enemies to their country. And
this was no empty menace, but pregnant with certain ruin to their property, and
the grossest indignity to their persons. Nor was this behavior confined to the
colony of Massachusetts Bay; the rest of the provinces entered into the contest
with the same warmth, and manifested the same resolution to oppose this
invasion of their rights.

In the midst of this confusion, three ships laden with tea, arrived in Boston;
but so much were the captains alarmed at the disposition which seemed to
prevail among the people, that they offered, providing they could obtain the
proper discharges from the tea consignees, custom house, and governor, to
return to Britain without landing their cargoes. The parties concerned,
however, though they durst not order the tea to be landed, refused to grant the
discharges required. The ships, therefore, would have been obliged to remain in
the harbor; but the people, apprehensive that if they remained there, the tea
would be landed in small quantities and disposed of in spite of every endeavor
to prevent it, resolved to destroy it at once. This resolution was executed
with equal speed and secresy. The very evening after the above mentioned
discharges had been refused, about seventeen persons, dressed like Mohawk
Indians, boarded the ships, Dec. 16.
and threw into the sea their whole cargoes, consisting of 342 chests of tea;
after which they retired, without making any farther disturbance, or doing any
other damage. No tea was destroyed in other places, though the same spirit was
every where manifested. At Philadelphia, the pilots were enjoined not to
conduct the vessels up the river; and at New York, though the governor caused
some tea to be landed, under the protection of a man of war, he was obliged to
deliver it up to the custody of the people to prevent its being sold.

The destruction of the tea at Boston, was the immediate prelude to the
disasters attending civil discord. Government finding themselves every where
insulted and despised, resolved to enforce their authority, by all possible
means; and as Boston had been the principal scene of the riots and outrages, it
was determined to pun^ish that town in an exemplary manner. Parliament was
acquainted, by a message from his majesty, with the undutiful behavior of the
city of Boston, 1774, March 7.
as well as of all the colonies, recommending at the same time, the most
vigorous and spirited exertions to reduce them to obedience. The parliament, in
its address, promised a ready com^^iance; and, indeed, the Americans seemed now
to have lost many of their partisans. It was proposed to ^^y a fine on the town
of Boston, equal to the price of ^^e ten which had been destroyed, and to shut
up its port by armed vessels until the refractory spirit of the ^habitants
should be subdued; which, it was thought, must quickly yield, as a total stop
would thus be put to their trade. The bill was strongly opposed on the same
grounds that the other had been; and it was pre^cted, that, instead of having
any tendency to reconcile or subdue the Americans, it would infallibly
exasperate them beyond any possibility of reconciliation. The petitions against
it, presented by the colony's agent, pointed out the same consequence in the
strongest terms, and in the most positive manner declared that the Americans
never would submit to it: but such was the ins^tuation, attending every rank
and degree of men, of more than one half of the nation, that it never was
imagined the Americans would dare to resist the parent state openly, but would
in the end submit implicitly to her commands. In this confidence, a third bill
was proposed for the impartial administration of justice on such persons as
might be employed in the suppression of riots and tumults in the province of
Massachusetts Bay. By this act it was provided, that should any persons acting
in that capacity be indicted for murder, and not able to obtain a fair trial in
the province, they might be sent by the governor to England, or to some other
colony, if necessary, to be tried for the supposed crime.

These three bills having passed so easily, the ministry proposed a fourth,
relative to the government of Canada; which, it was said, had not yet been
settled on any proper plan. By this bill the extent of that province was
greatly enlarged; its affairs were put under the direction of a council, in
which Roman Catholics were to be admitted; the Roman Catholic clergy were
secured in their possessions, and the usual perquisites from those of their own
profession. The council above mentioned were to be appointed by the crown; to
be removable at its pleasure; and to be invested with every legislative power,
excepting that of taxation.

No sooner were these laws made known in America, than they cemented the union
of the colonies almost beyond any possibility of dissolving it. The assembly of
Massachusetts Bay had passed a vote against the judges' accepting salaries from
the crown, and put the question, Whether they would accept them as usual from
the general assembly? Four answered in the affirmative; but Peter Oliver, the
chief justice, refused. A petition against him, and an accusation, were brought
before the governor; but the latter refused the accusation, and declined to
interfere in the matter; but as they still insisted for justice, against Mr.
Oliver, the governor thought proper to put an end to the matter by dissolving
the assembly.

In this situation of affairs, a new alarm was occasioned by the news of the
port bill, which had passed both houses, on the 25th of March, and reached
Boston on the 15th of May. This had been totally unexpected, and was received
with the most extravagant expressions of displeasure, among the people; and
whilst these continued, the new governor, May 19.
general Gage, arrived from England. He had been chosen to this office on
account of his being well acquainted in America, and generally agreeable to the
people; but human wisdom could not now point out a method by which the flame
could be allayed. The first act of his office as governor, was to remove the
assembly to Salem, a town 17 miles distant, in consequence of the late act.
When this was intimated to the assembly, they replied by requesting him to
appoint a day of public humiliation, for deprecating the wrath of Heaven, but
met with a refusal. When met at Salem, they passed a resolution, declaring the
necessity of a general congress, composed of delegates from all the provinces,
in order to take the affairs of the colonies at large into consideration; and
five gentlemen, remarkable for their opposition to the British measures, were
chosen to represent that of Massachusetts Bay. This was the basis of the
continental congress. They then proceeded with all expedition to draw up a
declaration, containing a detail of the grievances they labored under, and the
necessity of exerting themselves against lawless power; they set forth the
disregard shown to their petitions, and the attempts of Great Britain to
destroy their ancient constitution; and concluded with exhorting the
inhabitants of the colony to obstruct, by every method in their power, such
evil designs, recommending at the same time, a total renunciation of every
thing imported from Great Britain, till a redress of grievances could be
procured.

Intelligence of this declaration was carried to the governor, on the very day
it was completed; on which he dissolved the assembly. This was followed by an
address from the inhabitants of Salem in favor of those of Boston, and
concluding with these remarkable words: "By shutting up the port of Boston,
some imagine that the course of trade might be turned hither, and to our
benefit; but nature, in the formation of our harbor, forbids our becoming
rivals in commerce with that convenient mart; and were it otherwise, we must be
dead to every idea of justice, lost to all feelings of humanity, could we
indulge one thought to seize on wealth, and ^aise our fortunes on the ruin of
our suffering neighbors."

It had been fondly hoped by the ministerial party, that the advantages which
other towns of the colony might derive from the annihilation of the trade of
Boston, would make them readily acquiesce in the measure of ^^utting up that
port, and rather rejoice in it than otherwise; but the words of the address
above mentioned seemed to preclude all hope of this kind; and subsequent
transactions soon manifested it to be totally vain. No sooner did intelligence
arrive of the remaining bills, passed in the session of 1774, than the cause of
Boston became the cause of all the colonies. The port bill had already
occasioned violent commotions throughout them all. It had been reprobated in
provincial meetings, and resistance even to the last had been recommended
against such oppression. In Virginia, the first of June, the day on which the
port of Boston was to be shut up, was held a^ a day of humiliation, and a
public int^^cession in favor of America was enjoined. The style of the prayer
enjoined at this time was, that "God would give the people one heart and one
mind, firmly to oppose every invasion of the American rights." The Virginians,
however, did not content themselves with acts of religion. They recommended in
the strongest manner a general congress of all the colonies, as fully persuaded
that an attempt to tax any colony in an arbitrary manner was in reality an
attack upon them all, and must ultimately end in the ruin of them all.

The provinces of New York and Pennsylvania, however, were less sanguine than
the rest, being so closely connected in the way of trade with Great Britain,
that the giving it up entirely, appeared a matter of the most serious
magnitude, and not to be thought of but after every other method had failed.
The intelligence of the remaining bills respecting Boston, however, s^read a
fresh alarm throughout the con^inent, and fixed those who had seemed to be the
most wavering. The proposal of giving up all commerical intercourse with
Britain was again proposed; contributions for the inhabitants of Boston were
raised in every quarter; and they every day received addresses commending them
for the heroic courage with which they sustained their calamity.

The Bostonians on their part were not wanting in their endeavors to promote
the general cause. An agreement was framed, which, in imitation of former
times, they called a Solemn League and Covenant. By this the subscribers most
religiously bound themselves to break off all communication with Britain after
the expiration of the month of August ensuing, until the obnoxious acts were
repealed; at the same time they engaged neither to purchase nor use any goods
imported after that time, and to renounce all connection with those who did, or
who refused to subscribe to this covenant; threatening to publish the names of
the refractory; which at this time was a punishment by no means to be despised.
Agreements of a similar kind were almost instantaneously entered into
throughout all America. General Gage indeed attempted to counteract the
covenant by a proclamation, wherein it was declared an illegal and traitorous
combination, threatening with the pains of law such as subscribed or
countenanced it. But matters were too far gone for his proclamations to have
any effect. The Americans retorted the charge of illegality on his own
proclamation, and insisted that the law allowed subjects to meet in order to
consider of their grievances, and associate for relief from oppression.

Preparations were now made for holding the general congress so often proposed.
Philadelphia, as being the most central and considerable town, was pitched upon
for the place of its meeting. The delegates, of whom it was to be composed,
were chosen by the representatives of each province, and were in number from
two to seven for each colony, though no province had more than one vote. The
first congress which met at Philadelphia, Sept. 5.
on the 5th of September 1774, consisted of 51 delegates; nearly one half of
whom were lawyers. Gentlemen of that profession had acquired the confidence of
the inhabitants by their exertions in the common cause. The previous measures
in the respective provinces had been planned and carried into effect, more by
lawyers than by any other order of men. The novelty and importance of the
meeting excited an universal attention; and their transactions were such as
could not tend but to render them respectable. They chose Peyton Randolph their
president, and Charles Thomson their secretary. It was agreed, as one of the
rules of their doing business, that no entry should be made in their journals
of any propositions discussed before them, to which they did not finally assent.

The first act of congress was an approbation of the conduct of Massachusetts
Bay, and an exhortation to continue in the same spirit with which they had
begun. Supplies for the suffering inhabitants (whom the operation of the port
bill had reduced to great distress) were strongly recommended; and it was
declared, that in case of attempts to enforce the obnoxious acts by arms, all
America should join to assist the town of Boston; and, should the inhabitants
be obliged, during the course of hostilities, to remove farther up the country,
the losses they might sustain should be repaired at the public expense.

They next addressed general Gage by letter; in which, having stated the
grievances of the people of Massachusetts colony, they informed him of the
fixed and unalterable determination of all the other provinces to support their
brethren and to oppose the British acts of parliament; that they themselves
were appointed to watch over the liberties of America; and entreated him to
desist from military operations, lest such hostilities might be brought on
(...) would frustrate all hopes of reconciliation with the parent state.

The next step was to publish a declaration of their rights. These they summed
up in the rights belonging to Englishmen; and particularly insisted, that as
their distance rendered it impossible for them to be represented in the British
parliament, their provincial assemblies, with the governor appointed by the
king, constituted the only legislative power within each province. They then
marked the line between the supremacy (...) parliament, and the independency of
the colonial legislatures, by provisoes and restrictions, expressed in the
following words: "But from the necessity of the case, and a regard to the
mutual interests of both countries, we cheerfully consent to the operation of
such acts of the British parliament, as are bona fide restrained to the
regulation of our external commerce, for the purpose of securing the commerical
advantages of the whole empire to the mother country, and the commerical
benefits of its respective members, excluding every idea of taxation, internal
and external, for raising a revenue on the subjects of America without their
consent."

Doctor Ramsay remarks, that "this was the very hinge of the controversy. The
absolute unlimited supremacy of the British parliament, both in legislation and
taxation, was contended for on one side; while on the other, no farther
authority was conceded than such a limited legislation, with regard to external
commerce, as would combine the interest of the whole empire. In government, as
well as in religion, there are mysteries, from the close investigation of which
little advantage can be expected. From the unity of the empire it was
necessary, that some acts should extend over the whole. From the local
situation of the colonies it was equally reasonable that their legislatures
should at least in some matters be independent. Where the supremacy of the
first ended and the independency of the last began, was to the best informed a
puzzling question. Happy would it have been for both countries, had the
discussion of this doubtful point never been attempted."

They proceeded to reprobate the intention of each of the new acts of
parliament; and insisted on all the rights they had enumerated as being
unalienable, and what none could deprive them of. The Canada act they
particularly pointed out as being extremely inimical to the colonies, by whose
assistance it had been conquered; and they termed it "An act for establishing
the Roman Catholic religion in Canada, abolishing the equitable system of
English laws, and establishing a tyranny there." They further declared in
favor of a non importation and non consumption of British goods, until the
acts were repealed by which duties were imposed upon tea, coffee, wine, sugar,
and molasses, imported into America, as well as the Boston port act, and the
three others passed in the preceding session of parliament. The new regulations
against the importation and consumption of British commodities were then drawn
up with great solemnity; and they concluded with returning the warmest thanks
to those members of parliament who had, with so much zeal, though without any
success, opposed the obnoxious acts of parliament.

Their next proceedings were to frame a petition to the king, a memorial to the
British nation, an address to the colonies, and another to the inhabitants of
the province of Quebeck. They were all drawn up in a masterly manner, and ought
to have impressed the people of Britain with a more favorable idea of the
Americans than they could at that time be induced to entertain. The petition to
the king was as follows:

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,

WE your majesty's faithful subjects of the colonies of New Hampshire,
Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New
York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the counties of New Castle, ^ent and Sussex on
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina, in behalf of
ourselves and the inhabitants of these colonies, who have ^^puted us to
represent them in general congress, by ^^is our humble petition beg leave to
lay our grievances before the throne.

A standing army has been kept in these colonies ever since the conclusion of
the late war, without the consent of our assemblies; and this army, with a
considerable naval armament, has been employed to enforce the collection of
taxes.

The authority of the commander in chief, and under him of the brigadiers
generals, has in time of peace, been rendered supreme in all the civil
governments of America.

The commander in chief of your majesty's forces in North America, has, in time
of peace, been appointed governor of a colony.

The charges of usual offices have been greatly increased; and new, expensive
and oppressive offices have been multiplied.

The judges of admiralty and vice admiralty courts are empowered to receive
their salaries and fees, from the effects condemned by themselves.

The officers of the customs are empowered to break open and enter houses,
without the authority of any civil magistrate, sounded on legal information.

The judges of courts of common law have been made entirely dependent on one
part of the legislature for their salaries, as well as for the duration of
their commissions.

Counselors holding commissions during pleasure exercise legislative authority.

Humble and reasonable petitions from the representatives of the people have
been fruitless.

The agents of the people have been discountenanced, and governors have been
instructed to prevent the payment of their salaries.

Assemblies have been repeatedly and injuriously dissolved.

Commerce has been burdened with many useless and oppressive restrictions.

By several acts of parliament made in the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and
eighth years of your majesty's reign, duties are imposed on us, for the purpose
of raising a revenue; and the powers of admiralty and vice admiralty are
extended beyond their ancient limits; whereby our property is taken from us
without our consent, the trial by jury in many civil cases is abolished,
enormous forfeitures are incurred for slight offenses, vexatious informers are
exempted from paying damages, to which they are justly liable, and oppressive
security is required from owners before they are allowed to defend their rights.

Both houses of parliament have resolved that colonists may be tried in England
for offenses alleged to have been committed in America, by virtue of a statute
passed in the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth; and in consequence thereof
attempts have been made to enforce that statute.

A statute was passed in the twelfth year of your majesty's reign, directing
that persons charged with committing any offense therein described, in any
place out of the realm, may be indicted and tried for the same, in any shire or
county within the realm, whereby inhabitants of these colonies may, in sundry
cases by that statute made capital, be deprived of a trial by their (...) of
the vicinage.

In the last session of parliament an act was passed for blocking up the
harbor of Boston; another, empowering the governor of Massachusetts Bay to
send persons indicted for murder in that province to another colony, or even to
Great Britain for trial, whereby such offenders may escape legal punishment; a
third, for al^ering the chartered constitution of government in that province;
and a fourth, for extending the limits of Quebeck, abolishing the English, and
restoring the French laws, whereby great numbers of British freemen are
subjected to the latter; and establishing an absolute government, and the Roman
Catholic religion, throughout those rast regions that border on the westerly
and northerly boundaries of the free, protestant, English settlements; and a
fifth, for the better providing suitable quarters for officers and soldiers in
his majesty's service in North America.

To a sovereign who glories in the name of Briton, the bare recital of these
acts must, we presume, justify the loyal subjects who fly to the foot of the
throne, and implore his clemency for protection against them.

From this destructive system of colony administration, adopted since the
conclusion of the last war, have flowed those distresses, dangers, fears and
jealousies, that overwhelm your majesty's dutiful colonists with affliction;
and we defy our most subtle and inveterate enemies to trace the unhappy
differences between Great Britain and these colonies, from an earlier period,
or from other causes than we have assigned.

Had they proceeded on our part from a restless levity of temper, unjust
impulses of ambition, or artful suggestions of seditious persons, we should
merit the opprobious terms frequently bestowed upon us by those we revere. But
so far from promoting innovations, we have only opposed them; and can be
charged with no offense, unless it be one to receive injuries and be sensible
of them.

Had our Creator been pleased to give us existence in a land of slavery, the
sense of our condition might have been mitigated by ignorance and habit. But
thanks be to his adorable goodness, we are born the heirs of freedom, and ever
enjoyed our rights under the auspices of your royal ancestors, whose family was
seated on the British throne, to rescue and secure a pious and gallant nation
from the popery and despotism of a superstitious and inexorable tyrant.

Your majesty, we are confident, justly rejoices, that your title to the crown
is thus founded on the title of your people to liberty; and therefore we doubt
not but your royal wisdom must approve the sensibility, that teaches your
subjects anxiously to guard the blessings they received from divine Providence,
and thereby to prove the performance of that compact, which elevated the
illustrious house of Brunswick to the imperial dignity it now possesses.

The apprehension of being degraded into a state of servitude, from the
preeminent rank of English freemen, while our minds retain the strongest love
of liberty, and clearly foresee the miseries preparing for us and our
posterity, excites emotions in our breasts, which, though we cannot describe,
we should not wish to conceal. Feeling as men, and thinking as subjects, in the
manner we do, silence would be disloyalty. By giving this faithful information,
we do all in our power to promote the great objects of your royal ^ares, the
tranquillity of your government, and the welfare of your people.

Duty to your majesty, and regard for the preservation of ourselves and our
posterity, the primary obligations of nature and society, command us to entreat
your royal attention. And as your majesty enjoys the signal distinction of
reigning over freemen, we ^^prehend the language of freemen cannot be
displeasing.

Your royal indignation, we hope, will rather fall on those designing and
dangerous men, who, daringly in^^^posing themselves between your royal person
and your faithful subjects, and for several years past inces^^atly employed to
dissolve the bonds of society, by ^^using your majesty's authority,
misrepresenting your American subjects, and prosecuting the most desperate and
irritating projects of oppression, have at length compelled us, by the force of
accumulated injuries, ^o severe to be any longer tolerable, to disturb your
majesty's repose by our complaints.

These sentiments are extorted from hearts, that much more willingly would
bleed in your majesty's service. Yet so greatly have we been misrepresented,
that a necessity has been alleged of taking our property from us without our
consent, "to defray the expenses of the administration, the support of civil
government, and the defense, protection and security of the colonies."

But we beg leave to assure your majesty that such provision has been and will
be made for defraying the two first articles, as has been and shall be judged
by the legislatures of the several colonies, just and suitable to their
respective circumstances. And for the defense, protection and security of the
colonies, their militia, if properly regulated, as they earnestly desire may
immediately be done, would be fully sufficient, at least in times of peace; and
in case of war, your faithful colonists will be ready and willing, as they have
ever been when constitutionally required, to demonstrate their loyalty to your
majesty, by exerting their most strenuous efforts in granting supplies and
raising forces. Yielding to no British subjects in affectionate attachment to
your majesty's person, family and government; we too dearly prize the privilege
of expressing that attachment by those proofs, that are honorable to the
prince who receives them, and to the people who give them, ever to resign it to
any body of men upon earth.

Had we been permitted to enjoy, in quiet, the inheritance left us by our
forefathers, we should at this time, have been peaceably, cheerfully and
usefully employed in recommending ourselves, by every testimony of devotion, to
your majesty, and of veneration to the state from which we derive our origin.

But though now exposed to unexpected and unnatural scenes of distress by a
contention with that nation, in whose parental guidance on all important
affairs, we have hitherto, with filial reverence, constantly trusted, and
therefore can derive no instruction in our present unhappy and perplexing
circumstances from a^y former experience; yet we doubt not, the purity of our
intention, and the integrity of our conduct, will justify us at the grand
tribunal, before which all mankind must submit to judgment.

We ask but for peace, liberty and safety. We wish not a diminution of the
prerogative, nor do we solicit the grant of any new right in our favor. Your
royal authority over us, and our connection with Great Britain, we shall always
carefully and zealously endeavor to support and maintain.

Filled with sentiments of duty to your majesty, and of affection to our parent
state, deeply impressed by our education, and strongly confirmed by our reason,
and anxious to evince the sincerity of these dispositions, we present this
petition only to obtain redress of grievances, and relief from fears and
jealousies, occasioned by the system of statutes and regulations adopted since
the close of the late war, for raising a revenue in America; extending the
powers of courts of admiralty and vice admiralty; trying persons in Great
Britain for offenses alleged to be committed in America; affecting the province
of Massachusetts Bay; and altering the government, and extending the limits of
Quebeck; by the abolition of which system, the harmony between Great Britain
and these colonies, so necessary (...) the happiness of both, and so ardently
desired by the latter, and the usual intercourse, will be immediately restored.

In the magnanimity and justice of your majesty and parliament we confide for a
redress of our other grievances, trusting, that when the causes of our
apprehensions are removed, our future conduct will prove us not unworthy of the
regard we have been accustomed, in our happier days, to enjoy.

For, appealing to that Being who searches thoroughly the hearts of his
creatures, we solemnly profess, that our councils have been influenced by no
other motive than a dread of impending danger.

Permit us then, most gracious sovereign, in the name of all your faithful
people in America, with the utmost humility, to implore you, for the honor of
Almighty God, whose pure religion our enemies are undermining; for your glory,
which can be advanced only by rendering your subjects happy, and keeping them
united; for the interests of your family, depending on an adherence to the
principles that enthroned it; for the safety and welfare of your kingdoms and
dominions, threatened with almost unavoidable dangers and distresses -- that
your majesty, as the loving father of your whole people, connected by the same
bonds of law, loyalty, faith and blood, though dwelling in various countries,
will not suffer the transcendent relation formed by these ties to be farther
violated in uncertain expectation of effects, that if attained, never can
compensate for the calamities through which they must be gained.

We, therefore, most earnestly beseech your majesty, that your royal authority
and interposition may be used for our relief; and that a gracious answer may be
given to this petition.

That your majesty may enjoy every felicity through a long and glorious reign
over loyal and happy subjects, and that your descendants may inherit your
prosperity and dominions till time shall be no more, is, and always will be,
our sincere and fervent prayer.

All this time the disposition of the people had corresponded with the warmest
wishes of congress. The first of June had been kept as a fast, not only
throughout Virginia, where it was first proposed, but through the whole
continent. Contributions for the distresses of Boston had been raised
throughout America, and people of all ranks seemed to be particularly touched
with them. Even those who seemed to be most likely to derive advantages from
them, took no opportunity, as has been already instanced in the case of Salem.
The inhabitants of Marblehead also showed a noble example of magnanimity in the
present case. Though situated in the neighborhood of Boston, and most likely
to derive benefit from their distresses, they did not attempt to take any
advantage, but generously offered the use of their harbor to the Bostonians,
as well as their wharfs and warehouses, free of all expense. In the mean time
the British forces at Boston were continually increasing in number, which
greatly augmented the general jealousy and disaffection; the country were ready
to rise at a moment's warning; and the experiment was made by giving a false
alarm that the communication between the town and country was to be cut off, in
order to reduce the former by famine to a compliance with the acts of
parliament. On this intelligence, the country people assembled in great
numbers, and could not be satisfied till they had sent messengers into the city
to enquire into the truth of the report. These messengers were enjoined to
inform the town's people, that if they should be so pusillanimous as to make a
surrender of their liberties, the province would not think itself bound by such
examples; and that Britain, by breaking their original charter, had annulled
the contract subsisting between them, and left them to act as they thought
proper.

The people in every other respect manifested their inflexible determination to
adhere to the plan they had so long followed. The new counselors and judges
were obliged to resign their offices, in order to preserve their lives and
properties from the fury of the multitude. In some places they shut up the
avenues to the court houses; and, when required to make way for the judges,
replied, that they knew of none but such as were appointed by the ancient usage
and custom of the province. Every where they manifested the most ardent desire
of learning the art of war; and every individual who could bear arms, was most
assiduous in pr^^uring them, and learning their exercise.

Matters at last proceeded to such an height, that General Gage thought proper
to fortify the neck of land which joins the town of Boston to the continent.
This, though undoubtedly a prudent measure in his situation, was exclaimed
against by the Americans in the most vehement manner; but the general, instead
of giving ear to their remonstrances, deprived them of all power of acting
against himself, by seizing the provincial powder, ammunition, and military
stores at Cambridge and Charlestown. This excited such indignation, that it was
with the utmost difficulty the people could be restrained from marching to
Boston, and attacking the troops. Even in the town itself, the company of
cadets that used to attend him disbanded themselves, and returned the standard
he had as usual presented them with on his accession to the government. This
was occasioned by his having deprived the celebrated patriot John Hancock,
afterward president of the congress, of his commission as colonel of the
cadets. A similar instance happened of a provincial colonel having accepted a
seat in the new council; upon which 24 officers of his regiment resigned their
commissions in one day.

In the mean time, the proceedings of the governor occasioned the holding an
assembly of delegates from the several towns and districts in the county of
Suffolk, Sept. 9.
of which Boston is the county town. The purport of this was publicly to
renounce all obedience to the late acts of parliament, and to form an
engagement to indemnify such as should be prosecuted on that account; the
members of the new council were declared violaters of the rights of their
country; all ranks and degrees were exhorted to learn the use of arms; and the
receivers of the public revenue were ordered not to deliver it into the
treasury, but to retain it in their own hands till the constitution should be
restored, or a provincial congress dispose of it otherwise.

A remonstrance against the fortifications on Boston Neck, Sept. 12.
was next prepared, and presented to the governor; in which, however, they
still declared their unwillingness to proceed to any hostile measures;
asserting only as usual, their firm determination not to submit to the acts of
parliament, they had already so much complained of. The governor, to restore
tranquillity, if possible, called a general assembly; but so many of the
council had resigned their seats, that he was induced to countermand its
sitting by proclamation. This measure, however, was deemed illegal; the
assembly met at Salem; and, after waiting a day for the governor, voted
themselves into a provincial congress, of which Mr. Hancock was chosen
president. A committee was instantly appointed, who waited on the governor
with a remonstrance concerning the fortifications on Boston Neck; but nothing
of consequence took place, both parties mutually criminating each other. The
winter was now coming on, and the governor, to avoid quartering the soldiers
upon the inhabitants, proposed to erect barracks for them; but the selectmen of
Boston compelled the workmen to desist. Carpenters were sent for to New York,
but they were refused; and it was with the utmost difficulty that he could
procure winter lodgings for his troops. Nor was the difficulty less in
procuring clothes; as the merchants of New York told him, that "they would
never supply any article for the benefit of men sent as enemies to their
country."

This disposition, known to be almost universal throughout the continent, was
in the highest degree satisfactory to congress; they unanimously approved of
the Suffolk resolutions, Sept. 17.
and voted that contributions should be raised for the relief of their brethren
at Boston, as their occasions might require; and having accomplished the
momentous business for which they met, they broke up the 26th of October; after
appointing another meeting of congress, the 10th of May ensuing, unless
grievances should be redressed before that time.

Every one saw that the ensuing spring was to be the season of commencing
hostilities, and the most indefatigable diligence was used by the colonies to
be well provided against such a formidable enemy. A list of all the fencible
men in each colony was made out, and especially of those who had served in the
former war; of whom they had the satisfaction to find that two thirds were
still alive and fit to bear arms. Magazines of arms were collected, and money
was provided for the payment of troops. The governor in vain attempted to put
a stop to these proceedings by proclamations; the fatal period was now arrived;
and the more the servants of government attempted to repress the spirit of the
Americans, the more violent it appeared.

In the mean time the inhabitants of Boston were reduced to great distress. The
British troops, now distinguished by the name of the enemy, were absolutely in
possession of it; the inhabitants were kept as prisoners, and might be made
accountable for the conduct of the whole colonies, and various measures were
contrived to relieve the latter from such a disagreeable situation. Sometimes
it was thought expedient to remove the inhabitants altogether; but this was
impracticable without the governor's consent. It was then proposed to set fire
to the town at once, after valuing the houses and indemnifying the proprietors;
but this being found equally impracticable, it was resolved to wait some other
opportunity, as the garrison were not very numerous, and not being supplied
with necessaries by the inhabitants, might soon be obliged to leave the place.
The friends of British government indeed attempted to do something in
opposition to the general voice of the people; but, after a few ineffectual
meetings and resolutions, they were utterly silenced, and obliged to yield to
the superior number of their adversaries.

Notwithstanding the gloomy situation of affairs, the Americans had great
expectations, as well from the petition to the king, as the address to the
inhabitants of Great Britain. The indifference, however, with which this
address was generally received, quickly convinced them, that nothing was to be
hoped for from that quarter. This apparent indifference, so contrary to the
expectation of the colonies, had arisen from various causes. A great part of
the people had always considered America as a country the property of Britain,
to whose laws and protection she had a claim; and that the mother country, on
the other hand, had an equal title to demand from her colonies a reasonable
quota toward defraying the expense of the empire in general. Their prejudices
in favor of the omnipotence of parliament, and their desire that America
should bear a proportional share of the public expenses, hindered them from
viewing any other security in the colonial charters, to the inhabitants of
America, than a bar against taxation, by the king alone. The greater part of
the people had no just conception of the grounds of the quarrel, nor
acquaintance of the real situation of things in America. They were likewise
farther bewildered in their opinions by the conduct of opposition. They
observed that many of the members of both houses of parliament who stood
forward in favor of America, were the men, who, when in office, had been most
active in support of those obnoxious acts of parliament which gave birth to the
disturbances in the colonies. The American contests were no longer new. They
had engaged the attention of parliament, with very little intermission, for a
period of ten years. Most of the subjects in dispute were exhausted by endless
altercations; and the passions excited by them, however violent at first, had
now subsided, and been succeeded by that listlessness and languor consequent on
violent agitations of the mind. The former non importation agreement had been
dissolved, without producing any serious consequences, owing most probably to
the divisions occasioned by the repeal of the several new taxes in 1767. Most
people, therefore flattered themselves, that as things had so frequently
appeared at the verge of a rupture, without actually arriving at it, some means
would still be found for accommodating this dispute; or, at worst, it was
supposed the Americans themselves would grow tired. An opinion was also
circulated, with great industry, that a show of resolution on the part of the
British ministry, if persevered in for some time, would certainly put an end to
the contest, which, it was said, had been wholly nourished by former
concessions. The generality of the people, therefore, were inclined to leave
the trial of the effects of perseverance and resolution to the ministry, who
valued themselves on these qualities. Thus administration, being little opposed
at home, was left at leizure to prosecute such measures against America, as had
either been already adopted, or were as yet in embryo.

The parliament at that time, had but one session more to run before it would
expire of course. A proclamation for its dissolution, was, however, issued on
the 30th of September, and the writs made returnable for a new one, on the 29th
of November following. The proceedings of congress had not yet reached England;
but it was thought the ministry dreaded a non-importation agreement; and wished
to have the elections over, apprehending that the news of this event might
influence the trading and manufacturing towns to vote against the court party.
In the city, the popular party, carried every thing before them. Mr. Wilkes,
was again elected for Middlesex, as well as lord mayor of London; and the
ministry had now too much to risk, to give him any disturbance. The speech from
the throne, Nov. 30.
at the meeting of parliament, set forth the conduct of the Americans,
particularly the inhabitants of Massachusetts Bay, in the most atrocious light;
and a firm resolution was announced of withstanding to the utmost every attempt
to oppose the supreme legislative authority of Great Britain over all the
dominions of the crown, the maintenance of which was held to be essential to
the welfare, safety, and dignity of the empire in general.

An address, in answer to the speech, was proposed in the usual form, by the
minister; but the opposite party insisted, that a request should be made to his
majesty, for a production of the whole intelligence he had received from
America, as well as the letters, orders, and instructions relative to that
business. This amendment was opposed by the ministry, on the ground that
addresses were merely complimentary; that there was not then time for entering
into a full discussion of American affairs; but that they would come before the
house in their due order. After a warm debate, the original address was carried
by a prodigious majority, no less than 264 to 73.

The debate in the house of lords was warm and vehement, though the minority
was but 13 to 63 on the division. The dispute was, however, remarkable for a
protest, being the first mentioned in the English history upon an address. It
concluded thus: "But whatever may be the mischievous designs, or the
inconsiderate temerity, which leads others to this desperate course, we wish to
be known as persons who have ever disapproved of measures so pernicious in
their past effects and their future tendency, and who are not in haste, without
inquiry or information, to commit ourselves in declarations which may
precipitate our country into all the calamities of a civil war."

However it was, whether it proceeded from irresolution, a want of system,
doubts of parliamentary support, or a difference of opinion in the cabinet,
there was a strange suspension of American business previous to the Christmas
recess, and the minister seemed evidently to shrink from all contest upon that
subject. The national estimates were entirely formed upon a peace
establishment. The land tax was continued at three shillings in the pound; no
vote of credit was required; the army remained upon its former footing, and a
reduction of 4000 seamen took place, only 16,000 being demanded for the ensuing
year.

The strange inconsistency of administration, with respect to American affairs,
was severely scrutinized by the opposition. It was asserted, that the whole was
a cheat, in order to delude the people into a war, rendered doubly ruinous and
disgraceful by a defective preparation; that the ministers obstinately resolved
not to make peace by any reasonable political concession, nor war by any
vigorous military arrangement; but, by fluctuating between both, deprived the
nation of a possibility of deriving benefit from either. Far from serving the
public, this delay of incurring timely charge would certainly aggravate the
future expense, as they would assuredly feel in due time. That they were far
from desiring war; as little did they relish large peace establishments: but
if, against their will, war must be carried on, common sense distated, that it
ought to be carried on with effect; and that, if a peace establishment, and
even lower than a peace establishment, was sufficient to support a war, this
afforded a demonstrative proof, that the peace establishment had been
shamefully prodigal.

In answer to this, the minister of the naval department publicly asserted in
the house of lords, that he knew the low establishment proposed would be fully
sufficient for reducing the colonies to obedience. He spoke with the greatest
contempt both of the power and the courage of the Americans. He held, that they
were not disciplined nor capable of discipline, and that, formed of such
materials, and so indisposed to action, the numbers, of which such boasts had
been made, would only add to the facility of their defeat.

On this occasion, however, the most wary silence was observed by the ministers
with regard to their designs against the Americans; being, in all probability,
afraid that they would meet with a violent opposition from the mercantile
interest; and in this they were not deceived. A general alarm had been spread
during the recess; the merchants of several towns had met and prepared
petitions to parliament; and lord Chatham, though now broken with age and
infirmities, once more appeared in the house of lords, to testify his
disapprobation of ministerial measures. 1775, Jan. 20.
He made a motion for recalling the troops from Boston, and represented the
measure not as matter of choice, but of necessity. An hour lost in allaying the
present ferment might produce years of calamity, as the situation of the
inhabitants and troops, with regard to one another, rendered them continually
liable to events which might cut off all possibility of a reconciliation:
whereas, such a conciliatory measure on the part of Britain would remove all
jealousy and apprehension on the part of the colonies, and instantaneously
produce the happiest effects to both countries. He severely reproved
administration for refusing to take the American affairs instantly into
consideration; for deluding and deceiving the people by misrepresentations of
facts; persuading them that Boston stood unconnected with the other colonies in
the dispute with Great Britain, and that quiet would be restored to that city
by the appearance of a single regiment, as had been unwarily asserted. After
condemning, in the most explicit manner, the whole series of ministerial
conduct with regard to America, he is said to have concluded his speech with
the following words: "If the ministers thus persevere in misadvising and
misleading the king, I will not say that they can alienate the affections of
his subjects from his crown; but I will affirm, that they will make the crown
not worth his wearing! -- I will not say that the king is betrayed, but I will
pronounce that the kingdom is undone." Lord Chatham's motion was lost by a
majority of 68 to 18; and, on this occasion, the duke of Cumberland, the king's
brother, divided with the minority. Such a decisive victory, however, as it
discovered to the minister the true disposition of the new parliament, so it
was thought to have given him confidence to go farther in his plan of coercion
than he would otherwise have ventured to have done.

The American papers, at least such as the minister chose at this time to
produce, were now laid before the house. A separate committee was proposed for
considering the petitions of the merchants, and this committee was to begin its
sittings on the 27th of January, the day after that appointed for taking the
American affairs into consideration. On this occasion the most violent debates
ensued, in which the utmost asperity of language was made use of, especially on
the part of opposition. They said it was a pitiful shift to defeat the
petitions which they durst not openly reject. The question, however, was
carried by a majority of 197 to 81.

Thus were consigned to the Committee of Oblivion, as it was named by the
members in opposition, the petitions from London, Bristol, Glasgow, Norwich,
Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham, Woolverhampton, Dudley, etc.

A petition was next presented by Mr. Bollan, Dr. Franklin, and Mr. Lee, three
American agents, setting forth, that they were authorized by the American
continental congress to present a petition from the congress to the king, which
petition his majesty had referred to that house. They were enabled, they said,
to throw great light upon the subject; and prayed to be heard at the bar in
support of it. Their application had the same fate with the rest, being treated
with the utmost indifference and contempt. The motion for receiving the
petition was rejected by a majority of 218 to 68.

Lord Chatham persevered in the prosecution of his conciliatory scheme with
America, and accordingly brought into the house of lords a bill entitled, "A
provisional act for settling the troubles in America, and for asserting the
supreme legislative authority and superintending power of Great Britain over
the colonies." By this bill, the holding of a congress in the ensuing month of
May was allowed, for the double purpose of duly recognizing the supreme
legislative authority and superintending power of parliament over the colonies,
and for making a free grant to the king, his heirs and successors, of a certain
and perpetual revenue, subject to the disposition of parliament, and applicable
to the alleviation of the national debt; taking it for granted, that this free
aid would bear an honorable proportion to the great and flourishing state of
the colonies, the necessities of the mother country, and their obligations to
her. On these conditions it restrained the powers of the admiralty courts to
their ancient limits: and, without repealing, suspended for a limited time
those acts, or parts of acts, which had been complained of in the petition from
the continental congress. It placed the judges upon the same footing, as to the
holding of their salaries and offices, with those of England; and secured to
the colonies all the privileges, franchises, and immunities granted by their
several charters and constitutions. This proposal was treated with the utmost
indignity and contempt; not being allowed even to lie upon the table. On this
occasion, as on a former, the duke of Cumberland divided with the minority.

The measures now proposed by lord North were entirely of a coercive kind. Feb.
2.
A greater force was to be sent to America, and a temporary act passed to put a
stop to all the foreign trade of the New England colonies, particularly the
fishery on the banks of Newfoundland, until they returned to their duty. An
address to his majesty was at the same time moved for, to "beseech him to take
the most effectual measures, to enforce due obedience to the laws and authority
of the supreme legislature."

Unfortunately for the peace of both countries, the parliament of Great Britain
believed that the claims of the colonists amounted to absolute independence,
under the specious show of a redress of grievances. On the other hand, the
colonists were confident that Britain harbored designs not only hostile to
their interests, but that it was resolved to introduce arbitrary government.
Probably neither of these opinions were true in their utmost extent; but
matters had now proceeded so far, that every idea of reconciliation or
friendship with Britain was lost. The ministry, unhappily, listened for
information only to those whose interest it was to deceive them; such as
governors, judges, revenue officers, and other servants of government; these
men fancied that palatable information would prove the way to farther
promotion; and those whose integrity restrained them from stooping to such
meanness, were so warped by prejudice, that their information had an effect
equally hurtful as that of the former.

In the debates on the measures proposed by the minister, all the arguments
which had been used on former occasions by the members in opposition were now
collected and urged with the utmost vehemence. The dangers that would attend a
war with America, were pointed out; and the interference of foreign nations was
foretold. The ministry did not deny the danger, but said, "it must be
encountered; that every day's delay increased the evil, and that it would be
base and cowardly to put off for the present, an unavoidable contest, which
must fall with accumulated weight on the heads of their posterity. The danger
of the foreign interference was denied; the very idea of it was treated as the
creature of imagination, and it was said, that an appearance of vigorous
measures, with a farther reinforcement of troops, would be sufficient to quell
the disturbances: and it was added, that the friends of government, were strong
and numerous, and only waited for proper supplies, and favorable
circumstances, to declare themselves.

The minister carried all his plans by great majorities, but not without long
and warm debates, and several protests in the house of lords. At length, on the
9th of February, 1775, a joint address, from both houses, was presented to his
majesty in which, "they returned thanks for the communication of the papers
relative to the state of the British colonies in America, and gave it as their
opinion, that a rebellion actually existed in the province of Massachusetts,
and besought his majesty, that he would take the most effectual measures to
enforce due obedience to the laws and authority of the supreme legislature, and
begged in the most solemn manner to assure his majesty, that it was their fixed
resolution, at the hazard of their lives and properties, to stand by his
majesty against all rebellious attempts, in the maintenance of the just rights
of his majesty and the two houses of parliament."

The lords, Richmond, Craven, Archer, Abergaveny, Rockingham, Wycombe,
Courtenay, Torrington, Ponsonby, Cholmondeley, Abingdon, Rutland, Camden,
(...), Stanhop^, Scarborough, Fitzwilliam and ^^ankerville, protested against
this address, "as founded ^n no proper parliamentary information, being
introduced by refusing to suffer the presentation of petititions against it,
(though it be the undoubted right of the subjects to present the same) as
following the rejection of every mode of reconciliation -- as holding out no
substantial offer of redress of grievances, and as promising support to those
ministers who had inflamed America, and grossly misconducted the affairs of
Great Britain."

Thus the ministry, having proved ultimately victorious, no farther obstacle
remained to the entering upon decisive measures with regard to America. In
answer to the address, a message was sent from the throne, demanding an
augmentation of the forces by sea and land. This being referred to the usual
committee of supply, a project was next formed of laying farther restrictions
on the province of Massachusetts Bay, it being deemed absurd to send a military
force, without making proper coercive laws, of which the military were to
enforce the execution. For this purpose the minister declared he would make
choice of a punishment so universal, that all ranks and degrees of men could
not but be affected by it, which, of course, he supposed, would produce
obedience to the former laws. A bill was therefore brought into the house of
commons, Feb. 10.
to restrain the trade and commerce of the provinces of Massachusetts Bay and
New Hampshire, the colonies of Connecticut, and Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations in North America, to Great Britain, Ireland, and the British
Islands in the West Indies; and to prohibit such colonies and provinces from
carrying on any fishery on the banks of Newfoundland, or other places therein
to be mentioned, under certain conditions, and for a limited time. That the
extreme severity of this act, however, might be alleviated by such provisions
as would not destroy its main object, the minister said he would only propose
it as temporary, to continue either to the end of the year, or the next session
of parliament; and he would also propose, that particular persons might be
excepted, upon their obtaining certificates from the governor of the province
in which they resided, of their good behavior; or upon their subscribing a
test, acknowledging the rights of parliament. Every argument which wit or
ingenuity could suggest was urged against this bill, by the minority. Petitions
were presented and heard from the London merchants and the society of Friends,
representing the cruelty and impolicy of the act, the nature and extent of the
fishery, and the trade of New England, at different periods. [See New England,
p. 165, etc.] The marquis of Rockingham, in his speech against the bill,
entered into a very minute detail of the American trade, and took a comparative
view of that of New England at different periods. In the year 1704, he showed
that the whole amount of the exports to New England was only about 70,000 l.
annually; that in 1754, it had increased to 180,000 l. and in the succeeding
ten years to 400,000 l. and that in the last ten years it had been nearly
doubled. He concluded his speech, by fortelling, "that an useful and
constitutional agreement in sentiments, and coalition of interests, could never
take place between them and the mother country, unless the former measures,
preceding the laying on of any duties on the Americans, were recurred to and
adopted."

The New England restraining act, having passed and received the royal assent,
was accompanied with a demand of two thousand additional seamen, and four
thousand three hundred and eighty three land forces; and the last demand was
followed by an explanation from the minister, that the force at Boston would be
augmented to ten thousand men. These proposals drew forth the fiercest wrath of
opposition; the inconsistency, folly, and cruelty of ministers resounded
through the house. But whilst both parties were exhausting themselves in
fruitless debates, lord North surprised the whole nation by his conciliatory
motion, afterward styled his Olive Branch. By this it was proposed, that when
the governor, council, and assembly of any province, or the general court,
should propose to make provision according to their respective conditions,
circumstances, and situations, for contributing their proportion to the common
defense, such proportion to be raised under the authority of the general court,
or general assembly of such province or colony, and disposable by parliament;
and shall engage to make provision also for the support of the civil
government, and the administration of justice in such province or colony, it
would be proper, if such proposal should be approved of by his majesty in
parliament, and for so long as such provision shall be made accordingly, to
forbear, in respect of such province or colony, to levy any Suties, tax, or
assessment, except only such duties as it may be expedient to impose for the
regulation of commerce; the net produce of the duties last mentioned to be
carried to the account of such province, colony, or plantation respectively.

Such a proposition from the minister involved him in the most violent
contests, even with those of his own party. However, he soon convinced the
mal^contents, that the appearances of lenity and concession contained in his
conciliatory motion, were by no means inconsistent with the most rigid
measures; nay, so well did he succeed in the explanation of his own proposal,
that he acknowledged he had no expectation of its being well received by the
generality of the Americans; but that, if it did no good there, it would do
good in Britain: It would unite the people, by holding out to them a distinct
object of revenue; and as it united Britain, it would disunite America: That
whatever province came first to make a dutiful offer, would be kindly and
gently treated; and if only one province accepted the offer, the whole
confederacy would be broken.

By the members in opposition, this bill was reprobated in the most violent
manner. It was remarked that hitherto it had been constantly denied that they
had any contest about an American revenue; that the whole had been a dispute
about obedience to trade laws, and the general legistative authority of
parliament; but now ministers suddenly changed their language, and proposed to
interest the nation, console the manufacturers, and animate the soldiery, by
persuading them that it is not a contest for empty honor, but for the
acquisition of a substantial revenue. It was said that the Americans would be
as effectually taxed, without their consent, by being compelled to pay a gross
sum, as by an aggregate of small duties to the same amount. That this scheme of
taxation exceeded in oppression any that the rapacity of mankind had hitherto
devised. In other cases, a s^ecifie sum was demanded, and the people might
reasonably presume that the remainder was their own; but here, they were wholly
in the dark as to the extent of the demand. All their eloquence, however, was
by no means sufficient to carry the point even here, when the minister had been
deserted by some of his staunchest friends. The bill was passed by a majority
of 274 to 88.

This bill was followed by another, seemingly of a contrary tendency, being a
supplement to the New England Fishery Bill, and included the colonies of New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina. No debate of any
consequence ensued on this subject; but the discussion of another petition from
the West India planters, proved the means of rendering the importance of these
islands, and their dependence on North America, more generally understood than
before this time. From documents now produced, it appeared, that the capital in
these islands, consisting of cultivated lands, buildings, negroes, and stock of
all kinds, did not amount to less than sixty millions sterling. Their exports
of late years to Great Britain Lad run to about 190,000 hogsheads and puncheons
of sugar and rum annually; amounting in weight to 95,000 tons, and in value
about four millions; besides a great number of smaller articles, as well as
their immense export to North America. So rapid was the improvement of these
islands, that within a few years, their export of sugar to Britain had been
increased by 40,000 hogsheads annually, amounting to near 800,000 l. in value;
and it seemed probable, that no less than thirty millions of West India
property belonged to people in Britain; and that the revenue gained above
700,000 l. annually upon the West India trade, exclusive of its eventual and
circuitous products, and of the African trade. It was also fully shown, that
this immense capital and trade, as well as the African, neither of which could
subsist without the other, were, both from nature and circumstance, totally
dependent on North America.

This petition, as well as another from Waterford in Ireland, produced no good
consequences. The ministerial plan was unalterably determined. Conciliatory
motions were proposed by Mr. Burke and Mr. Hartley; but, whatever ingenuity
might be displayed in the devising and framing these motions, very little
regard was paid to them by administration. The only thing remarkable was the
immense value of North America to Britain, as appeared from Mr. Barke's
comparative view of the trade of Britain at different periods. From thence it
was shown, that in 1704, the exports to North America, the West Indies, and
Africa, amounted only to 569,930 l. That in the year 1772, at an average of
several years before and after the exports to the same places, including those
from Scotland, (which, in the year 1704, had no existence) amounted to no less
than 6,024,171 l. being in the proportion of nearly eleven to one. He also
showed, that the whole export trade of England, including that of the colonies,
amounted, at the first period of 1704, only to 6,509,000 l. Thus, the trade to
the colonies alone was, at the latter period, within less than half a million
of being equal to what Britain carried on at the beginning of the present
century with the whole world. And, stating the whole export trade of Britain at
present at sixteen millions, that to the colonies, which in the first period
constituted but one twelfth of the whole, was now very considerably more than
one third.

However astonishing this general increase of the whole colonies may appear,
the growth of the province of Pennsylvania was still more extraordinary. In the
year 1704, the whole exports to that colony amounted only to 11,459 l. and in
1772 they were risen to 507,509 l. being nearly fifty times the original
demand, and almost equal to the whole colony export at the first period.

Toward the close of the session a memorial was presented to the house of
commons, and another to the house of peers, from the assembly of New York, and
both were rejected, upon the principle that they claimed to themselves rights
derogatory to, and inconsistent with, the legislative authority of parliament.
Memorials from the British inhabitants of Quebeck^ presented by lord Camden,
and another from the inhabitants of Quebeck at large, were likewise rejected.
The only remarkable circumstances attending these, were the two royal brothers
voting in the minority, and the animated speech of lord Effingham, in the upper
house, in favor of the claims of America, when he declared his resignation of
the military command he held.

The session concluded with the passing the money bills in the usual form. The
speaker, in his address to the king, stated the heaviness of the grants, which,
however, had been readily complied with, on account of the particular exigence
of the times; at the same time assuring his majesty, that should the Americans
persist in their resolutions, and thus render it necessary to draw the sword,
the commons would do every thing in their power to support the dignity of the
British legislature.

Doctor Franklin labored hard to prevent the breach from becoming irreparable,
and in union with Dr. Fothergill and Mr. David Barclay, two English gentlemen,
highly esteemed by the British ministry, heartily stated the outlines of a
compact which he supposed would procure a durable union of the two countries;
but his well meant endeavors proved abortive, and in the mean time he was
abused as the fomenter of those disturbances which he was anxiously
endeavoring to prevent. That the ministry might have some opening to proceed
upon, and some salvo for their personal honor, he was disposed to engage, that
pecuniary compensation should be made for the tea destroyed; but he would not
give up essential liberty, for the purpose of procuring temporary safety. Dr.
Franklin finding the ministry bent on war, unless the colonists would consent
to hold their rights, liberties and charters as the discretion of a British
parliament, and well knowing that his countrymen would hazard every thing,
rather than consent to terms so degrading, as well as so inconsistent with the
spirit of the British constitution, he quitted Great Britain in March 1775, and
returned to Philadelphia; where he joined his countrymen, and exerted his great
abilities in conducting them through a war which was now unavoidable.

END OF VOL. I.
APPENDIX.
Wednesday morning, Dec. 1754. SIR,
I MENTIONED it yesterday to your excellency as my opinion, that excluding the
people of the colonies from all share in the choice of the grand council, would
probably give extreme dissatisfaction, as well as the taxing them by an act of
parliament, where they have no representative. In matters of general concern to
the people and especially where burdens are to be laid upon them, it is of use
to consider, as well what they will be apt to think and say, as what they ought
(...) think; I shall therefore, as your excellency requires it of me, briefly
mention what of either kind occurs to me on this occasion.

First, they will say, and perhaps with justice, that the body of the people in
the colonies are as loyal and as firmly attached to the present constitution
and reigning family, as any subjects in the king's dominions:

That there is no reason to doubt the readiness and willingness of the
representatives they may choose, to grant from time to time such supplies for
the defense of the country as shall be judged necessary, so far as their
abilities will allow:

That the people in the colonies, who are to feel the immediate mischiefs of
invasion and conquest by an enemy, in the loss of their estates, lives and
liberties are likely to be better judges of the quantity of forces necessary to
be raised and maintained, forts to be built and supported, and of their own
abilities to bear the expense, than the parliament of England at so great a
distance.

That governors often come to the colonies merely to make fortunes, with which
they intend to return to Britain; are not always men of the best abilities or
integrity; have many of them no estates here, nor any natural connexions with
us, that should make them heartily concerned for our welfare; and might
possibly be fond of raising and keeping up more forces than necessary from the
profits accruing to themselves, and to make provision for their friends and
dependants:

That the counselors in most of the colonies being appointed by the crown, on
the recommendation of governors, are often of small estates, frequently
dependent on the governors for office, and therefore too much under influence:

That there is, therefore, great reason to be jealous of a power in such
governors and councils, to raise such sums as they shall judge necessary, by
draft on the lords of the treasury, to be afterward said on the colonies by act
of parliament, and paid by the people here; since they might abuse it, by
projecting useless expeditions, harasling the people, and taking them from
their labors to execute such projects, merely to create offices and (...), and
gratify their dependants and divide profits:

That the parliament o^ England is at a great distance, subject to be
misinformed and misled by such governors and councils, whose united interests
might probably secure them against the effect of any complaint from hence:

That it is supposed to be an undoubted right of Englishmen, not to be taxed
but by their own consent given through their representatives:

That the colonies have no representatives in parliament:

That to propose taxing them by parliament, and refuse them the liberty of
choosing a representative council, to meet in the colonies, and consider and
judge of the necessity of any general tax, and the quantum, shows a suspicion
of their loyalty to the crown, or of their regard for their country, or of
their common sense and understanding, which they have not deserved:

That compelling the colonies to pay money without their consent, would be
rather like raising contributions in an enemy's country, than taxing Englishmen
for their own public benefit:

That it would be treating them as a conquered people, and not as true British
subjects:

That a tax laid by the representatives of the colonies might easily be
lessened, as the occasions should lessen; but being once laid by parliament,
under the influence of the representations made by governors, would probably
be kept up, and continued for the benefit of governors, to the grievous burden
and discouragement of the colonies, and prevention of their growth and increase:

That a power in governors to march the inhabitants from one end of the
British and French colonies to the other, being a country of at least 1,500
square miles, without the approbation or consent of their representatives first
obtained, might occasion expeditions grievous and ruinous to the people, and
would put them upon a footing with the subjects of France in Canada, that now
groan under such oppression from their governor, who, for two years past, has
harrassed them with long and destructive marches to the Ohio:

That, if the colonies in a body may be well governed by governors and
councils appointed by the crown without representatives, particular colonies
may as well, or better, be so governed: A tax may be laid on them all by act of
parliament for support of government, and their assemblies (...) dismissed as
an useless part of the constitution.

That the powers proposed by the Albany plan of union, to be vested in a grand
representative council of the people, even with regard to military matters, are
not so great as those the colonies of Rhode Island and Connecticut are
entrusted with by their charter, and have never abused: For by this plan, the
president general is appointed by the crown, and controls all by his negative;
but in these governments, the people choose the governor, and yet allow him no
negative:

That the British colonies bordering on the French, are properly frontiers of
the British empire; and the frontiers of an empire are properly defended at the
joint expense of the body of the people in such empire. It would now be thought
hard, by act of parliament, to oblige the cinque ports, or sea coasts of
Britain, to maintain the whole navy, because they are more immediately defended
by it; not allowing them at the same time a vote in choosing the members of
parliament: And if the frontiers in America must bear the expense of their own
defense, it seems hard to allow them no share in voting the money, judging of
the necessity and sum, or advising the measures:

That besides the taxes necessary for the defense of the frontiers, the
colonies pay yearly great sums to the mother country unnoticed; for taxes paid
in Britain, by the landholder or artificer, must enter into and increase the
price of the produce of land, and of manufactures made of it; and great part of
this is paid by consumers in the colonies, who thereby pay a considerable part
of the British taxes.

We are restrained in our trade with foreign nations; and where we could be
supplied with any manufacture cheaper from them, but must buy the same dearer
from Britain, the difference of price is a clear tax to Britain. We are obliged
to carry great part of our produce directly to Britain; and wherein the duties
there laid upon it lessen its price to the planter, or it sells for less than
it would in foreign markets, the difference is a tax paid to Britain.

Some manufactures we could make, but are forbidden and must take of British
merchants; the whole price of these is a tax paid to Britain.

By our greatly increasing the demand and consumption of British manufactures,
their price is considerably raised of late years: Their advance is clear profit
to Britain, and enables its people better to pay great taxes; and much of it
being paid by us, is a clear tax to Britain.

In short, as we are not suffered to regulate our trade, and restrain the
importation and consumption of British superfluities, (as Britain can the
consumption of foreign superfluities) our whole wealth centres finally among
the merchants and inhabitants of Britain; and if we make them richer, and
enable them better to pay their taxes, it is nearly the same as being taxed
ourselves, and equally beneficial to the crown. These kind of secondary taxes,
however, we do not complain of, though we have no share in the laying or
disposing of them: But to pay immediate heavy taxes, in the laying,
appropriation, and disposition of which we have no part, and which, perhaps, we
may know to be as unnecessary as grievous, must seem hard measure to
Englishmen; who cannot conceive, that by hazarding their lives and fortunes, in
subduing and settling new countries, extending the dominion, and increasing the
commerce of their mother nation, they have forfeited the native rights of
Britons, which they think ought rather to be given them as due to such merit,
if they had been before in a state of slavery. These, and such kind of things
as these, I apprehend, will be thought and said by the people, if the proposed
alteration of the Albany plan should take place. Then the administration of the
board of governors and councils so appointed, not having any representative
body of the people to approve and unite in its measures, and conciliate the
minds of the people to them, will probably become suspected and odious:
Dangerous animosities and feuds will arise between the governors and governed,
and every thing go into confusion.

Perhaps I am too apprehensive in this matter; but having freely given my
opinion and reasons, your excellency can judge better than I whether there be
any weight in them; and the shortness of the time allowed me, will, I hope, in
some degree excuse the imperfections of this scrawl.

With the greatest respect and fidelity, I have the honor to be, your
excellency's most obedient and most humble servant,

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

A CONCISE AND IMPARTIAL HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION. TO WHICH IS
PREFIXED, A GENERAL HISTORY OF NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA. TOGETHER WITH An
ACCOUNT of the DISCOVERY and SETTLEMENT of NORTH AMERICA, and a VIEW of the
PROGRESS, CHARACTER, and POLITICAL STATE of the COLONIES previous to the
REVOLUTION. FROM THE BEST AUTHORITIES.

BY JOHN LENDRUM.

Published according to Act of Congress.

VOL. II.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, (PROPRIETORS OF THE WORK)
FAUST'S STATUE, No. 45, NEWBURY STREET. 1795.

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.
CHAP. XIX. Stores and ordnance seized by the people of Rhode Island and New
Hampshire -- Faint exertions of the loyalists quashed by the sons of liberty --
The regulars are frustrated in their attempt to seize some field piece^ at
Salem -- Skirmish at Lexington -- General Gage receives the arms of the
inhabitants -- Fails in his agreement -- Boston invested by a provincial army
-- Public fast -- Ticonderoga and Crown Point taken -- Congress meet -- Direct
the people of Massachusetts to form a new government -- Proclamation by general
Gage -- B^ttle at Bunker's Hill -- Paper currency established -- Distress of
the garrison in Boston -- Articles of union between the colonies -- Declaration
on taking up arms -- Proceedings of Congress -- Speech to the Indians --
Addresses -- Second petition to the king -- Georgia accedes to the confederacy
-- General Washington joins the continental army -- Rich prizes taken,
containing immense supplies designed for Boston -- Falmouth burnt --
Hostilities in New York and Georgia -- Resolutions of the Rhode Island
assembly. Page 13 CHAP. XX. The Canada Expedition -- Disputes of lord Dunmore
with the Virginians -- Scheme of Connelly to bring the Ohio Indians to a
junction with lord Dunmore at Alexandria -- North and South Carolina expel
their governors -- Boston attacked and evacuated. Page 54 CHAP. XXI. The siege
of Quebec continued -- General Carleton receives relief -- Sallies out, and
defeats the Americans -- His humanity -- General Thompson defeated -- General
Sullivan retreats and saves the remains of the American army -- General Gordon
shot by lieutenant Whitcombe, when unarmed -- Captain Mugford's exploits in
Boston Bay -- Lieutenant colonel Campbell and a number of Highlanders carried
in prisoners to Boston, after a smart combat -- General Moore defeats the
loyalists in North Carolina -- Charleston, in South Carolina, besieged by a
British fleet and army -- They are obliged to retreat with great loss --
Commodore Hopkins seizes ordnance and stores in the Bahama Islands -- Failed ^n
his attempts upon the Glasgow frigate -- The British convey vessels up Lake
Champlain, and destroy the naval force of the Americans -- Congress declare the
States independent -- Battle on ^ong Island -- General Washington's able
retreat -- The Royal Commissioners hold a conference with a committee of
congress -- New York abandoned -- Battle at the White Plains -- The British
overrun the Jersies -- The desperate situation of the American affairs --
General Lee taken prisoner and closely confined -- Lieutenant colonel Compbell
confined in a dungeon in Concord good -- General Sullivan join^ general
Washington -- Rhode Island taken, and commodore Hopkins's squadron blocked up
-- General Washington invested with dictatorial power -- He gives (...) new
turn to the affairs of America, by surprising and defeating the British in the
battles of Trenton and Princeton -- Cruelties of the Hessians and British in
the Jersies -- Causes of the decline of the British affairs -- Indians attack
the back settlements of the Southern States -- They are routed and (...) for
peace -- Affairs in Britain -- American privateers distress their trade -- An
account of John the Painter. Page 71 CHAP. XXII. The loyalists in New York
embodied -- Americans sail in their attempt on Fort Independence -- Orders
issued by the American general against plundering -- Law state of the American
army unknown to the British -- Supplies of arms arrive from Fr^^^^ -- Stores at
Peek's Kill destroyed -- Magazines destroyed o^ D^nbury -- General Wooster
killed -- Americans invade Long Island under colonel Meigs -- General How
takes the field -- The militia oppose him from all quarters -- Fails in his
attempt to bring general Washington to action -- Re^ires to Amb^y -- Turns and
advances upon the Americans -- Skirmishes -- Lord Stirling defeated -- General
Washington returns to (...) strong camp -- Royal army prepare for the grand
expedition -- General Prescot carried off from Rhode Island -- Fleet and ar^^
leave Sandy Hook -- Congress and general Washington alarme^ at the loss of
Ticonderoga -- Fleet arrives in the Chesap, (...) Army lands at Turkey Point --
General Washington advan^^ to the relief of Philadelphia -- Battle at
Brandywine -- Res^t^o^s on the battle -- Congress flee to York Town --
Philadelphia taken -- Battle at Germantown -- Passage of the Delaw^^^ opened to
Philadelphia -- General Howe's efforts to bring Americans to a (...) fruitless
-- Winters in Philadelphia -- Americans encamp in huts at Valley Forge during
the winter -- Invention of the American Turtle, and battle of the Kegs --
Reflections on the campaign. Page 140 CHAP. XXIII. Canada -- Conduct of the
northern expedition committed to lieutenant general Burgoyne -- Expedition
under colonel St. Ledger -- State of the force employed -- General Burgoyne sets
out from Quebec -- His speech to the savages -- His proclamation -- Ticon^ 2
besieged -- Abandoned by general St. Clair -- Pursuit by land and water --
American galleys and batteaux destroyed -- Rear of the Americans overtaken by
colonel Frazer -- Colonel Francis defeated and killed -- St. Clair retreats to
the woods with the remains of the army -- Americans set fire to and abandon
Fort Anne -- Extraordinary difficulties encountered by the Royal army in the
march to Fort Edward -- General St. Clair arrives at Fort Edward -- Hurt done
to the royal cause by the Indians -- Murder of Miss M'Rea -- General Gates
succeeds St. Clair in the command -- St. Ledger besieges Fort Schuyler -- He
defeats general Harkimer on his way to the relief of the Fort -- The Indians
desert him -- Obliged to raise the siege -- Difficulties of general Burgoyne --
General Stark defeats colonels Baum and Br^yman in an attempt to surprise the
magazines at Bennington -- General Burgoyne passes North River at Saratoga, and
advances to attack the American army at Still Water -- Severe actions on the
19th of September and 7th of October -- Distressed situation of the royal army
-- General Gates misinformed of the state of the British camp -- Narrow escape
of a strong detachment sent to take ^^ssession of it -- The British army nearly
surrounded on all sides -- No possibility of retreat -- Convention concluded
with general Gates -- The British lay down their arms -- State of both armies
-- Sir Henry Clinton's devastations on North River -- Possibility of his
relieving Burgoyne asserted -- Convention suspended -- Consequences of the
capture of Burgoyne -- Captures at sea -- Attempt to displace general
Washington. Page 165 CHAP. XXIV. Treaty between France and America -- Lord
North's conciliatory bills -- Rejected by congress -- The French treaty
received by congress, and accepted with joy -- Their address to the people --
The alliance between France and America announced in the British house of
commons -- Louis XVI. admits the American deputies to a public audience --
Debates in the British parliament on acknowledging the independence of America
-- Proceedings of the hostile fleets -- The royal commissioners hold a
conference with a committee of congress -- Their proceedings -- Fail in their
negociations -- Philadelphia evacuated -- The battle of Freehold -- The French
fleet arrives in America -- Indecisive proceedings of the hostile fleets and
armies -- Sullivan lands on Rhode Island, and evacuates it -- Predatory
excursions of the British -- The Indians and tories, their cruel depredations
-- The Americans retaliate, in their expeditions against them -- Captain
Willings' expedition into West Florida -- The British take Savannah, and
apparently reduce the state of Georgia -- Deplorable situation of the United
States -- M. Gerard desires congress not to prolong the war by too high demands
-- General Lincoln appointed to command at the southward -- Prevost defeats the
Americans at Briars' Creek -- His attempt on Charleston -- The British make an
inroad with a land and sea force into Virginia -- The British take the fort^ at
Verplank and Stoney Points -- Governor Tryon's destructive expedition into
Connecticut -- General Wayne storms Stoney Point -- Major Lee takes the British
post at Paulus Hook, but is unable to retain it -- The Americans unsuccessful
in Penobscott -- Their fleet destroyed. Page 190 CHAP. XXV. The French and
British fleets sail from America to the West Indies -- D'Estaing appears before
Savannah -- Besieges it (...) conjunction with general Lincoln -- The allies
are defeated, and retreat -- Rhode Island evacuated -- Remarkable enterprise of
colonel White -- Spain declares in favor of America -- Conquers part of
Florida -- The British take Fort Omoah, in which are immense spoils --
D'Estaing returns to the West Indies without effecting any thing in America --
The Randolph frigate blown up -- The Alfred and Virginia frigates taken by the
British -- Major Talbot's gallant enterprise -- Paul Jones, his exploits on the
British coasts -- Takes the Serapis and Countess of Scarborough and carries
them into the Texel -- The British house of commons set on foot an inquiry into
the conduct of lord and general How -- Result of the inquiry, particularly as
to general Burgoyne -- His character cleared up -- Extraordinary evidence given
by general Robertson and Mr. Galloway, regarding the American war. Page 259
CHAP. XXVI. Alarming situation of Britain -- Discontents in Ireland -- Armed
neutrality -- Charleston besieged and taken by general Clinton -- New York in
danger -- The citizens armed -- The Americans make an attempt on Staten Island
-- The academy of arts and sciences instituted in Massachusetts -- Clinton's
rapid success in Carolina -- Tarleton defeats Buford -- The action variously
related -- Clinton's proclamations -- He returns to New York -- Acquaints the
British minister that South Carolina was reduced to allegiance -- His delusion
in this respect -- The anniversary of American independence celebrated at
Philadelphia -- General Sumpter defeats several royal detachments -- Lord
Rawdon fixes his headquarters at Camden -- Baron Kalb arrives in North
Carolina with 2,000 continentals -- The South Carolina militia desert from the
British, and carry off their officers -- General Gates defeated at Camden --
Tarleton defeats Sumpter -- Predatory excursions from New York -- Connecticut
Farms and Springfield burnt -- M. Ternay arrives at Rhode Island from France --
The French fleet blocked up, and the designs of the allies frustrated --
Arnold's treason discovered -- Major Andre suffers as a spy -- The ^aptors of
Andre rewarded by congress -- Arnold's promotion in the British service -- His
address to the inhabitants of America -- Reasons for his defection -- Colonel
Ferguson defeated and killed -- Decline of the British affairs in South
Carolina -- Sumpter defeats Wymes -- Tarleton's unsuccessful attack on Sumpter
-- Lesslie joins Cornwallis -- General Green succeeds general Gates in the
command. Page 278 CHAP. XXVII. Foreign affairs. -- Gibralter blockaded --
Rodney captures a Spanish convoy -- Defeats Don Langara -- Relieves Gibralter
-- The combined fleets intercept the British East and West India convoys -- The
Quebec fleet taken by American privateers -- The Spaniards make an unsuccessful
attempt on the squadron at Gibralter -- The garrison in distress for provisions
-- Admiral Darby relieves Gibralter -- Dreadful bombardment of Gibralter --
Spain conquers West Florida -- The Spanish works at Gibralter entirely
destroyed by general Elliot -- Plans of the combined powers frustrated --
Origin of the Dutch war -- Admiral Rodney and general Vaughan take the island
of St. Eustatius -- Their proceedings -- M. Piquet intercepts the Eustatius
convoy. Page 321 CHAP. XXVIII. Revolt of the Pennsylvania line -- Distresses of
the American soldiery -- Continental paper money goes out of circulation -- The
effects of depreciation -- The finances regulated -- Virginia invaded by Arnold
-- Engagement between the British and French fleets -- Generals Philips and
Arnold ravage Virginia. Page 338 CHAP. XXIX. General Green opposes lord
Cornwallis in the Carolinas and Georgia -- Exploit of colonel Washington --
General Morgan defeats lieutenant colonel Tarleton -- Lord Cornwallis pursue^
general Morgan -- General Green keeps alive the courage of his party, when
greatly reduced -- Major Craig takes post a^ Wilmington -- General Green
defeated at Guildford, yet reap^ the fruits of victory -- Distresses of the
British army -- British interest ruined in North Carolina -- Lord Cornwallis
retreat^ to Wilmington -- General Green returns to South Carolina -- He takes
a number of British posts -- Lord Rawdon defeat^ general Green at Camden --
Augusta taken -- Ninety Six besieged -- Relieved by Lord Rawdon -- General
Green retreat -- He is pursued -- He returns when lord Rawdon divides (...)
force -- Lord Rawdon evacuates Ninety Six -- General Green method of carrying
on the war -- Battle at Eutaw Springs -- The British driven down to Charleston.
Page 34^ CHAP. XXX. Lord Cornwallis joins general Arnold at Petersburg --
Lieutenant colonel Tarleton and Simpcoe sent on different expedition -- M. de
la Fayette's able movements -- General Wayne attack the British army. Lord
Cornwallis fortifies York Town a^ Gloucester -- Plan for his capture -- Admiral
Greaves enga^^^ the French fleet off Chesapeak -- Arnold's expedition into
Connecticut -- Lord Cornwallis capitulates -- Joy of the America^ -- General
Washington receives congratulations from all quarters -- General Wayne defeats
colonel Brown in Georgia -- ^^feats a party of Creek Indians after a furious
combat -- O^clusion of hostilities. Page 3^^ CHAP. XXXI. Minorca taken by the
Spaniards -- French conquests in the (...) Indies -- Admiral Rodney's decisive
engagement with the Fre^ fleet -- Destruction of the Spanish floating batteries
at Gib^ter -- Humanity of captain Curtis -- Proceedings of the British
parliament -- The British nation wish for peace -- Sir (...) Carleton arrives
at New York with powers to treat of p^ -- Different places evacuated by the
British troops -- Independence of America acknowledged -- The army disbanded,
(...) general Washington resigns his commission -- Loss of men (...) treasure
by the war. Page (...) CHAP. XXXII. A general view of the political state of
the Union, until the (...) Government was established.
THE HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION.
CHAP. XIX.
Stores and ordnance seized by the people of Rhode Island and New Hampshire --
Faint exertions of the loyalists quashed by the sons of liberty -- The regulars
are frustrated in their attempt to seize some field pieces at Salem -- Skirmish
at Lexington -- General Gage receives the arms of the inhabitants -- Fails in
his agreement -- Boston invested by a provincial army -- Public fast --
Ticonderoga and Crown Point taken -- Congress meet -- Direct the people of
Massachusetts to form a new government -- Proclamation by General Gage --
Battle at Bunker's Hill -- Paper currency established -- Distress of the
garrison in Boston -- Articles of union between the colonies -- Declaration on
taking up arms -- Proceedings of Congress -- Speech to the Indians -- Addresses
-- Second petition to the king -- Georgia accedes to the confederacy -- General
Washington joins the continental army -- Rich prizes taken, containing immense
supplies designed for Boston -- Falmouth burnt -- Hostilities in New York and
Georgia -- Resolutions of the Rhode Island assembly.

WHILST the rulers of Britain were thus pluming themselves on their own wisdom
and ^udence in conducting the affairs of the empire, the Americans were
preparing for a determined resistance. The southern colonies began to take up
arms as well as the northern; and, as soon as news came of a proclamation
having been issued in Britain to prevent the exportation of arms and ammunition
to the colonies, every method was taken to supply that defect. The people of
Rhode Island however, bolder than the rest, or not having equal resources,
seized upon the ordnance belonging to the crown, amounting to about forty
pieces of cannon of different sizes; whilst the assembly passed resolutions for
the procuring of arms and military stores by every means, and from every
quarter in which they could be obtained, as well as for training and
disciplining the inhabitants. Their example was followed by the people of New
Hampshire, who, with the same view, surprised a small fort, called William and
Mary, from whence they were supplied with as much powder and ammunition as
enabled them to put themselves in a posture of defense.

The determination of the colonies was confirmed by the news of the king's
speech, and the address in answer to it. Dec. 14.
The assembly of Pennsylvania unanimously approved and ratified the acts of
Congress; and the assembly of Maryland appointed a sum of money for the
purchase of arms and ammunition. A provincial congress, held a^ Philadelphia in
the end of January, 1775.
recommended the encouragement of the most necessary manufactures; particularly
salt, saltpetre, gu^^ powder, and steel; and at the same time declarin^ their
resolution to resist, in case the petition of Congre^ to the king should prove
ineffectual. Powder mill were erected in Pensylvania and Virginia, and
encouragement was given for the fabrication of arms through out the whole
continent. The only exception to the general voice, was the assembly of
New York, in whi^^ January 10, 1775, it was carried by a very small majority
not to accede to the resolutions of Congress; and at this meeting they drew up,
with the consent of their lieutenant governor, the paper which, as we have
already seen, the parliament refused to hear read.

The recess of the provincial congress of Massachusetts Bay, in the beginning
of November 1774, had afforded an opportunity to the friends of government, or
loyal^ists, as they now began to be called, to try their strength ^in various
places. Associations for mutual defense were accordingly formed, and
resolutions taken to oppose the provincial congress; but the associators were
every where overwhelmed with prodigious majorities, and their attempts had no
other effect than to mislead the governor, and through him the people of Great
Britain, with regard to the general disposition of the people.

Doctor Gordon observes, that assemblies, conventions, congresses, towns,
cities, private clubs and circles, were seemingly animated by one great, wise,
active and noble spirit; one masterly soul, enlivening one vigorous ^ody. All
their acts tended to the same point, the supporting of the measures of the
continental congress. But there were great numbers in every colony, who
disapproved of these measures; a few, comparatively, from principle and a
persuasion that the same were wrong, and that they ought to submit to the
mother country; some through attachment to the late governmental authority
exercised among them; many from ^elf interest; but the bulk, for fear of the
mischievous ^onsequences likely to follow. The professing friends of ^berty,
acted in a spirited manner, whilst the others ^y still. Such as discovered a
disposition to oppose ^opular measures were not supported; they therefore
^eclined making further efforts, and absented themselves from town and other
meetings. The popular cry being against them, they sought personal peace and
safety in remaining quiet. But could the truth have been ascertained, it would
probably have been found that in most of the town and other meetings, even i^
New England, far more than half the parties having a right to attend, from
various causes were absent; and that there were a great many among the
absentees, who were such, because they knew that matters would be carried at
such meetings contrary to their own sentiments.

The truth of these latter remarks of our author, i^ their full extent, appear
rather problematical; bu^ those readers who were in the scene of action are the
best judges.

As the disturbances had originated in the province^ of Massachusetts Bay, and
there continued all alon^ with the greatest violence, so this was the provin^^
where the first hostilities were formally commenced. In the beginning of
February the provincial congre^ met at Cambridge, and elected John Hancock, esquire
th^^ president: and as no friends to Britain could now (...) admittance to that
assembly, the only consideration (...) how to make proper preparations for war.
Expertn^^ in military discipline was recommended in the strong^^ manner, and
several military institutions enacted among which that of the Minute-men was
one of the most remarkable. These were chosen from the m^ active and expert
among the militia; and their busine^ was to keep themselves in constant
readiness at the (...) of their officers; from which perpetual vigilance the
derived their title. -- It was now easily seen that a slig^ occasion would
bring on hostilities, which could (...) but be attended with the most violent
and ^^^tain destruction to the vanquished party; for bo^^ were so much
exasperated by a long course (...) reproaches and literary warfare, that they
seemed be filled with the utmost inveteracy against each other.

On the 26th of February general Gage, having been informed that a number of
field pieces had been brought to Salem, dispatched a party to seize them. Their
road was obstructed by a river, over which was a drawbridge. This the people
had pulled up, and refused to let down: upon which the soldiers seized a boat
to ferry them over; but the people cut out her bottom. Hostilities would
immediately have commenced, had it not been for the interposition of a
clergyman, Reverend Thomas Barnard.
who represented to the military, on the one hand, the folly of opposing such
numbers; and to the people, on the other, that as the day was far spent, the
military could not execute their design, so that they might without any fear
leave them the quiet possession of the drawbridge. This was complied with; and
the soldiers, after having remained for some time at the bridge, returned
without executing their orders.

The next attempt, however, was attended with more serious consequences.
Generel Gage having been informed that a large quantity of ammunition and
military stores had been collected at Concord, about 20 miles from Boston, for
the support a provincial army, wished to prevent hostilities by depriving the
inhabitants of the means necessary for carrying them on. It was likewise
reported that he had a design to seize messieurs Hancock and Adams, the leading
men of the congress. Wishing to accomplish his design without bloodshed, he
took every precaution to effect it by surprise, April 18.
and without alarming the country. At eleven o'clock at night, 800 grenadiers
and light infantry, the flower of the royal army, embarked at the common,
landed at Phipp's farm, and marched for Concord, under the command of
lieutenant colonel Smith. Neither the secrecy with which this expedition was
planned; the privacy with which the troops marched out, nor an order that no
inhabitants should leave Boston, were sufficient to prevent intelligence from
being sent to the country militia, of what was going on.

About two in the morning, 130 of the Lexington militia had assembled to oppose
them, but the air being chilly, and intelligence respecting the regulars
uncertain, they were dismissed, with orders to appear again at beat of drum.
They collected a second time to the number of 70, between 4 and 5 o'clock in
the morning, and the British regulars soon after made their appearance. Major
Pitcairn, who led the advanced corpse, rode up to them and called out, "Disperse
you rebels, throw down your arms and disperse." They still con^^^^ed in a body,
on which he advanced nearer -- discharged his pistol -- and ordered his
soldiers to fire. This was done with a huzza. A dispersion of the militia was
the consequence, but the firing of the regulars was nevertheless continued.
Individuals, finding they were fired upon, though dispersing, returned the
fire. Three or four of the militia were killed on the green. A few more were
shot after they had began to disperse. The royal detachment proceeded on to
Concord, and executed their commission. They disabled two 24 pounders -- threw
500lb. of ball into rivers and wells, and broke in pieces about 60 barrels of
flour.

Mr. John Butterick of Concord, major of a minute-regiment, not knowing what
had passed at Lexington, ordered his men not to give the first fire, that they
might not be the aggressors. Upon his approaching near the regulars, they
fired, and killed captain Isaac Davis, and one private of the provincial
minute-men. The fire was returned, and a skirmish ensued. The king's troops,
having done their business, began their retreat toward Boston. This was
conducted with expedition, for the adjacent inhabitants had assembled in arms,
and began to attack them in every direction. In their return to Lexington, they
were exceedingly annoyed, both by those who pressed on their rear, and others
who, pouring in from all sides, fired from behind stone walls, and such like
coverts, which supplied the place of lines and redoubts.

At Lexington the regulars were joined by a detachment of 900 men, under lord
Piercy, which had been sent out by general Gage to support lieutenant colonel
Smith. This reinforcement having two pieces of cannon, awed the provincials,
and kept them at a greater distance, but they continued a constant, though
irregular and scattering fire, which did great execution. The close firing from
behind the walls by good marksmen, put the regular troops in no small
confusion, but they nevertheless kept up a brisk retreating fire on the militia
and minute-men.

A little after sunset, the regulars reached Bunker's Hill, worn down with
excessive fatigue, having marched that day between thirty and forty miles. On
the next day they crossed Charlestown ferry, and returned to Boston.

There never were more than 400 provincials engaged at one time, and often not
so many. As some tired and gave out, others came up and took their places.
There was scarcely any discipline observed among them. Officers and privates
sired when they were ready, and saw a royal uniform, without waiting for the
word of command. Their knowledge of the country enabled them to gain
opportunities by crossing fields and fences, and to act as flanking parties
against the king's troops, who kept to the main road.

The regulars had 65 killed, 180 wounded, and 28 made prisoners. Of the
provincials 50 were killed, and 88 wounded and missing.

This was the fatal day remarkable for the dismemberment of the British empire,
and the final separation of the American colonies. The provincial congress of
Massachusetts, which was in session at the time of the battle, dispatched an
account of it to Great Britain, accompanied with many depositions, to prove
that the British troops were the aggressors. They also addressed the
inhabitants of Great Britain, in which, after complaining of their sufferings,
they say, "these have not yet detached us from our royal sovereign; we profess
to be his loyal and dutiful subjects, and though hardly dealt with, as we have
been, are still ready with our lives and fortunes, to defend his person, crown,
and dignity. Nevertheless, to the persecution and tyranny of his evil ministry,
we will not tamely submit. Appealing to heaven for the justice of our cause, we
determine to die or be free."

To prevent the people of Boston from joining their countrymen in the vicinity,
in an attack which wa^ threatened, general Gage agreed with the town committee
that upon the inhabitants lodging their arms (...) Faneuil hall, or any other
convenient place, under the care of the selectmen, such inhabitants as chose
might depart with their families and effects. The arms delivered up after this
agreement was concluded, were 1778 fire arms, 634 pistols, 273 bayonets, and 38
blunderbusses. The agreement was well observed in the beginning, but after a
short time obstructions we^^ thrown in the way of its final completion, on the
ple^^ that persons who went from Boston to bring in the goods of those who
chose to continue within the tow^ were not properly treated. The general, on a
farth^ consideration of the consequences of moving the whi^^ out of Boston,
evaded it in a manner not consistent wit^ good faith. He was in some measure
compelled (...) adopt this dishonorable measure, from the clamo^ of the
tories, who alleged that none but enemies to the British government were
disposed to remove, and that when they were all safe with their families and
effects, the town would be set on fire. The selectmen gave repeated assurances
that the inhabitants had delivered up their arms; on the other hand general
Gage issued a proclamation, in which he asserted that he had full proof to the
contrary. The provincial congress remonstrated, but without effect. Passports
were not universally refused, but were given out slowly. The general showed a
disinclination to part with the women and children, thinking, that, by
retaining them, the provincials would be restrained from assaulting the town.
This occasioned very distressing scenes -- wives separated from their husbands
-- children from their parents -- and the aged and infirm from their relations
and friends: and this distress was heightened by the quibble which was made on
the meaning of the word effects, which the general construed as not including
merchandise; whereby he deprived the provincials of a supply of those articles
of which they stood most in need. Thus, many who quitted the town were deprived
of their usual means of support.

The flame of civil discord now broke out in all its fury. The bravery shown by
the American militia in their first essay at Lexington, and the advantages they
imagined themselves to have gained, afforded great matter of exultation.

The spirits of the people were so raised, that they meditated nothing less
than the total expulsion of the British troops from Boston. An army of 20,000
men was assembled, who formed a line of encampment from Roxbury to Mystic; and
here they were soon after pined by a large body of Connecticut troops, under
general Putnam, an old officer of great bravery and experience. By this
formidable force was the town of Boston now kept blocked up. General Gage,
however, had so strongly fortified it, that the provincials, powerful as they
were, durst not make an attack; whilst, on the other hand, his force was by far
too insignificant to meet such an enemy in the field.

Resistance being universally resolved on by the Americans, the pulpit, the
press, the bench and the bar severally labored to encourage them. The clergy
of New England were a numerous, learned, and respectable body, who had a great
ascendency on the minds of their hearers. Their number is said to have amounted
to 700, and their exertions in the public cause were important and effectual.
In their prayers and in their sermons they represented the cause of America as
the cause of heaven. The synod of New York and Philadelphia sent forth a
pastoral letter, which was publicly read in their churches. This earnestly
recommended such sentiments and conduct as were suitable to their situation.
Writers and printers followed in the rear of the preachers, and next to them
had the greatest hand in animating their countrymen. Gentlemen of the bench and
of the bar denied the charge of rebellion, and justified the resistance of the
colonists. A distinction, founded on law, between the king and his ministry,
was introduced. The former, it was contended, could do no wrong. The crime of
treason was charged on the latter, for using the royal name to varnish their
own unconstitutional measures. The phrase of a ministerial war became common,
and was use as a medium for reconciling resistance with allegiance*

At the same time that the organization of an army was resolved on by the
continental congress, a public fast was recommended to be observed on the 20th
(...) July 1775, throughout the UNITED COLONIES, (...) "a day of public
humiliation, fasting and prayer (...) Almighty God, to bless their rightful
sovereign king George, and to inspire him with wisdom to discern and pursue the
true interest of his subjects; and that the British nation might be influenced
to regard the things that belonged to their peace, before they were hid from
her eyes -- that the colonies might be ever under the care and protection of a
kind providence, and be prospered in all their interests -- that America might
soon behold a gracious interposition of heaven, for the redress of her many
grievances; the restoration of her invaded rights, a reconciliation with the
parent state, on terms constitutional and honorable to both."

The necessity of securing Ticonderoga was early attended to by many in New
England. General Gage had set the example of attempting to seize upon military
stores, and by so doing had commenced hostilities, so that retaliation appeared
warrantable.

Colonel Allen was at Castleton with about 270 men, 230 of which were Green
Mountain Boys, so called from their residing within the limits of the Green
Mountains, the Hampshire grants being so denominated, from the range of green
mountains that run through them. Sentinels were placed immediately on all the
roads to prevent any intelligence being carried to Ticonderoga.

Colonel Arnold, who now joined colonel Allen, reported, that there were at
Ticonderoga, 80 pieces of heavy cannon, 20 of brass, from four to eighteen
pounders, ten or a dozen mortars, a number of small arms, and considerable
stores; that the fort was in a ruinous condition, and, as he supposed,
garrisoned by about forty men. It was then settled, that colonel Allen should
have the supreme command, and colonel Arnold was to be his assistant.

They arrived at Lake Champlain, opposite Ticonderoga, on the ninth of May at
night. Boats were with difficulty procured, when he and colonel Arnold crossed
over with 83 men, and landed near the garrison: The two colonels advanced along
side each other, and entered the port, leading to the fort, in the gray of the
morning. A sentinel snapped his fusee at colonel Allen, and then retreated
through the covered way to the parade. The main body of the Americans then
followed and drew up. Captain de la Place, the commander, was surprised in bed.
Thus the place was taken without any bloodshed. They likewise surprised Crown
Point, in which there was a garrison of twelve men. They took, also, two small
vessels, and found materials at Ticonderoga for building others. By this
expedition the provincials acquired great quantities of ammunition and military
stores; and obtained the command of Lake Champlain, which secured them a
passage into Canada. Colonel Allen went home, and colonel Arnold, with a number
of men, agreed to remain there in garrison. Colonel Arnold, after a series of
successes, formed the bold plan of invading Canada. He wrote to congress, that
with 2000 men he would reduce the whole province. His great exertions, when
that measure was adopted, will be related hereafter.

Congress, before its dissolution on the 26th of October 1774, recommended to
the colonies, to choose members for another, to meet on the 10th of May 1775,
unless the redress of their grievances was previously obtained. A circular
letter had been addressed by lord Dartmouth to the several colonial governors,
requesting their interference to prevent the meeting of this second congress;
but these requisitions had lost their influence delegates were elected not only
for the twelve colonies that were before represented, but also for the parish
of St. John's in Georgia.

On their meeting, the day after the capture of Ticonderoga, May 10.
they chose Peyton Randolph for their president, and Charles Thomson for their
secretary. On the next day Mr. H^^^^^k, who soon after succeeded Mr. Randolph
as president, laid before them an account of the late great events of
Massachusetts: whereupon congress resolved itself into a committee of the
whole, to take into consideration the affairs of America. The line of
moderation and firmness which they pursued will be hereafter related.

Toward the latter end of May, a considerable reinforcement having arrived
with the British generals How, Burgoyne and Clinton, general Gage was enabled
to attempt something of consequence; and this the boasts of the provincials,
that they were besieging those who had been sent to subdue them, seemed to
render necessary. Some skirmishes in the mean time happened in the islands
lying off Boston harbor, in which the Americans had the advantage, and burned
an armed schooner, which her people had been obliged to abandon after she was
left aground by the tide.

Hostilities were now forwarded by the resolves of the continental congress,
which on the 8th of June, declared the compact between the crown and the people
of Massachusetts Bay to be dissolved by the violation of the charter of William
and Mary. They, at the same time, recommended to the people, to establish a new
government, until a governor of his majesty's appointment will consent to
govern the colony according to its charter. They prohibited them from
negociating any bill, or transacting any business with the sea or land officers
of Britain, their agents or contractors, furnishing them with stores or
provisions of any kind. A general post office was established at Philadelphia,
at the head of which they placed Dr. Franklin, who had been deprived of the
same place in England.

General Gage, on the other hand, issued a proclamation, wherein he offered a
pardon in the king's name, to all who should forthwith lay down their arms and
return to their respective occupations and peaceable duties, excepting only
from the benefit of that pardon, "Samuel Adams and John Hancock, whose offenses
were said to be of too flagitious a nature to admit of any other consideration
than that of condign punishment." It was also declared, that not only the
persons above named and excepted, but also all their adherents, associates, and
correspondents, should be deemed guilty of treason and rebellion, and treated
accordingly. "That all the courts of judicature were shut, and martial law
should take place, till a due course of justice should be established."

The Americans, supposing this proclamation to be a prelude to hostilities,
prepared for action. Orders were therefore issued by the provincial commander^
that a detachment of one thousand men should entrench upon Bunker's Hill, a
considerable height just at the entrance of the peninsula at Charlestown; the
situation of which rendered the possession of it of great importance to either
party. By some mistake, Breed's Hill, high and large as the other, but situated
nearer Boston, wa^ marked out for the intrenchments instead of the other*

In the night of the 16th of June, the provincials took possession of Breed's
Hill, and worked with such indefatigable diligence, that, to the astonishment
o^ their enemies, they had between midnight and the dawn of the next morning,
thrown up a redoubt about eight reds square. They kept such a profound silenc^
that they were not heard by the British, on board the^ vessels, though very
near. The dawn of day only discovered the work when near completion when the
enemy poured an incessant show^ of shot and bombs upon the redoubt from their
ships, June 17.
and from a battery on Copp's Hill in Boston; which, however, did not hinder
the provincial from throwing up a small breast work from the ea^^ side of the
redoubt to the bottom of the hill before midday; but they were prevented
completing it by the intolerable fire of the enemy. By some unaccountable
error, the detachment, which had been working for hours, was neither relieved
nor supplied with refreshments, but were left to engage under these
disadvantages.

Between twelve and one o'clock, and the day exceedingly hot, a number of boats
and barges filled with regular troops from Boston approached Charlestown, when
the men were landed at Moreton's Point, a little to the eastward of the
American works. They consisted of four battalions, two companies of grenadiers,
and ten of light infantry, with a proportion of field artillery; but, by some
oversight, their spare cartridges were much too big for them: so that, when the
Americans were at length forced from their lines; there was not a round of
artillery cartridges remaining.

Major general How and brigadier general Pigot had the command. The troops
formed and remained in that position, till joined by a second detachment of
light infantry and grenadier companies, a battalion of the land forces, and a
battalion of marines, amounting in the whole to about 3000 men. The generals
Clinton and Burgoyne took their stand upon Copp's Hill, to observe and
contemplate the bloody and destructive operations that were now commencing. The
regulars formed in two lines, and advanced deliberately, frequently halting to
give time for the artillery to fire, which was not well served. The light
infantry were directed to force the left point of the breast work, and to take
the American line in flank. The grenadiers advanced to attack in front,
supported by two battalions, whilst the left, under general Pigot, inclined to
the right of the American line. One or two of the continental regiments had
been posted in Charlestown, but afterward removed to prevent their being cut
o^^ by a sudden attack; so that the British were not in the least hurt by the
musquetry from thence.

General Gage had for some time resolved upon burning the town, whenever any
works were raised by the Americans upon the hills belonging to it: and whil^^
the British were advancing nearer to the attack, order^ came to Copp's Hill for
executing the resolution. Soo^ after a carcass was discharged, which set fire
to an old house near the ferry way; the fire instantly spread and most of the
place was soon in flames; whilst the houses at the eastern end of Charlestown
were set o^ fire by men who landed from the boats.

The regulars derived no advantage from the smo^^ of the conflagration, for the
wind suddenly shifting carried it another way, so that it could not cover the^^
in their approach. The provincials had not a riflema^^ among them, not one
being yet arrived from the south ward; and many of their muskets wanted
bayonet^ However, they were almost all marksmen, being accustomed to sporting
of one kind or other from the^^ youth. A number of Massachusetts people were
(...) the redoubt, and the part of the breast work nearest (...) The left of
the breast work, and the open ground stretching beyond its point to the water
side, through whi^^ there was not an opportunity of carrying the wor^^ was
occupied partly by the Massachusetts forces, and partly by the people of
Connecticut.

The British moved on slowly to the attack, inster^^ of using a quick step;
which gave the provincials the advantage of taking surer and cooler aim. These
(...) served their fire, till the regulars came within ten (...) twelve rods,
when they began a furious discharge (...) small arms, which stopped the
regulars, who kept (...) the firing without advancing. The discharge from the
Americans was incessant, and appeared like a continued sheet of fire, and did
such execution, that the regulars retreated in disorder, and with great
precipitation, toward the place of landing. Their officers used every effort
to make them return to the charge, with which they at length complied; but the
Americans again reserved their fire till the regulars came within five or six
rods, when the enemy was a second time staggered. The troops were thrown into
such disorder, that for a few moments general How was said to have been left
almost alone, and all the officers near him either killed or wounded. In this
critical moment, general Clinton, who arrived at the place of action from
Boston during the engagement, rallied the troops almost instantaneously, and
brought them back to the charge; at the same time the British reaped a farther
advantage, by bringing some cannon to bear, so as to rake the inside of the
breast work from end to end. The works were now every where attacked with fixed
bayonets, and, as many of the Americans were destitute of that weapon, and
their powder beginning to fail, they were forced to yield, though not till
after an obstinate resistance. At last they retreated over Charlestown neck,
which was enfiladed by the guns of the Glasgow man of war and two floating
batteries. They suffered but ^ittle however, from this formidable artillery,
though the fear of it had prevented some regiments, who were ordered to support
them, from fulfilling their duty.

It was feared by the Americans, that the British ^roops would push the
advantage they had gained, and march immediately to the head quarters at
Cambridge, about two miles distant, and in no state of defense. But they
advanced no farther than to Bunker's Hill, where they threw up works for their
own security. The provincials did the same on Prospect Hill, in front of them,
about half way to Cambridge.

The loss of the peninsula depressed the spirits of the Americans, and their
great loss of men produced (...) same effect on the British. There have been
few ^^tles in modern wars, in which, all circumstances considered, there was a
greater destruction of men than (...) this short engagement. The number of
American engaged, including those who dared to cross the (...) and join them,
amounted only to fifteen hundred; (...) the unengaged, who appeared in various
parts, did, (...) their different movements, lead may of the Bost^^ spectators
to apprehend, at that distance, that they co^sisted of some thousands. The loss
of the British, (...) acknowledged by general Gage, amounted to roy^^ Nineteen
commissioned officers were killed, and seven^ more wounded. Among those more
generally regr^^ted, were lieutenant colonel Abercrombie, and maj^^ Pitcairn.
That the officers suffered so much, must (...) imputed to their being aimed at.
From their (...) much confusion was expected; they were th^^ ^ore particularly
singled out. The light infantry (...) grenadiers lost three fourths of their
men. Of (...) company not more than five, and of another, not mo^^ than
fourteen escaped. The unexpected resistance (...) the Americans was such as
wiped away the reproach^^ of cowardice, which had been cast on them by the
enemies in Britain. The spirited conduct of the B^^ish officers merited and
obtained great applause, (...) the provincials were justly entitled to a large
porti^^ of the same, for having made the utmost exertions (...) their
adversaries necessary to dislodge them from li^^ which were the work only of a
single night.

The Americans lost five pieces of cannon. The killed amounted to 139. Their
wounded and miss^^ to 314. Thirty of the former fell into the hand^ the
conquerors. General Gage, in his letter on (...) subject, was confident they
must have been m^^ more, as the Americans were seen during the engagement,
conveying away and burying their dead. This, if true, must be accounted a very
extraordinary circumstance, and bears some resemblance to the contests related
by Homer concerning the dead bodies of his ^heroes. The Americans deeply
regretted the deaths of major general Warren, of colonel Gardner of Cambridge,
of lieutenant colonel Parker of Chelmsford, who was wounded, taken prisoner,
and afterward died (...) Boston gaol; of major Moore and major M'Clary, who
were the only officers of distinction that they lost.

In the opinion of many, general How was charge^ble with a capital error in
landing and attacking as ^e did. It might originate in too great a confidence
(...) the forces he commanded, and in too contemptuous ^n opinion of the enemy
he had to encounter. He ^ertainly might have entrapped the provincials, by
land^^g on the narrowest part of Charlestown neck, under ^he fire of the
flooting batteries and ships of war. ^ere he might have stationed and fortified
his army, and kept up an open communication with Boston by (...) water
carriage, which he would have commanded through the aid of the navy, on each
side of the penin^la. Had he used this maneuver, the provincials must have
made a rapid retreat from Breed's Hill, to escape having his troops in the rear,
and being enclosed. (...) was said that general Clinton proposed it. The
re^^ction of that proposal greatly weakened the British ar^y, and probably
prevented the ruin of the Americans.

The British troops claimed the victory in this engagement; but it must be
allowed that it was dearly bought; ^^d the Americans boasted that the real
advantages ^ere on their side, as they had so much weakened the ^emy that they
durst not afterward venture out of ^eir intrenchments.

In other places the same determined spirit of resist^ce appeared on the part
of the Americans. Lord North's conciliatory scheme was utterly rejected by the
assemblies of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and after wards in every other
colony. The commencement (...) hostilities at Lexington determined the colony
of New York, which had hitherto continued to waver, to unit^ with the rest; and
as the situation of New York re^^dered it unable to resist an attack from the
sea, it (...) resolved, before the arrival of a British fleet, to secu^^ the
military stores, send off the women and children and to set fire to the city if
it was still found incapable of defense.

At the same time that congress resolved on the establishment of an army, they
took measures to preser^^ the opposition to British power on a settled and
per^^nent basis, by establishing a large paper currency; th^^ United States
being liable for the value. From (...) paper creation, they reaped as much
benefit, for a considerable time, as would have resulted from a free (...) of
as many Mexican dollars. Thus, whilst the Briti^^ ministry were puzzling
themselves for new taxes, (...) funds on which to raise their supplies,
congress rai^^ theirs by resolutions directing paper of no intrinsic va^^ue to
be struck off, in form of promissory notes, althou^^ without any certain funds
for its support or redem^tion.

The troops which were shut up in Boston were for reduced to distress. Their
necessities obliged them attempt the carrying off the American cattle on the
^^ands in Boston Bay, which produced frequent ski^^es; but the provincials,
better acquainted with (...) navigation of these shores, landed on the islands,
^^stroyed or carried off whatever was of any use, bur^^ the light house at the
entrance of the harbor, (...) took prisoners the workmen sent to repair it, an
(...) as a party of marines who guarded them. Thus (...) garrison were reduced
to the necessity of send^^^ armed vessels to make prizes indiscriminately of
all that came in their way, and of landing in different places to plunder for
subsistence as well as they could.

The congress in the mean time continued to act with all the vigor which its
constituents had expected. Articles of confederation and perpetual union were
drawn up and solemnly agreed upon; by which they bound themselves and their
posterity for ever. These were in substance as follows.

1. Each colony was to be independent within itself, and to retain an absolute
sovereignty in all domestic affairs.

2. Delegates to be annually elected to meet in congress, at such time and
place as should be enacted in the preceding congress.

3. This assembly should have the power of determining war or peace, making
alliances; and, in short, all that power which sovereigns of states usually
claim as their own.

4. The expenses of war to be paid out of the common treasury, and raised by a
poll tax on males between 16 and 60; the proportions to be determined by the
laws of the colony.

5. An executive council to be appointed to act in place of the congress during
its re^ess.

6. No colony to make war with the Indians without consent of congress.

7. The boundaries of all the Indian lands to be secured and ascertained to
them; and no purchases of ^ands were to be made by individuals, or even by a
colony, without consent of congress.

8. Agents appointed by congress should reside among the Indians, to prevent
frauds in trading with them, and to relieve, at the public expense, their wants
and distresses.

9. This confederation to last until there should be^ reconciliation with
Britain; or, if that event should no^ take place, it was to be perpetual.

After the action at Bunker's hill, however, when the power of Great Britain
appeared less formidable in the eyes of the Americans than before, congress
proceeded formally to justify their proceedings, in a declaration showing the
necessity of taking up arms against Gre^^ Britain. This, like all their other
publications, (...) fraught with the utmost energy of language, whilst (...)
the same time it was ushered in with a solemnity, whi^^ could not fail to make
a deep impression on those (...) whom it was calculated. "Were it possible,"
said the (...) for men who exercise their reason, to believe that (...) divine
Author of our existence intended a part of (...) human race to hold an absolute
property in, and (...) bounded power over others, marked out by his infini^^
goodness and wisdom, as the objects of a legal domination, never rightfully
resistible, however severe (...) oppressive; the inhabitants of these colonies
might (...) least require from the parliament of Great Britain so (...)
evidence that this dreadful authority over them (...) been granted to that
body: but a reverence for (...) Great Creator, principles of humanity, and the
d^^tates of common sense, must convince all those (...) reflect upon the
subject, that government was institued to promote the welfare of mankind, and
ought (...) be administered for the attainment of that end.

"The legislature of Great Britain, however, sti^^lated by an inordinate
passion for power, not only (...) justifiable, but which they know to be
peculiarly rep^^bated by the very constitution of that kingdom; and (...)
spairing of success in any mode of contest where (...) guard should be had to
law, truth, or right; have, (...) length, deserting those, attempted to effect
their (...) and impolitic purpose of enslaving these colonies by violence, and
have thereby rendered it necessary for us to close with their last appeal from
reason to arms. Yet, however blinded that assembly may be, by their intemperate
rage for unlimited domination, so to slight justice in the opinion of mankind,
we esteem ourselves bound by obligations to the rest of the world to make known
the justice of our cause."

After taking notice of the manner in which their ancestors left Britain, the
happiness attending the mutual friendly commerce betwixt that country and her
colonies, and the remarkable success of the late war, they proceeded as
follows: "The new ministry, finding the brave foes of Britain, though
frequently defeated, yet still contending, took up the unfortunate idea of
granting them a hasty peace, and of then subduing her faithful friends.

"These devoted colonies were judged to be in such a state as to present
victories without bloodshed, and all the easy emoluments of statutable plunder.
The un^terrupted tenor of their peaceable and respectful be^aviour from the
beginning of their colonization; their dutiful, zealous, and useful services
during the ^ar, though so recently and amply acknowledged in the most
honorable manner by his majesty, by the ^ate king, and by parliament, could
not save them from the intended innovations. Parliament was influenced to adopt
the pernicious project; and assuming a ^ew power over them, has, in the course
of eleven years given such decisive specimens of the spirit and consequences
attending this power, as to leave no doubt of ^he effects of acquiescence under
it.

"They have undertaken to give and grant our money without our consent, though
we have ever exercised (...) exclusive right to dispose of our own
property^tatutes have been passed for extending the jurisdic^^on of the courts
of admiralty and vice admiralty beyond their ancient limits; for depriving us
of the (...) customed and inestimable rights of trial by jury, in c^^es
affecting both life and property; for suspending (...) legislature of one of
our colonies; for interdicting (...) commerce to the capital of another; and
for alteri^^ fundamentally the form of government established (...) charter,
and secured by acts of its own legislature and solemnly confirmed by the crown;
for exempti^^ the murderers of colonists from legal trial, and in (...) sect
from punishment; for erecting in a neighbour^ province, acquired by the joint
arms of Great Britain and America, a despotism dangerous to our very
ex^^^^ence; and for quartering soldiers upon the colonists (...) time of a
profound peace. It has also been resolv^ in parliament, that colonists, charged
with committ^^ certain offenses, shall be transported to England to (...) tried.

"But why should we enumerate our injuries in (...) tail? -- By one statute it
was declared, that parliament can of right make laws to bind us in all eases
what^er. What is to defend us against so enormous, so (...) limited a power?
Not a single person who assumed is chosen by us, or is subject to our control
or in^^ence; but, on the contrary, they are all of them (...) empt from the
operation of such laws; and an American revenue, if not diverted from the
ostensible (...) poses for which it is raised, would actually ligh^^ their own
burdens in proportion as it increases our^*

"We saw the misery to which such despotism we^^ reduce us. We for ten years
incessantly and ine^^tually besieged the throne as supplicants; we reason we
remonstrated with parliament in the most mild (...) decent language; but
administration, sensible that (...) should regard these measures as freemen
ought to^^ent over fleets and armies to enforce them.

"We have pursued every temperate, every respectful measure; we have even
proceeded to break off all commerical intercourse with our fellow subjects, as
our last peaceable admonition, that our attachment to no nation on earth would
supplant our attachment to liberty; this we flattered ourselves was the
ultimate step of the controversy; but subsequent events have shown how vain was
this hope of finding moderation in our enemies!

"The lords and commons, in their address in the month of February, said, that
a rebellion at that time actually existed in the province of Massachusetts Bay;
and that those concerned is it had been countenanced and encouraged by unlawful
combinations and engagements entered into by his majesty's subjects in several
of the colonies; and therefore they besought his majesty that he would take the
most effectual measures to enforce due obedience to the laws and authority of
the supreme legislature. Soon after the commerical intercourse of whole
colonies with foreign countries was cut off by an act of parliament; by
another, several of them were entirely prohibited from the fisheries in the
seas near their coasts, on which they always depended for their subsistence;
and large reinforcements of ships and troops were in mediately sent over to
general Gage.

"Fruitless were all the entreaties, arguments, and eloquence of an illustrious
band of the most distinguished peers and commoners, who nobly and strenuously
asserted the justice of our cause, to stay, or even to mit^gate the heedless
fury with which these accumulated outrages were hurried on. Equally fruitless
was the interference of the city of London, of Bristol, and of many other
respectable towns in our favor."

After having reproached parliament, general Gage, and the British government
in general, they proceed thus: "We are reduced to the alternative of chusin^ an
unconditional submission to tyranny, or resistance (...) force. The latter is
our choice. We have counte^ the cost of this contest, and find nothing so
dread^^^ as voluntary slavery. Honor, justice, and humanity forbid us tamely
to surrender that freedom which (...) received from our gallant ancestors, and
which our ^^^nocent posterity have a right to receive from us. O^^ cause is
just; our union is perfect; our internal (...) sources are great; and, if
necessary, foreign assistan^^ is undoubtedly attainable. We fight not for glory
(...) conquest; we exhibit to mankind the remarkable sp^^tacle of a people
attacked by unprovoked enemi^^ They boast of their privileges and civilization,
and ^^proffer no milder conditions than servitude or death^ In our native land,
in defense of the freedom (...) is our birthright, for the protection of our
proper^^ acquired by the honest industry of our forefathers (...) our own,
against violence actually offered, we ha^ taken up arms; we shall lay them down
when host^^^ties shall cease on the part of our aggressors, and (...) danger of
their being renewed shall be removed -- a^^ not before."

These are some of the most striking passages of the famous declaration, dated
the 6th of July, 1775. T^^ people of Britain might have been convinced by (...)
determined spirit which it breathes, without inquiri^^ whether the principles
on which it is founded are rig^^ or wrong, that the conquest of America was an
eve^ scarcely ever to be expected.

In every other respect, an equal spirit was show^ a military rage had seized
the minds of almost all (...) colonists. Persons of fortune and family, who w^
not appointed officers, entered cheerfully into the ran^ Even many of the young
Quakers took up arms, for^ themselves into companies, and applied with the ut^^
assiduity, to acquire a proficiency in military discipline: nay, so universal
was the ambition of distinguishing themselves in the cause of liberty, that no
fewer than two hundred thousand men are said at this time to have been training
throughout the continent.

Whilst the rulers of the British nation were intent upon conquering America,
they had the mortification to see those whom they styled rebels and traitors,
succeed in negociations in which they themselves were utterly foiled. In the
passing of the Quebeck bill, min^istry had flattered themselves that the
Canadians would be so much attached to them on account of restoring the French
laws, that they would very readily join in any attempt against the colonists
who had reprobated that bill in such strong terms: but in this, as in every
thing else indeed, they found themselves mistaken. The Canadians having been
subject to Britain for a period of 15 years, and being thus rendered sensible
of the advantages of British government, received the bill itself with evident
marks of disapprobation; nay, reprobated ^t as tyrannical and oppressive. A
scheme had been formed for general Carleton, governor of the prov^nce, to
raise an army of Canadians wherewith to act against the Americans; and so
sanguine were the ^opes of administration in this respect, that they had ^ent
20,000 stand of arms, and a great quantity of military stores, to Quebeck, for
the purpose. But the people, though they did not join the Americans, yet were
^ound immovable in their purpose to stand neuter. Application was made to the
bishop; but he declined (...) interpose his influence, as contrary to the rules
of ^^e Popish clergy: so that the utmost efforts of government in this province
were found to answer little (...) no purpose.

The British administration next tried to engage the ^^dians in their cause.
But though agents were dispersed among them with large presents to the chief^^
they universally replied, that they did not understand the nature of the
quarrel, nor could they distinguish whether those who dwelt in America or on
the other side of the ocean were in fault: but they were surprised to see
Englishmen asking their assistance against one another; and advised them to be
reconciled, and (...) to think of shedding the blood of their brethren. -- To
the representations of Congress they paid more respect These set forth, that
the English, on the other side (...) the ocean, had taken up arms to enslave,
not only th^^ countrymen in America, but the Indians also; and (...) the latter
should enable them to overcome the colonis^^ they themselves would soon be
re^uced (...) a state (...) slavery also. By arguments of this kind, these
savag^^ were engaged to remain neuter; and thus the coloni^^ were freed from a
most dangerous enemy. On th^^ occasion, the congress thought proper (...) hold
a solemn conference with the different tribes of Indians. July 13.
The speech made (...) them on the occasion is curious, but too long to be
ful^^ inserted. The following is a specimen of the mode of addressing these
people.

"Brothers, Sachems, and Warriors!

"We the delegates from the Twelve United Pr^^inces, now sitting in general
congress at Philadelphia send their talk to you our brothers.

"Brothers and Friends, now attend!

"When our fathers crossed the great water, (...) came over to this land, the
king of England gave (...) a talk, assuring them that they and their children
should be his children; and that if they would leave ^^^native country, and
make settlements, and live (...) and buy and sell, and trade with their
brethren bey^^ the water, they should still keep hold of the same (...) enant
chain, and enjoy peace; and it was covenant^^ that the fields, houses, goods,
and possessions, which our fathers should acquire, should remain to them as
their own, and be their children's for ever, and at their sole disposal.

"Brothers and Friends, open an ear!

"We will now tell you of the quarrel betwixt the counselors of King George
and the inhabitants and colonies of America.

"Many of his counselors have persuaded him to break the covenant chain, and
not to send us any more good talks. They have prevailed upon him to enter into
a covenant against us, and have torn asunder, and cast behind their backs, the
good old covenant which their ancestors and ours entered into, and took strong
hold of. They now tell us they will put their hands into our pocket without
asking, as though it were their own; and at their pleasure they will take from
us our charters, or written civil constitution, which we love as our lives;
also our plantations, our houses, and our goods, whenever they please, without
as^^ing our leave. They tell us that our vessels may go to that or this island
in the sea, but to this or that particular island we shall not trade any more;
and in case of our noncompliance with these new orders, they shut up our
harbors.

"Brothers, we live on the same ground with you; the same island is our common
birthplace. We desire to sit down under the same tree of peace with you: let
us water its roots, and cherish the growth, till the large leaves and
flourishing branches shall extend to the setting sun, and reach the skies. If
any thing disagreeable should ever fall out between us, the Twelve United
Colonies, and you, the Six Nations, to wound our peace, let us immediately seek
measures for healing the breach. From the present situation of our affairs, we
judge it expedient to kindle up a small sire at Albany, where we may hear each
other's voice, and disclose our minds fully to one another."

At the same time that the declaration setting forth their reasons for taking
up arms was published, congress sent addresses to the inhabitants of Great
Britain and Ireland, and to the speaker and gentlemen of the assem^bly of
Jamaica. In these, they gave reasons for the measures they had taken,
vindicated themselves from the charge of aiming at independency, professed
the^^ willingness to submit to the several acts of trade an^ navigation which
were passed before the year 1763, recapitulated their reasons for rejecting
lord North's conciliatory motion -- stated the hardships they suffer^^ from the
operations of the royal army in Boston, an^ insinuated the danger the
inhabitants of the empi^^ would be in of losing their freedom, in case their
American brethren were subdued.

All these addresses were executed in a masterly manner, and were well
calculated to make friends to the colonies. A second petition to the king was
move^ for by Mr. Dickinson, and it was carried through congress, chiefly by
him, and was the work of his (...) In this, among other things, it was stated,
"that no^ withstanding their sufferings, they had (...) tained too high a
regard for the kingdom from which they derived their origin, July 8.
to request such a reconciliation as might in any manner (...) inconsistent
with her dignity and welfare. Attach^^ to his majesty's person, family, and
government, wi^^ all the devotion that principle and affection can inspi^^
connected with Great Britain by the strongest ties the can unite society, and
deploring every event that tend^ in any degree to weaken them, they not only
most (...) vently desired the former harmony between her (...) the colonies to
be restored, but that a concord mig^^ be established between them, upon so firm
a basis as (...) perpetuate its blessings uninterrupted by any futu^^
dissensions, to succeeding generations, in both countri^^ They therefore
besought that his majesty would be pleased to direct some mode by which the
united applications of his faithful colonists to the throne, in pursuance of
their common councils, might be improved into a happy and permanent
reconciliation." This well weant petition was presented on September 1st, 1775,
by Mr. Penn and Mr. Lee, and, three days after, lord Dartmouth informed them,
"that to it no answer would be given." The rejection of this petition served as
a sufficient answer to those colomists who thought they had been too hasty in
their opposition to the parent state.

The mother country wished for absolute submission to her authority, the
colonists for a repeal of every act that imposed taxes, or that interfered in
their internal legislation. The British ministry being determined not to repeal
these acts, and the congress equally determined not to submit to them, the
claims of the two countries were so wide of each other as to afford no
reasonable ground to expect a compromise.

The other remarkable transactions of this congress were the ultimate refusal
of the conciliatory proposal made by lord North; and appointing a generalissimo
to command their armies, which were now very numerous. The person chosen for
this purpose, was GEORGE WASHINGTON, esquire of Virginia; a man so ^niversally
esteemed, that he was raised to such a high station by the unanimous voice of
congress. This election was neither accompanied with competition nor followed
by envy; but flowed from the same general impulse on the public mind, which led
the colonists (...) agree in other particulars. Horatio Gates and Charles Lee,
two English officers of considerable rep^^tation, were also chosen; the former
an adjutant ^eneral, the latter a major general. Artemas Ward, ^hilip Schuyler,
and Israel Futnam, were likewise nominated major generals. Seth Pomeroy,
Richard Montgomery, David Wooster, William Heath, Joseph Spencer, John Thomas,
John Sullivan, and Nathani^l Green, were chosen brigadier generals at the same
time.

Congress had also the satisfaction to receive deputi^^ from the whole colony
of Georgia, in July, expressing^ desire to join the confederacy. The reasons
they g^^^ for renouncing their allegiance to Britain were, that (...) conduct
of parliament toward the other colonies (...) had been oppressive; that though
the obnoxious (...) had not been extended to them, they could view (...) only
as an omission, because of the seeming little consequence of their colony, and
therefore looked upon i^ rather to be a slight than a favor. After the
access^^ of Georgia, the confederacy assumed the title of (...) Thirteen United
Colonies.

As the scene of action begins to open wherein (...) commander in chief
acquired such distinguished glo^^ some account of that great man becomes
necessary but to draw his character in his life time, would sav^^ of flattery.
Posterity will do ample justice to action which being still fresh in
remembrance, are the ampl^^ panegyric. George Washington, esquire was born (...)
Westmoreland county, Virginia, on the 11th of February, 1732. He is of English
extraction, and descend^ from one of the most opulent and respectable famil^ in
Virginia. His education and youthful exer^^ tended to form a solid mind and a
vigorous body. (...) was naturally inclined, and early in life applied him^^ to
the military profession; and acquired conside^^ experience in the command of
different bodies of (...) provincial troops during the war against France.
(...) gallant conduct in that war has been already not^^ After the peace of
1763, colonel Washington re^^ to his estate at Mount Vernon, and devoted
himself a private and philosophic life, of which he was pass^ately fond, and
which he certainly would not have relinquished, had not the voice of his
country and a sense of its danger, called him forth to public view, to assert
her rights. He was appointed a delegate to the congress which met in September
1774. Born with abilities to be the leader of a brave and independent people in
war, and to unite the jarring interests of a number of states, nature has not
been less favorable to him in corporeal than in mental endowments. His person
is majestic and striking: his physiognomy is prepossessing, and strongly
expressive of the noble qualities of his soul. This was the man, in whom, next
to God, America confided her fate, and his subsequent conduct fully justified
the choice; having led his countrymen through the mazes of a tedious and bloody
war, to the enjoyment of peace, liberty, and independence.

General Washington soon after his appointment to the command of the American
army, set out on his way to the camp at Cambridge, June 21.
accompanied by general Lee. In his progress, he was treated with the highest
honors in every place through which he passed, both by public bodies and by
individuals. Large detachments of volunteers, composed of private gentlemen,
turned out to receive him. When he reached the army, he was received with
joyful acclamations. July 2.
He published at the head of the troops, the declaration, previously drawn up
by Congress, setting forth the reasons of taking up arms.

At this time, the British were entrenched on Bunker's Hill, having also three
floating batteries in Myst^^ River, and a twenty gun ship below the ferry,
between Boston and Charlestown. They had the neck strongly fortified, and a
battery on Copp's Hill.

The continental army under the command of general Washington, amounted to
about 14,500 men. They were entrenched at Winter Hill, Prospect Hill, and
Roxbury, communicating with one another by small posts over a distance of ten
miles. Parties were likewise stationed in several towns along the sea coast.
This whole force was thrown into three grand divsions: general Ward commanded
the right wing, at Roxbury; general Lee, the left, as Prospect Hill; and the
center was commanded by general Washington. These dispositions were so
judiciously made, that the British were pent up in the town, and excluded from
the provisions and forage which the adjacent country, and islands in Boston
Bay, afforded.

Great embarrassments occurred in forming the continental army into a regular
system. Enterprising leaders had come forward with their followers, without a
scrupulous attention to rank; but it was impossible to assign to every officer
the station which hi^ services merited, or his vanity aspired to; and to
introduce discipline and subordination among freem^^ who were accustomed to
think for themselves was (...) arduous task. Many of the southern riflemen
dese^^^ to the enemy, others were mutinous and repugnant (...) all kind of
duty; and some officers were found w^^ w^erea disgrace to the Massachusetts
colony, by practicing the meanest arts of peculation. Gordon, Vol. II. p. 141.
Every subtil^ that avarice could invent or profligacy carry on, we^ used to
cheat the public, by men who procured commissions, not to fight for the
liberties of their country but to prey upon its distresses. But these abuses
(...) soon checked by the commander in chief, and the arm^ better officered;
and the troops gradually acquired (...) mechanism and movements as well as the
name of (...) army. Method and punctuality began to be introd^ed. The military
skill of adjutant general Gates (...) of infinite service in these
arrangements. The (...) of engineers to plan suitable works, and tools for
their execution, were sensibly felt; yet the zeal and activity of the soldiers
in general, greatly made up for these defects.

It was found on the 4th of August, that the whole stock of powder throughout
the four New England provinces, could make but little more than nine rounds a
man, to the army investing Boston. They remained in this destitute condition
for a fortnight or more. During this interval, the scarcity of powder became a
common camp talk; and a deserter carried an account of it to Boston. But the
British, having been so often deceived, durst not rely upon the intelligence.
Besides, though they had met with unexpected proofs of American courage, yet
they could not believe that the colonists were possessed of such consummate
assurance, as to continue investing them, whilst so destitute of ammunition.
They rather suspected a deep laid plot to ensnare them. At length, the American
army was relieved. The Jersey committee of Elizabeth Town, upon receiving the
alarming news, sent a sew tons, with the greatest privacy, lest the fears of
their own people, had it been known, should have stopped it for their own use, in
case of an emergency. A supply of several thousand pounds weight of powder was
soon after obtained from Africa, in exchange for New England rum. This was
managed with so much address, that every ounce for sale in the British forts on
the African coasts, was purchased and brought off for the use of the colonists.

The first attempts of the Americans at sea proved very successful. In the
month of November, the Massachusetts assembly and the continental congress both
resolved to grant letters of marque and reprisal, and to establish coarts of
admiralty. The object was first limite^ to the defense of the American coast,
and interc^^^ing warlike stores and supplies designed for the use of their
enemies; but as the prospect of accommodation gradually vanished, it was
extended to all British property on the high seas.

In the end of the same month, the Lee privateer, Nov. 29.
commanded by captain Manly of Marblehead, captured the brig Nancy, as ordnance
ship from Woolwich, containing a large brast mortar, upon a new construction,
afterward called the Congress, several pieces of brass cannon, a large
quantity of arms and ammunition, with all manner of tools utensils and machines
necessary for camps and artillery; so that had congress sent an order for the
articles most wanted, they could not have made out a more suitable invoice. The
whole value of the vessel and cargo was computed at 50,000 l. and this loss, in
particular, occasioned much discontent in Britain.

About two months before this valuable capture, a ship from Bristol to Boston,
with flour, having parted with her convoy, was decoyed into Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, and secured for the benefit of the Americans. Several store ships
were captured in the month of December. Among others, captain Manly took three,
with various stores for the troops in Boston, and a brig from Antigua with rum.

These were part of the immense supplies which the British ministry had
prepared for the relief of the troops in Boston. It is said that no fewer than
five thousand oxen, fourteen thousand of the largest and fartest sheep, with a
vast number of hogs, were purchased and sent out alive. Incredible quantities
of vegetables were also bought up, and cured by new methods. Ten thousand butts
of strong beer were supplied by two brewers. Five thousand chaldrons of coals
were purchased i^ the river Thames and shipped off for Boston; and even the
article of faggots was sent from London. The immense expense of maintaining
armies at such (...) distance from Britain, was now, for the first time,
experimentally felt. Some estimate of the expense of the whole may be formed,
from that of the trifling articles of vegetables, casks and vinegar, which
amounted to little less than 22,000 l. and the articles of hay, oats, and
beans, for a single regiment of light cavalry, to nearly as much more. Besides
all this enormous expense, and the charge of flour, corn, and salted
provisions, near half a million of money was expended in the purchase of
Spanish and Portuguese coin for the extraordinary and contingent articles in
various branches of the military operations. In fine, the expense in every
article, was swelled to the utmost.

It was not without reason supposed, in Britain, that by such unbounded
supplies, the troops would be restored to health and spirits, and the general
complaint silenced, that had for some time prevailed, concerning the bad and
unwholesome quality of the provisions with which they had been supplied. But
things turned out, however, in a manner directly opposite to every expectation
of this kind. After every delay in fitting out had been surmounted, the vessels
were detained for a long time on the coast of Britain, or tossed about by
contrary winds in the channel, until the greater part of the live stock,
particularly the sheep, perished; so that the sea was every where strewed with
their carcases. Contrary winds and stormy weather pursued them on their voyage
in the mid seas; and as they approached the place of their destination, the
wind blew full in their teeth and drove them off the coasts. Several of them
were blown to the West India Islands in great distress; others, entangled with
the American coasts, were either taken at sea, or in the harbors and creeks
where they put in for shelter. A few arrived at Boston, after having been beat
about in stormy seas for three or four months, with their cargoes almost
entirely spoilt, yielding a very inconsiderable portion of refreshments to the
troops, after having been purchased at such an enormous cost.

The disasters which attended the Boston transports seemed also to have waited
on the Newfoundland fishery for the year 1775. It did not at all realize the
sanguine expectations of the ministry with respect to its easy translation from
America to Britain. The Americans, by cutting off all supplies of provisions
from the ships employed in the fishery, threw every thing into disorder. So
that by sending off a number of ships to Ireland for provisions, such a neglect
was occasioned in the fishery, that the value of more than half a million
sterling of the usual produce was left in the bowels of the deep.

A dreadful tempest, likewise, which discharged itself chiefly on the shores of
Newfoundland, contributed (...) render abortive the success of those who
remained. The sea is said to have risen, almost instantaneously thirty feet
above its level. Upwards of seven hundred boats, with a number of ships, with
all on board, perished in the ocean, whilst the waves, surpassing their usual
bounds so far, overwhelmed every thing with a rapid and unavoidable
destruction. The shores presented a shocking spectacle for some time after, and
the fishing nets were hauled up loaded with dead bodies. These disasters were,
by some, ascribed to the immediate vengeance of the Deity on the opposite party.

The accumulated misfortunes of the British, as they gave new life and spirit
to the colonists, could not but add greatly to the distresses of the troops and
inhabitants blocked up in Boston. The British had the mortification to see a
number of the transports taken in the very entrance of the harbor, whilst,
from various causes, the ships of war were prevented from affording them any
relief: thus the American camp obtained the stores and necessaries which had
been destined for the sustenance and use of their enemies.

In order to supply the troops in Boston with provisions, it had been found
necessary to carry on a kind of predatory war. In the course of which, the town
of Falmouth, in Massachusetts Bay, having given some offense relative to the
loading of a mast ship, was condemned to the flames. The officer, captain
Mowat, is said to have declared he had orders for burning all the towns on the
coast between Boston and Halifax. However, he gave the people time to remove
their families from the danger, which, under pretense of a negotiation for
delivering up their arms, was lengthened out till next morning; during which
time, they had removed the greatest part of their effects. About nine in the
morning, on the 18th of October, on their refusal to deliver up their arms, and
some carriage guns, a violent discharge of cannon and mortars took place, from
four armed vessels. Above three thousand shot, besides bombs and careases, were
thrown into the town, by which the principal part of it, lying next the water,
and consisting of 130 dwelling houses, and 278 warehouses, together with the
church, a new handsome courthouse, the old townhouse, and public library,
were reduced to ashes. About one hundred of the worst houses, favored by their
situation and distance, escaped without damage. This produced an alarm on the
sea coast, and occasioned many to move with their families and effects farther
into the country, but had no tendency to procure the submission of the people
to the power and mercy of the armed British agents.

A few days after the burning of Falmouth, the Brit^ish took possession of the
Old South meeting house in Boston, and destined it for a riding school for the
use of the light dragoons. These proceedings naturally increased the
irritability of the minds of the people, and induced a more determined spirit
of refistance and aversion to Great Britain.

The first hostilities that happened in New York, commenced in the month of
August. The New York convention having resolved upon the removal of the cannon
from the battery of that city, captain Sears w^^ appointed to the business.
Captain Vandeput, of the Asia man of war, was privately informed of the design,
and prepared to oppose its execution. Learning wh^^ it was to be attempted, he
appointed a boat to watch the motions of the people assembled for the purpose,
about the dead of night. The sailors in the boat, giving the signal, with a
flash of powder, of what was going forward, the people on shore mistook it for
an attempt to fire a musket at them, and immediately aimed (...) volley of shot
at the boat, by which a man was kill^^ Captain Vandeput soon after commenced a
firing from the Asia with grape shot, swivel shot, 18 and 24 pounders, without
killing a single person, and wounded (...) three, two slightly, the other lost
the calf of his leg^ He then ceased a considerable time, supposing that th^^
people had desisted from their purpose, whilst they we^^ only changing their
mode of operation.

Captain Sears provided a deceiving party, with intention to draw the Asia's
fire from the line of the working party. He sent the former behind a breastwork
by which they were secured by dodging down upon observing the flash of the
Asia's guns. When all (...) in readiness, they huzzaed and sung out their notes
(...) though tugging in unison, and fired from the walls (...) whilst the
working party silently got off twenty-(...) eighteen pounders, with carriages,
empty carriages rammers, etc.

Upon hearing the noise and seeing the fire of the musketry, the captain
ordered a whole broadside (...) be fired toward that part of the fort where
the deceiving party had secured themselves, Aug. 24.
without intending any particular injury to the city. However, some of the shot
flew into the city and did damage.

This affair happened between twelve o'clock at night and two in the morning,
and threw the inhabitants into the utmost consternation. The distress of the
New Yorkers was very much increased by a painful apprehension, that captain
Vandeput would renew his firing upon the city. A removal of men, women,
children, and goods commenced, and continued for some time. Matters were
however so far adjusted, as to quiet the apprehensions of the people, in
reference to their suffering farther from the fire of the Asia. To prevent it,
the convention permitted Abraham Lot, esquire to supply the king's ships,
stationed at New York, with all necessaries, as well fresh as salted, for the
use of those ships.

In the month of November, the general assembly of Rhode Island passed an act
for the capital punishment of persons, who should be found guilty of holding a
traitorous correspondence with the ministry of Great Britain, or any of their
officers or agents, or of supplying the ministerial army or navy, employed
against the United Colonies, with provisions, arms, etc. or of acting as pilots
on board any of their vessels. They also passed an act for sequestering the
estates of several persons, whom they considered as avowed enemies to the
liberties of America.

Hostilities commenced in Georgia, between the opposite parties, about the
middle of November, when a number of royalists attacked the Americans, and
obliged them after three days, to surrender a fort they had taken possession
of, in which they expected to make an effectual resistance.

Before the close of the year congress resolved to build five vessels of 32
guns, five of 28, and three of 24, in order to distress the enemy and protect
their own coas^^. They likewise resolved that a committee of five be appointed
for the sole purpose of corresponding with their friends in Great Britain,
Ireland, and other part of the world. This committee is said to have rendered
very essential services to the common cause: and doubtless, their papers, if
ever made public, will thr^^^ great light upon the history of the American
revolution.

In all the countries of Europe, in which public affairs were the subject,
either of writing or conversation the general voice was in favor of the
American. Even Voltaire and Rousseau agreed in this, though^ scarcely ever in
any thing else.

CHAP. XX.
The Canada Expedition -- Disputes of Lord Dunmore (...) the Virginians --
Scheme of Connelly to bring the (...) Indians to a Junction with Lord Dunmore
at Alexandria -- North, and South, Carolina expel their Governors -- Boston
attacked and evacuated.

THE success which had hitherto attended the Americans in all their measures,
now embolde^^ them to think not only of defending themselves, (...) likewise of
acting offensively against Great Britain. The conquest of Canada appeared an
object within the^ reach, and one that would be attended with many advantages;
and as an invasion of that province was already facilitated by the taking of
Crown Point and Ticonderoga, it was resolved, if possible, to penetrate the^
way into Canada, and reduce Quebeck during the winter before the fleets and
armies, which they were well assured would sail thither from Britain, should
arrive. By order of congress, therefore, 3000 men were put under the command of
generals Montgomery and Schuyler, to whom were committed the management of
their military arrangements in the northern department, with orders to proceed
to Lake Champlain, from whence they were to be conveyed in flat bottomed boats
to the mouth of the river Sorel, a branch of the great river St. Lawrence, and
on which is situated a fort of the same name with the river. On the other hand,
they were opposed by general Carleton, governor of Canada, a man of great
activity and experience in war, who, with a very few troops, had hitherto been
able to keep in awe the disaffected people of Canada, notwithstanding all the
representations of the colonists.

As soon as general Montgomery arrived at Crown Point, he received information
that several armed vessels were stationed at St. John's, a strong fort on the
Sorel, with a view to prevent his crossing the lake, on which he took
possession of an island which commands the mouth of the Sorel, and by which he
could prevent them from entering the lake. In conjunction with general
Schuyler, he next proceeded to St John's: but finding that place too strong, it
was agreed in a council of war, to retire to Isle aux Noix, where general
Schuyler being taken ill, Montgomery was left to command alone. His first step
was to gain over the Indians whom general Carleton had employed, and this he in
a great measure accomplished; after which, on receiving the full number of
troops appointed for his expedition, he determined to lay siege to St. John's,
the first British post in Canada, being 115 miles to the northward of
Ticonderoga. In this he was facilitated by the reduction of Chamblee, a small
fort in the neighborhood, where he found a supply of six tons of gunpowder. An
attempt was made by general Carleton to relieve the place; for which purpose he
with great pains collected about 1000 Canadians, whilst colonel Maclean
proposed to raise a regiment of the Highlanders (...) had emigrated from their
own country to America.

But whilst general Carleton was on his march (...) these new levies, he was
attacked by the proving (...) and utterly defeated; which being made known to
(...) other body of Canadians who had joined colonel Ma^lean, they abandoned
him without striking a blow, (...) he was obliged to retreat to Quebeck.

The defeat of general Carleton was a sufficient (...) compence to the
Americans for that of colonel Eth^^ Allen, which had happened some time before.
The success which had attended this gentleman again Crown Point and Ticonderoga
had emboldened (...) to make a similar attempt on Montreal; but being attacked
by the militia of the place, supported (...) detachment of regulars, he was
entirely defeated (...) taken prisoner, with forty of his men, the rest making
their escape into the woods. The colonel, together with the prisoners, were
sent in irons to England, (...) the express orders of general Carleton; on the
grow^ that colonel Allen was an uncommissioned adventure. They were, however,
afterward sent back to Ameri^^^.

As the defeat of general Carleton and the desertion of Maclean's forces left
no room for the ^^^rison of St. John's to hope for any re^^^ they now consented
to surrender themsel^^^ prisoners of war; Nov. 3.
but were in other respects trea^^ with great humanity. They were in number 500
(...) ulars and 200 Canadians, among whom were many the French nobility, who
had been very active in p^^moting the cause of Britain among their countrym^^.

General Montgomery next took measures to prev^^^ the British shipping from
passing down the river (...) Montreal to Quebeck. This he accomplished so
effectually that the whole were taken. Nov. 13.
The town itself, being incapable of defense, (...) obliged to furrender at
discretion; and it was with the utmost difficulty that general Carleton escaped
in the night time in a boat with muffled paddles; and his escape ^^ved the
province, which he found now involved (...) an unexpected danger from a new
enterprise of the provincials.

This was an expedition against the lower part of the province of Canada, and
the city of Quebeck itself, set on foot by by colonel Arnold, who (...) by the
colonels Green and En^^, and majors Megis and Bigelow, (...) about 1000 men,
made an invasion from New England, through a way unfrequented by travelers,
and thought to be altogether impassable to any body of forces. He set out from
the camp at Boston, about the middle of September, from whence proceeding to
Newbury Port, at the mouth of the river Merrimack, his troops were conveyed to
the mouth of the Kenneb^^k. Up (...) they proceeded with great labor and
difficulty, being imp^^^ed by a very rapid stream, with rocky ^itles and
bottom, cataracts, carrying places, and other obstacles. Their passage along
the banks was not less difficult than by water, the country being every where
covered with thick woods, deep swamps, mountains and pre^ipices; so that the
general progress was only from four to ten miles a day. By this incessant
labor, many fell sick. One third of the number which set not, were from want
of necessaries obliged to return; the others proceeded with unabated fortitude
and constancy. Provisions became at length so scarce, that some of the men are
their dogs, and some their shoes and cartouch boxes. Though the affair might
now well be judged desperate, Arnold, with the few who adhered to him, scarcely
four hundred in number, still proceeded with great constancy; and having
crossed a ridge extending quite through that part of the continent, called the
Heights of Land, they arrived at length at the head of the Chandiere, a bran^^
of the river St. Lawrence, after which they soon ^^proached the inhabited parts
of Canada. On the (...) of November they procured some provisions, and for
after came to a house, being the first they had seen (...) thirty-one days.

On the appearance of colonel Arnold, the Canadians manifested the same good
will to him that they (...) done to Montgomery; and he, on his part, affi^^
them of the good wishes of the American coloni^^ whom he invited them to join
in perpetual friendship for which purpose he published a declaration, signed
(...) general Washington. The American army, he (...) them, was not come to
plunder, but to protect (...) animate them; they were requested therefore, not^
desert their habitations, or fly from their friends, (...) to supply them with
necessaries, for which he affar^^ them they should be amply recompensed. Ar^^
having accomplished this astonishing expedition, th^^ by acquired the name of
the American Hannibal.

After the escape of general Carleton from Mont^^ in the manner already
mentioned, general Presc^^ with some other officers, and all the armed force,
am^^ whom were one hundred and twenty British soldi^^ with eleven armed
vessels, fell into the hands of (...) provincials. Montgomery having found
plenty (...) woolen manufactures, among other articles, at M^^treal, took the
opportunity of clothing his troops, (...) preparing for their future progress
in his intended (...) pedition, which was now found to be attended (...) very
great difficulties. One of the principal of the arose from the nature of the
engagements entered (...) by the provincial soldiers. Having enlisted only for
certain time, and the term of their service being ne^^ expired, they were
desirous of returning home to the families; so that it was only by mere
affection to the general that they could now be kept together. Besides this,
other difficulties arose from the want of proper subordination, owing to the
excessive passion for liberty, and to which they could only be trained through
numberless wants and distresses of every kind. Montgomery, however, happily
possessed a genius calculated to remedy these evils; and having mostly by his
personal influence, prevailed on his troops to persevere in the enterprise he
had so happily begun, pushed on to join Arnold, with as many men as he could
spare from the defense of Montreal, and those detachments which were sent into
different parts of the province, in order to encourage and persuade the
inhabitants to join him.

It would probably have contributed greatly to the success of this enterprise,
if neither of the commanders had approached the town of Quebeck till joined by
the other, as much depended on the effect of their first appearance before the
place. Colonel Arnold, however, instead of waiting for his superior, pushed on
directly to the capital, which he found in a very distructed situation. Nov. 9.
An universal division and discontent reigned among the inhabitants, owing to
the opposition of the British merchants and others to the Quebeck act. The
petitions (...) this subject had been greatly resented by their own government;
and so far did they appear to have been suspected, that their application for
leave to embody themselves as a militia for the defense of Montreal ha^ not
even met with any answer. With regard to the French inhabitants, the case was
still worse; they were universally known to waver, and some to be so much
disaffected, that no confidence whatever could be put in them for the defense
of the city. The whole force, therefore, consisted of the handful of new raised
emigrants, who had retreated from Sorel under colonel Maclean, some marines
which the governor had received from Boston, and the militia which had been
embodied by the lieutenant governor, amounting (...) the whole to about 1520
men.

In this critical situation of affairs, colonel Arn^^ with his party suddenly
appeared at Point Levi, op^^site to the city, and had it not been for the
intervent (...) of the river, would probably have reduced it, notwithstanding
the smallness of the force he had with (...). But though he was speedily
supplied with boats so (...) purpose of crossing it, and found means to elude
(...) vigilance of the ships of war stationed there, the ^^^ment of opportunity
was lost; the divided citi^^ quickly united in the common cause; the sailors
^^^ed from the ships to manage the guns of the batteri^^ and Arnold, with his
handful of men, became the ^^^ject of contempt, instead of terror. After an
una^^ing parade, therefore, he found himself utterly unto attempt any thing,
and was obliged to content ^^^self with cutting off the supplies of provisions
as (...) as possible from the city, until general Montgo^^ could join him.

By reason of the difficulties attending a wi^^ march, through the first snows
in Canada, it was (...) 1st of December before the American comman^ reached
Point aux Trembles; where, forming a j^^tion with colonel Arnold, the siege of
Quebeck ^^menced. But before that time, general Carleton^ made such
preparations as rendered every prospe^^ success precarious, if not desperate.
Montgom^^ vain threatened, and made a boast of his stre^^. The British
commander well knew that this parad^^ intended only to cover his real weakness,
and that (...) less by surprise, he had not the least chance of ^^^ceeding.
That no means of intimidating the en^ however, might be left untried, the
American g^^ set about erecting works, in spite of the inclement (...) the
season. His batteries were composed of snow (...) water, which soon became
solid ice. He then commenced a bombardment with five small mortars, but with
little effect. In a few days the general opened a six gun battery at the
distance of 700 yards from the walls, but his metal was too light to make any
impression. The severities of the season, likewise, increased in such a manner,
that human nature seemed no longer able to resist them, and he determined at
last to put all to the issue of a general assault; it not being expected that
the garrison would make much resistance. But whilst he was making the necessary
preparations for this purpose, intelligence of the design is said to have been
conveyed to the garrison by some deserters; so that, perceiving by the motions
of the enemy, that they were taking proper measures to frustrate his design, he
was obliged to alter his mode of proceeding. On the 31st of December, 1775, he
made the arduous attempt, under cover of a vicient storm (...). The American
army, consisting of about 800 men, Dec. 31.
was divided into four bodies, of which two were directed to make false attacks
on the upper town, one by colonel Livingston at the head of the Canadians,
against St. John's gate; and the other by major Brown, against Cape Diamond;
whilst general Montgomery and colonel Arnold were to make two real ones against
the lower town. Signals were to be made for the combination of the attacks,
which were to begin exactly at five o'clock in the morning. It is said that
captain Praser, of the regulars, who was then on piquer, going his rounds, saw
the rockets fired off as signals, and, forming a conjecture of what was going
forward, (...) to arms without orders, and so prepared the garrison for defense.

The different routes the assailants had to make, the depth of the snow, and
other obstacles, prevented the execution of Livingston's command. The general
moved with his division, and passed the first barrier (...) he then advanced
boldly to attack the second, which was much stronger. A violent discharge of
grape-sh^^ from several cannon, together with a well directed (...) of
musketry, here put an end to the life and hopes of this enterprising officer.
His aid-de-camp, captain Jo^^ M'Pherson, captain Cheesman, and most of his
other officers, fell at the same time. This so dispirited ^^men, that colonel
Campbell, on whom the comman^^ devolved, thought proper to draw them off.

In the mean time colonel Arnold, with his pa^^ passed through St. Roques, and
made a furious att^^^ upon a two gun battery, which, although well defe^^ed,
was at length carried, but with considerable (...) In this attack colonel
Arnold, having his leg shatter^^ was carried off the field of battle. His
officers, however, carried on the attack with great vigor, and pu^^ing on made
themselves masters of a second (...) The garrison having now driven off the
provincials (...) every other quarter, and directing their whole fo^^ against
this small body, entirely surrounded them, a^ prevented every possibility of
escape. Even in the desperate circumstances, they did not yield till after th^^
had continued the fight three hours, during which (...) their numbers were
greatly reduced, and, convin^^ that some misfortune must have befallen their
frien^^ they surrendered themselves prisoners of war. (...) loss of the
Americans in killed and wounded, was (...) 100, and 300 were taken prisoners.
Among the (...) were captain Kenkricks, lieutenant Humphries, (...) lieutenant
Cooper. On this occasion, the humanity (...) general Carleton was more
conspicuous than in the (...) fair of Ethan Allen, as the prisoners were well
trea^ and the dead body of general Montgomery buried (...) all the honors due
to his rank as an officer, and (...) character as a private gentleman.

"This deliverance of Quebeck," says Dr. Ramsay, "may be considered as a proof
how much may be done by one man for the preservation of a country. It also
proves that soldiers may in a short time be formed out of the mass of citizens."

The conduct and courage of general Carleton in the defense of his province,
and the behavior of the garrison, met with deserved applause; nor could the
valor of the American troops be exceeded. They had fought under as great
disadvantages as those which attended the British at Bunker's hill, and had
behaved equally well, although unsuccessful. Such a terrible difaster left no
hope remaining of the accomplishment of their purpose, as the force under
general Arnold was now greatly reduced. He did not, however, abandon the
province, or even remove to a greater distance than three miles from Quebeck.

The provincials strengthened their camp in the best manner they could, being
apprehensive of an attack from the garrison. As there were few regular troops
in the place, however, general Carleton did not choose to venture ^^y attempt of
this kind, as well knowing the resolution of his adversaries, and that any
misfortune would still endanger the loss of the province. Arnold, indeed, in
his present situation, discovered an amazing vigor of mind as well as
perseverance in his enterprise. Though the severity of the winter was far
beyond any thing they had hitherto experienced the snow lying four feet deep on
a level, he made a shift not only to keep his troops together, but to render
them formidable. An express was dispatched to general Wooster, who was at
Montreal, to come with a reinforcement, and assume the command; but as this
could not be instantly done, he bore up, with the small force he had, against
the difficulties which surrounded him, and by obstructing the supplies of
provisions and other, necessaries into the town, rendered its situation (...)
precarious, should any considerable reinforcement ^^rive in time to his little
army. The Canadians, notwithstanding the bad success of the American (...)
still continued friendly; and thus he was enabled (...) sustain the hardships
of a winter (...) in (...) most severe climate. The congress, far from puff
(...) any censure on him for his misfortune, created him (...) brigadier
general.

Whilst hostilities were thus carried on with vigor (...) the north, the flame
of contention was gradually (...) tending itself in the south. Lord Dunmore,
the ^^^ernour of Virginia, was involved in disputes similar (...) those which
had taken place in other colonies. The^ had proceeded so far that the assembly
was dissolves and the governor had refused to call a new o^^ Hence a plausible
reason was afforded to the people (...) assembling a provincial congress,
where, by virtue (...) an old law of 1738, they took measures for array (...)
the militia, on pretense of the danger they (...) from the negroes; and to
remedy the defect of (...) bill, they recommended to each county to raise a
volunteer company for the better defense and protection of (...) province. Lord
Dunmore, on this, removed the pow^^ from Williamburg; which created such
discontents, (...) an immediate quarrel would probably have ens^^^ had not the
merchants of the town undertaken to ^^^tain satisfaction for the injury
supposed to be (...) the community. This tranquillity, however, was (...)
interrupted; the people, alarmed by a report that (...) armed party were on
their way from the man of (...) where the powder had been deposited, assembled
(...) arms, and determined to oppose by force any farth^^ removals. In some of
the conferences which pass^ at this time, the governor let fall some unguard
(...) expressions, such as threatening them with setting by the royal standard,
proclaiming liberty to the negroes, destroying the town of Williamsburg, etc.
which were afterward made public, and exaggerated in such a manner as greatly
to increase the public ferment.

The people now held frequent assemblies. Some of them took up arms with a
design to force the governor to restore the powder, and to take the public
money into their own possession; but on their way to Williamsburg for this
purpose, they were met by the receiver general, who became security for the
payment of the gunpowder, and the inhabitants promised to take care of the
magazine and public revenue.

By this insurrection the governor wa^ so much intimidated, that he sent his
family on board the Fowey man of war. He himself, however, issued a
proclamation, in which he declared the behavior of the person who promoted the
tumult treasonable, accused the people of dissaffection, etc. On their part
they were by no means deficient in recriminating; and some letters of his to
Britain being about the same time discovered, consequences ensued extremely
similar to those which had been occasioned by those of Mr. Hutchinson at Boston.

In this state of confusion the governor thought it necessary to fortify his
palace with artillery, and procure a party of marines to guard it. Lord North's
conciliatory proposal arrived also about the same time, and he used his utmost
endeavors to cause the people to comply with it. The arguments he used were
plausible; and, had not matters already gone to such a pitch of distraction, it
is highly probable that some attention would have been paid to them. "The view
(he said) in which the colonies ought to behold this conciliatory proposal, was
no more than an earnest admonition from Great Britain to relieve her wants:
that the utmost condescendence had been used in the mode of application; no
determinate sum having been fixed, as it (...) thought most worthy of British
generosity to take wh^^ they thought could be conveniently spared, and (...)
wise to leave the mode of raising it to themselves," (...) But the clamor and
dissatisfaction were now so universal, that nothing else could be heard (...)
governor had called an assembly for the purpose of laying this conciliatory
proposal (...) fore them; June 1.
but it had been little attended to. T^^ assembly began their session by
inquiries into the (...) of the magazine. It had been broken into by some the
townsmen; for which reason spring gun^ had (...) placed there by the governor,
which discharged themselves upon the offenders at their entran^^ these
circumstances, June 8.
with others of a simil^^ kind, raised such a violent uproar, that, (...) soon
as the preliminary business of the session was (...) the governor retired on
board the Fowey man of (...) informing the assembly that he durst no longer
(...) himself on shore. This produced a long course (...) disputation, which
ended in a positive refusal of (...) governor to trust himself again in
William (...) even to give his assent to the bills, which could (...) be passed
without it, although the assembly offe^^ to bind themselves for his personal
safety. In (...) turn he requested them to meet him on board (...) man of war,
where he then was; but his prop^^ was rejected, and all farther correspondence,
conti^^ing the least appearance of friendship, was discontinued.

Lord Dunmore, having thus abandoned his government, attempted to reduce by
force those whom he co^^ no longer govern. Some of the most strenuous ^^herents
to the British cause, whom their zeal had r^^dered obnoxious at home, now
repaired to him. (...) was also joined by numbers of black slaves. With the^
and the assistance of the British shipping, he was for some time enabled to
carry on a kind of predatory war sufficient to hurt and exasperate, but not to
subdue. After some inconsiderable attempts on land, proclaiming liberty to the
slaves, Nov. 7.
and setting up the royal standard, he took up his residence at Norfolk, a
maritime town of some consequence, where the people were better affected to
Britain than in most other places. A considerable force, however, was collected
against him; and the natural impetuosity of his temper prompting him to act
against them with more courage than caution, he was entirely defeated, and
obliged to retire to his shipping, which was now crowded by the number of those
who had incurred the resentment of the provincials.

In the mean time, a scheme of the utmost magnitude and importance was formed
by one Mr. Connelly, a Pennsylvanian, attached to the cause of Britain. The
first step of this plan was to enter into a league with the Ohio Indians. This
he cummunicated to lord Dunmore, and it received his approbation: Upon which
Connelly (...) out, and actually succeeded in his design. On his return, he was
dispatched to general Gage, from whom he received a colonel's commission, and
set out in order to accomplish the remainder of his scheme. The plan in general
was, that he should return to the Ohio, where, by the assistance of the British
and Indians in these parts, he was to penetrate through the back settlements
into Virginia, and join lord Dunmore at Alexandria. But by an accident very
naturally to be expected, he was discovered, taken ^risoner, and confined.

After the retreat of lord Dunmore from Norfolk, that place was taken
possession of by the provincials, who greatly distressed those on board lord
Dunmore's fleet, by refusing to supply th^^ with any necessaries; 1776, Jan. 1.
and by firing on th^^ from behind the buildings and warehouses on the wharves.
These proceedings drew a remonstrance from his lordship; in which he likewise
insist that the fleet should be furnished with necessaries; (...) his request
being denied, a resolution was taken to (...) fire to the town. After giving
the inhabitants pr^^^ warning, a party landed, under cover of a man of (...)
and set fire to that part which lay nearest the sho^^ but the flames were
observed at the same time to (...) sorth in every other quarter, and the whole
town (...) reduced to ashes. This universal destruction, ^^^sioned a loss of
more than L.300,000.

In the southern colonies of Carolina, the government were expelled, and
obliged to take refuge on board men of war, as lord Dunmore had been; Mr. Ma^^
governor of North Carolina, on a charge of attemp^^ to raise the back
settlers, consisting chiefly of S^^^ Highlanders, against the colony. Having
(...) themselves against any attempts of these enemies, (...) ever, they
proceeded to regulate their internal con^^^ in the same manner as the rest of
the colonies.

Toward the end of the year 1775, Britain b^^^ the whole of America united
against her in the (...) determined opposition. Her vast possessions of (...)
tract of land (since known by the name of the (...) States) were now reduced to
the single town of B^^^ in which her forces were besieged by an enemy (...)
whom they were apparently not able to cope, and whom they must of course expect
in a very short (...) to be expelled. The situation of the inhabitan^^ Boston,
indeed, was peculiarly unhappy. After ^^ing failed in their attempts to leave
the town, in (...) as has been already related, general How, who ^^ceeded
general Gage in October, 1775, being ^^^hensive that they might give
intelligence of the situation of the British troops, strictly prohibited any
person from leaving the place under pain of military execution. 1776, March.
Thus matters continued till the month of March 1776, when the town was
evacuated.

General Washington opened a battery on the west side of the town, from whence
it was bombarded, with a heavy fire of cannon at the same time; and three days
after, it was attacked by another battery from the eastern shore. This terrible
attack continued for 14 days without intermission; when general How, finding
the place no longer tenable, determined if possible to drive the enemy from
their works. Preparations were therefore made for a most vigorous attack, on a
hill called Dorchester Neck, which, during one night, the Americans had
fortified in such a manner as would in all probability have rendered the
enterprise next to desperate. No difficulties, however, were sufficient to
daunt the spirit of the general; and every thing was in readiness, when a
sudden storm prevented an exertion which must have been productive of a
dreadful waste of blood. Next day, upon a more close inspection of the works
they were to attack, it was thought advisable to desist from the enterprise
altogether. The fortifications were very strong, and extremely well provided
with artillery; and, besides other implements of destruction, upwards of 100
hogsheads of stones were provided to roll down upon the enemy as they came up;
which, as the ascent was extremely steep, must have done prodigious execution.

Nothing therefore now remained but to think of a retreat; and even this was
attended with the utmost difficulty and danger. The Americans, however, knowing
that it was in the power of the British general to reduce the town to ashes,
which could not have been repaired in many years, and being told by four of the
selectmen, who were allowed to go to the American camp, that general How did
not intend to burn the town unless he was impeded in his embarkation, did not
think proper to give the least molestation; and for the space of a fortnight
the troops were employed in the evacuation of the place, from whence they
carried along with them 2000 of the inhabitants, who durst not stay, on account
of their attachment to the British cause. Several ships were left behind, in
order to protect such vessels as should arrive from Britain; and the
fortifications of Castle William were blown up, lest the Americans should, by
their means, lock up the m^^ of war in the harbor, and render any future
attempt on the town by sea, totally impracticable. From Boston they sailed to
Halifax; but all their vigilance could not prevent a number of valuable ships
from falling into the hands of the Americans. During the embarkation of the
rear of the royal army, general Washington marched into the town of Boston with
all the parade of victory, March 17.
and was received by the inhabitants, who now recovered their liberty, with
every possible mark of gratitude and respect, as their deliverer. He likewise
received the public thanks of the assembly of the province. Being apprehensive
however, that general How, who had rather more than 7000 men embarked, might
make some attempt on New York, he that very day sent off some regiments for the
defense of the place, under the conduct of general Lee. A considerable quantity
of cannon and ammunition had also been left at Bunker's Hill and Boston Neck;
and in the town, an immense variety of goods, principally woollen and linen, of
which the provincials stood very much in need. Some shops, it is said, were
opened and stripped of their goods by the soldiers; part w^^ carried off, and
part wantonly destroyed. These irregularities were forbidden in orders, and the
guilty threatened with death; but nevertheless much mischief was committed. The
estates of those who fled to Halifax were confiscated; as also those who were
attached to government, and had remained in the town.

As an attack was expected as soon as the British forces should arrive, every
method was employed to render the fortifications, already very strong,
impregnable. For this purpose, some foreign engineers were employed, who had
before arrived at Boston; and so eager were people of all ranks to accomplish
this business, that every able bodied man in the place, without distinction of
rank, set apart two days in the week, to complete it the sooner.

CHAP. XXI.
The Siege of Quebeck-continued -- General Corleton receives relief -- Sallies
out, and defeats the Americans -- His Humanity -- General Thomson defeated --
General Sul^ivan retreats and saves the remains of the American army -- General
Gordon shot by Lieutenant Whitcombe, when unarmed -- Captain Mugford's Exploits
in Boston Bay -- Lieutenant Colonel Campbell and a number of Highlanders
carried in prisoners to Boston, after a smart combat -- General Moore defeats
she Loyalists in North Carolina -- Charleston, in South Carolina, besieged by a
British fleet and army -- They are obliged to retreat with great loss --
Commodore Hopkins seizes ordnance and stores in the Bahama Islands -- Failed in
his attempts upon the Glasgow frigate -- The British convey vessels up Lake
Champlain, and destroy the Naval Force of the Americans -- Congress declare the
States independent -- Battle on Long Island -- General Washington's able
Retreat -- The Royal Commissioners hold a Conference with a Committee of
Congress -- New York abandoned -- Battle (...) the White Plains -- The British
overrun the Jersies -- The desperate situation of the American affairs --
Gen^^^^ Lee taken prisoner and closely confined -- Lieutenant Colnel Campbell
confined in a dungeon in Concord gaol -- General Sullivan joins General
Washington -- Rhode Is^^and taken, and Commodore Hopkins's squadron bloc^^^ up
-- General Washington invested with Dictatorial Power -- He gives a new turn to
the affairs of America, (...) surprising and defeating the British in the
Battles (...) Trenton and Princeton -- Cruelties of the Hessians (...) British
in the Jersies -- Causes of the decline of the Br^ish affairs -- Indians attack
the back settlements of the Southern States -- They are routed and sue for
Peace -- Affairs in Britain -- American privateers distress their trade -- An
account of John the Painter.

IN Canada, the American arms continued unsu^cessful; nor did they ever recover
after the blo^ they received before the walls of Quebeck. That unsuccessful
assault made a deep impression on the Camdians and Indians, which the most
animating addresse^ of Congress were unable to remove.

Congress, in their letter to the Canadians, observed, "Such is the lot of
human nature, Jan. 24.
that the best of causes are subject to vicissitudes; but generous souls,
enlightened and warmed with the fire of liberty, become more resolute as
difficulties increase." They stated to them, that "eight battalions were
raising to proceed to their province, and that if more force was necessary it
should be sent." They requested them to seize with eagerness the favorable
opportunity then offered to cooperate in the present glorious enterprise.

The cause of the Americans had received such powerful aid from many patriotic
publications in their gazettes, and from the fervent exhortations of popular
preachers, connecting the cause of liberty with the principles of religion,
that it was determined to employ these two powerful instruments, printing and
preaching, to operate on the minds of the Canadians. A complete apparatus for
printing, together with a printer and a clergyman, were therefore sent into
Canada.

These powerful auxiliaries were, however, of no avail. Reinforcements had been
promised to general Arnold, who still continued the blockade of Quebeck; but
they did not arrive in time to second his operations. Being sensible, however,
that he must either desist from the enterprise, or finish it successfully, he
recommenced in form; attempting to burn the shipping, and even to storm the
town itself. The provincials were unsuccessful, by reason of the smallness of
their number, though they succeeded so far as to burn a number of houses in the
suburbs; and the garrison were obliged to pull down the remainder, in order to
prevent the sire from spreading.

As the provincials, though unable to reduce the town, kept the garrison in
continual alarms, and in a very disagreeable situation, March 25.
some of the nobility collected themselves into a body under the command of one
Mr. Beaujeu, in order to relieve the capital; but they were met on their march,
and so entirely defeated, that they were never afterward able to attempt any
thing.

By the first of May so many new troops had arrived, that the American army, in
name, amounted to 3000; but they had little reason to plume themselves on their
success or augmented numbers. Their want of artillery at last convinced them,
that it was impracticable in their situation to reduce a place so strongly
fortified; the small pox at the same time made its appearance in their camp,
and carried off great numbers; intimidating the rest to such a degree, that
they deserted in crowds. The affections of the Canadians were likewise
alienated by the rapacity and love of plunder which led many of the invading
army to practices, disgraceful to themselves, and injurious to the cause in
which they had taken up arms. To add to their misfortunes, the British
reinforcements unexpectedly appeared, and the ships made their way through the
ice with such celerity, that the one part of their army was separated from the
other, and general Carleton, May 6.
sallying out as soon as the reinforcement was landed, obliged them to fly with
the utmost precipitation, leaving behind them all their cannon and military
stores; at the same time that their shipping was entirely captured by vessels
sent up the river for that purpose. On this occasion the provincials fled so
fast that they could not be overtaken; so that none fell into the hands of the
British, excepting the sick and the wounded.

The humanity and generosity of general Carleton met with no less applause, on
this prosperous turn in his favor, than what he acquired by the brave and
judicious defense he had made, whilst every thing seemed to conspire against
him. A number of the sick and wounded Americans were scattered about in the
woods and villages, not only destitute of every comfort necessary in their
miserable situation, but in the utmost danger of perishing for want. To prevent
the melancholy fate which threatened these unfortunate men, the viotorious
general issued a proclamation, to remove their doubts and fears, May 10.
engaging "that they should have relief and assistance at the public expense;"
at the same time assuring them, "that as soon as they were recovered, they
should have free liberty to depart." "This humane line of conduct," says Dr.
Ramsay, was more injurious to the views of the leaders in the American
councils, than the severity practiced by other British commanders. The truly
politic, as well as humane general Carleton, dismissed these prisoners, after
liberally supplying their wants, with a recommendation, "to go home, mind their
farms, and keep themselves and their neighbors from all participation in the
unhappy war."

It was during this calamitous state of affairs that congress were seriously
deliberating upon a final separation from Great Britain. And, at length, in the
month of July, the declaration of independence was published. A particular
account of this momentous transaction will be given hereafter. In the mean time
we shall go on with an account of the northern campaign.

The British general, now freed from any danger of an attack, was soon enabled
to act offensively against the provincials, by the arrival of the forces
destined for that purpose from Britain. By these he was put at the head of
about 13,000 men, among whom were those of Brunswick. With this force he
instantly set out to the Three Rivers, where he expected that Arnold would have
made a stand; but he had retired to Sorel, a place 150 miles distant from
Quebeck, where he was at last met by the reinforcements ordered by congress.
Here, though the preceding events were by no means calculated to inspire much
military ardour, a very daring enterprise was undertaken; and this was, to
surprise the British troops posted here under generals Fraser and Nesbit; of
whom the former commanded those on land, the latter such as were on board of
transports, and were but a little way distant. The enterprise was undoubtedly
very hazardous, both on account of the strength of the parties against whom
they were to act, and as the main body of the British forces were advanced
within 50 miles of the place; beside^ that a number of armed vessels and
transports with troops lay between them and the Three Rivers. Two thousand
chosen men, however, under general Thomson, engaged in this enterprise. Their
success was by no means answerable to their spirit and valor. Though they
passed the shipping without being observed, general Fraser had notice of their
landing; and thus being prepared to receive them, they were soon thrown into
disorder, at the same time that general Nesbit, having landed his forces,
prepared to attack them (...) the rear. On this occasion some field pieces did
prodigious execution, June 8.
and a retreat (...) found to be unavoidable. General Nesbit, however, had got
between them and their boats; (...) that they were obliged to take a circuit
through a de^^ swamp, whilst they were hotly pursued by both parties at the
same time, who marched for some miles on each side of the swamp, till at last
the unfortunate provincials were sheltered from further damage by a wood at the
end of the swamp. Their general, however, was taken, with 200 of his men.

By this disaster the provincials lost all hopes of accomplishing any thing in
Canada. They demolished their works, and carried off their artillery with the
utmost expedition. They were pursued, however, by general Burgoyne; against
whom it was expected that they would have collected all their force, and made
(...) resolute stand. But they were now too much dispirited by misfortune, to
make any farther exertions of valor. On the 18th of June the British general
arrived at Fort St. John's, June 18.
which he found abandoned and burnt. Chamble^ had shared the same fate, as well
as all the vessels that were not capable of being dragged up against the
current of the river. It was thought that they would have made some resistance
at Nut Island, the entrance to Lake Champlain; but this also they had
abandoned, and retreated across the lake to Crown Point, whither they could not
be immediately followed. Thus was the province of Canada entirely evacuated by
the Americans; whose loss in their retreat from Quebeck was not calculated at
less than 1000 men, of whom 400 fell at once into the hands of the enemy at a
place called the Cedars, about 50 miles above Montreal, by the bad conduct of
colonel Cole and major Butterfield, who escaped deserved punishment, and were
only cashiered and disgraced. General Sullivan, however, who conducted this
retreat after the affair of general Thomson, had great merit in what he did,
and received the thanks of congress accordingly.

Great numbers of Canadians had taken a decided part with the Americans; and
although congress had assured them but a few months before, "that they would
never abandon them to the fury of their common enemies," the provincial
commanders were, from the necessity of the case, forced to leave them to the
mercy of that government against which they had offended. A short time before
the Americans evacuated Canada, general Arnold was busily employed in
plundering the merchants of Montreal, under pretense of supplying the army. And
"his nephew, soon after, opened a store at Albany, and publicly disposed of
goods which had been procured at Montreal."

General Sullivan left the northern army on the 12th of July, and was succeeded
by general Gates. General Sullivan's return of the troops serving in Canada was
7006. It appears that the whole loss sustained by the provincials at Quebeck,
Three Rivers, Cedars, the consequent retreat from Canada, together with deaths
and desertions which happened from the first of April, amounted to upwards of
5000 men, exclusive (...) 3000 sick.

Toward the end of July, one lieutenant W^^^combe, a Green Mountain boy, who
was out (...) scouting party, was guilty of a most base and villan^^^ action,
from no other principle than a desire of pl^^der. He wanted a sword and a
watch; and in order to supply himself, shot general Gordon, as he was ^^^ing
unarmed from St. John's toward Chamblee. T^^ general died of the wound a few
days after. This, (...) was ^atural, raised the resentment of sir Guy Carlet^^
army. Through the weakness of government, (...) military discipline, at that
time, he was neither de^^ered up to the enemy, nor received deserved punis^ment.

Some transactions happened at Boston, after i^ (...) evacuated, which deserve
to be mentioned. One M^^ford, who had been master of a trading vessel, app^^^
to general Ward for the command of a continen^ cruiser which lay unemployed. By
his importun^ and professions he prevailed, and had an order gi^^^ him. The
captain having procured powder and (...) with twenty men, pushed immediately
into Boston (...) After he was gone from the general, the latter recei^^ such a
bad character of him, that he sent off an expre^^ to recall the order; but it
was too late, as Mug^^^ had sailed. Soon after he had got into the bay, (...)
ship Hope of 270 tons, 4 guns, and 17 men, preferm^^^ to view. She was last
from Cork, and had on bo^^^ 1500 barrels of gunpowder, besides carbines and
bayonets, traveling carriages for heavy cannon, a vast variety of tools,
implements, and necessaries for the ar^^ and artillery. Captain Mugford, in
(...) cruiser of fifty tons and four guns, May 17.
ran (...) to her, and ordered her to strike. The Hope, either from the sailors
declining to fight, or from other motives, made no resistance. Commodore Banks
lay a few miles off with his men of war, in sight; and his boats might soon
have been up with the ship. The captain of the Hope, sensible of this
advantage, gave orders to his men to cut the topfail halliards and ties.
Mugford heard the orders, and knew the consequence of executing them -- that
the sailing of the ship would be so long prevented, that the men of war's boats
would recover her. He therefore opened with a volley of oaths and execrations,
and, in the most horrid manner, threatened the captain and every man on board
with immediate death if the orders were executed, upon which the captain was so
terrified as to desist. After taking possession of his prize, Mugford was
joined by two other small cruisers, who assisted in carrying her safe through
Pudding Point Gut. The ^inhabitants of Boston, who had been engaged in keeping
the continental fast, had, on leaving their respective places of worship in the
afternoon, the peculiar pleasure of seeing in the harbor the most valuable
prize, on account of the powder, taken since the commencement of the war.

Two days after this exploit, Mugford's cruiser and another in company were
attacked, when at anchor in Pudding Point Gut, by thirteen boats from the men
of war at Nantasket. The boats were beaten off with the loss of the brave
lieutenant who commanded, and several of his men; but Mugford, exerting himself
heroically, was killed, and was the only person lost on the side of the
American cruisers.

Commodore Banks, omitting to leave cruisers in the bay, after he was forced to
leave Nantasket, afforded an opportunity to the American privateers of taking a
number of Highlanders. Three days after his quitting it, June 17.
the George and Annabella transports entered, after a passage of seven weeks
from Scotland, during which time, they had (...) an opportunity of speaking
with a single vessel, th^^ could give them the smallest information of the
British troops having evacuated Bost^n. They were attac^^^ in the morning by
four privateers, with whom (...) engaged till the evening, when she privateer^
(...) away, and the transports pushed for Boston harbor not doubting but that
they should receive protection either from a fort, or ship of force stationed
for (...) security of British ships. They stood up for Nant^^ road, when an
American battery opened upon th^^ which was the first serious proof they had of
the fi^^tion of affairs at the port to which they were desti^^^ They were too
far embayed to retreat, as the wind (...) died away, and the tide was half
expended. The ^^^vateers, with which they had been engaged, joined (...) two
others, made toward them. They prepared (...) action, but by some misfortune,
the Annabella (...) aground so far astern of the George, that the latter
^^^pected but a feeble support from her musketry. (...) eleven at night, the
privateers anchored close by, (...) hailed them to strike the British flag. The
mate (...) George, and every sailor on board, the captain excepted, refused to
fight any longer; but every officer (...) private of the seventy-first
regiment, who were in (...) ship, stood to their quarters, with ready obedience
(...) the lieutenant colonel, until their ammunition was ^^^pended. They were
then forced to yield, after a (...) combat of an hour and an half. Their killed
(...) eight privates and major Menzies, besides seven^^^ wounded. The major was
buried with the hon^^^ of war at Boston; and the prisoners experienced (...)
utmost civility and good treatment. A week b^^ the capture of these transports,
the Ann, in the (...) service, was taken and carried into Marblehead. (...)
number of Highlanders taken amounted to 267 ^^^vates, and 48 officers, besides
lieutenant colonel Archibald Campbell.

The bad suecess of the provincials in Canada, was somewhat compensated by what
happened in the southern colonies. -- We have formerly taken notice that Mr.
Martin, governor of North Carolina, had been obliged to leave his province and
take refuge on board a man of war. Notwithstanding this, he did not despair of
reducing it again to obedience. For this purpose be applied to the Regulators,
a daring set of men, who lived in a kind of independent state; and though
considered by government as rebels, yet had never been molested, (...) account
of their numbers and known skill in the use of fire arms. To the chiefs of
these people commissions were sent, in order to raise some regiments; and a
colonel Macdonald was appointed to command them. In the month of February he
erected the king's standard, issued proclamations, etc. and collected some
forces, expecting to be soon joined by a body of regular troops, who were known
to be shipped from Britain to act against the southern colonies. The Americans,
sensible of their danger, dispatched immediately what forces they had to act
against the royalists, at the same time that they diligently exerted themselves
to support these with suitable reinforcements. Their present force was
commanded by a general Moore, whose numbers were inforior (...) Macdonald; for
which reason the latter summoned him to join the king's standard under pain of
being treated as a rebel. Feb. 15.
But Moore, being well provided with cannon, and conscious that nothing could
be attempted against him, returned the compliment, by acquainting colonel
Macdonald, that if he and his party would lay down their arms, and subscribe an
oath of fidelity to congress, they should be treated as friends; but if they
persisted in an undertaking for which it was evident they had not sufficient
strength, they could not but ^^^pect the severest treatment. He reminded them
(...) their ungrateful behavior to the colony, and the g^^eral himself of an
oath he and some of his efficers (...) taken a short time before, that they
only came to (...) their friends and relations, without any concern wh^^^ever
in public matters; upon which declaration al^^ they were allowed to enter the
country; whilst on (...) other hand he and his officers were engaged in the
(...) honorable and glorious cause in the world -- the ^^fence of the
liber^ies of their country.

In a few days general Moore found himself at the (...) of 8000 men, by reason
of the continual supplice (...) daily arrived from all parts. The royal party
amo^^^ed only to 2000, and they were destitute of artille^^ which prevented
them from attacking the enemy (...) they had the advantage of numbers. They
were (...) therefore obliged to have recourse to a desperate ex^^tion of
personal valor; by di^t of which they effec^^^ a retreat for near 80 miles to
Mo^re's Creek, within (...) miles of Wilmington. Could they have gained (...)
place, they expected to have been joined by govern^^^ Martin, lord William
Campbell, and general Clint^^^ who had lately arrived with a considerable
detachme^^ whom they were to introduce into the heart of (...) country; by
which means they hoped that all the (...) settlers would be united in the royal
cause, the Indi^^^ be brought forward, and the loyalists meet (...)
encouragement to show themselves. But Moore (...) his army pursued them so
close, that they were oblig^^^ to attempt the passage of the creek itself,
though a ^^^siderable body of the Americans, under the comma^^ of colonel
Caswell, with fortifications well planted (...) cannon, was posted on the other
side. On attempt^^^ the creek however, it was found not to be forda^^^ They
were obliged therefore to cross over a wooden bridge, which the provincials had
not time to destroy entirely. They had, however, by pulling up part of the
planks, and greasing the remainder in order to render them slippery, made the
passage so difficult, that the royalists could not attempt it. In this
situation they were, Feb. 27.
on the 27th of February, attacked by Moore with his superior army, and totally
defeated, with the loss of their general and most of their leaders, as well as
the best and bravest of their men, and the victory on the part of the
provincials was every way complete.

Thus was the power of the provincials established in North Carolina. Nor were
they less successful in the province of Virginia; where lord Dunmore, having
long continued an useless predatory war, was at last driven from every creek
and road in the province. The people he had on board were distressed to the
highest degree by confinement in small vessels. The heat of ^he season, and the
numbers crowded together, produced a pestilential fever, which made great
havoc, especially among the blacks. At last, finding themselves in the utmost
hazard of perishing by famine as well as disease, they set fire to the least
valuable of their vessels, reserving only about 50 for themselves, in which
they bid a final adieu to Virginia, some sailing to Florida, July.
some to Bermuda, and the rest to the West Indies. Lord Dunmore, after he
quitted Virginia, joined the Pritish forces, and arrived with sir Peter Parker
off Staten island.

In South Carolina the provincials had a more formidable enemy to deal with. A
squadron, whose object was the reduction of Charleston, had been fitted out in
December 1775; but by reason of unfavourable weather did not reach Cape Fear in
North Carolina, May.
till the month of May 1776: and here it met with f^rther obstacles till the
end of the month. Thus the Americans, always noted for their alertness in
raising fortifications, had time to strength^^ those of Charleston in such a
manner as rendered, extremely difficult to be attacked. The British squ^^ron
consisted of the Bristol, the admiral's ship, of (...) guns; the Experiment of
the same force; the Act^^^ Solebay, and Siren frigates of 28 guns each; (...)
Sphinx of 20, a hired armed ship of 22, a small slo^^ of war, an armed
schooner, and the Thunder (...) ketch, all under the command of sir Peter
Parker The land forces were commanded by general Clint^^ lord Cornwallis, June.
and brigadier general Vaugh^^ In the beginning of June the squadron anch^^ed
off Charleston bar.

The Americans were commanded by general L^^ who had been the constant
antagonist of Clinton (...) since he left Boston: when the British general
touch^^ at New York, such was the activity and diligence (...) the provincials,
headed by general Lee, that he fou^^ no place open to attack: on his arrival at
Virginia, (...) found every thing in the same state: when he came (...) Cape
Fear, in North Carolina, the same general (...) present in the same state of
preparation: and now, (...) his arrival at Charleston, the same opponent
presen^^^ himself, seemingly as well prepared for his recepti^^ as ever.

The fleet had some difficulty in passing Charle^^^ bar, being obliged to take
out the guns from two (...) the largest ships, which were, notwithstanding,
seve^^ times in danger of sticking fast. The next obsta^^^ was a strong fort on
Sullivan's Island, six miles (...) from Charleston; which, though not
completely finished, was very strong. However, the British general resolved
without hesitation to attack it; but though an attack was easy from the sea, it
was very difficult to obtain a cooperation of the land forces. This was
attempted by landing them on Long Island, adjacent to Sullivan's Island on the
east, from which it is separated by a very narrow creek; ^^^d not to be above
two feet deep at low water. Opposite to this ford the provincials had posted a
strong body of troops, with cannon and intrenchments; whilst general Lee was
posted on the main land, with a bridge of boats betwixt that and Sullivan's
Hand, so that he could at pleasure send reinforcements to the troops in the
fort on Sullivan's Island.

On the part of the British, so many delays occursed, that it was the 28th of
June before matters were in readiness for an attack; and by this time the
provincials had abundantly provided for their reception. On the morning of that
day, the bomb ketch began to throw shells into Fort Sullivan, June 28.
and about midday the two 50 gun ships and the three 28 gun frigates came up
and began a severe fire. The three frigates were ordered to take their station
between Charleston and the fort, in order to ensilade the batteries, and cut
off the communication with the main land; but through the ignorance of the
pilots they all stuck fast; and though two of them were disentangled, they were
found to be totally unfit for service: the third was burnt, that she might not
fall into the hands of the provincials.

The attack was therefore confined to the Bristol, Experiment, the three armed
vessels, and the bomb ketch, between whom and the fort a ^readful fire ensued.
The Bristol suffered excessively. The springs on her cable being shot away, she
was for some time entirely exposed to the fire of the batteries. As the
Americans poured in great quantities of red hot balls; she was twice in flames.
The captain (Mr. Morris) after receiving five wounds, was obliged to go below
deck in order to have his arm amputated. After undergoing this operation he
returned to his place, where (...) received another wound, but still refused to
(...) station: at last he received a red hot ball in his (...) which instantly
put an end to his life. Of all the ^^^^cers and seamen who stood on the quarter
deck of (...) vessel, not one escaped without a wound, excepting (...) Peter
Parker alone; whose intrepidity and presen^^ mind on this occasion was very
remarkable. The^^ engagement lasted till darkness put an end to it. (...)
damage was done by the British, as the works of (...) Americans lay so low that
many of the shot flew (...) and the fortifications being composed of pa^^^
(...) mixed with earth, were extremely well calculate (...) resist the
impression of cannon. During the heigh^ (...) the attack, the provincial
batteries remained for so^^time silent, so that it was concluded that they
(...) been abandoned; but this was found to proceed (...) from want of powder;
for as soon as a supply of (...) necessary article was obtained, the firing was
resum^^ as before. During this desperate engagement it (...) found impossible
for the land forces to give the (...) assistance to the fleet. The American
works (...) found to be much stronger than they had been ima^^^ed, and the
depth of water effectually prevented th^^ from making any attempt. In this
unsuccessful ^^tack, the killed and wounded on the part of the (...) ammounted
to about 200. The Bristol and Experim^^^ were so much damaged, that it was
thought they (...) not have been got over the bar; however, this was last
accomplished by a very great exertion of (...) skill, to the surprise of the
provincials, who had ^^^pected to make them both prizes. On the Americ^^^ side
the loss was judged to have been considerable, (...) was reported to be only
ten men killed, and twenty-(...) wounded. Before morning, the ships had retired
about two miles distant from the island, and in a few days more, the troops
re-embarked, and the whole sailed for New York.

The Americans on this occasion justly boasted of their heroes. A sergeant,
observing the flag staff shot away in the beginning of the action, jumped from
one of the embrasures upon the beach, took up the flag, and fixing it upon a
sponge staff, put it in its proper place, in the midst of the dreadful fire
already mentioned. For this distinguished act of bravery he was presented with
a sword by the congress. Another, whilst exerting himself in a very
distinguished manner, was c^^^lly shattered by a cannon ball: when about to
expire, "My friends," said he, "I am dying, but don't let the cause of liberty
expire with me."

The thanks of congress were given to general Lee, and also to colonels
Moultrie and Thomson for their good conduct in this memorable action. In
compliment to the commanding officer, the fort from that time was called Fort
Moultrie.

This year also, the Americans, having so frequently made trial of their valor
by land, became desirous of trying it by sea also, and of forming a navy that
might in some measure be able to protect their trade, and do essential hurt to
the enemy. In the beginning of March, Commodore Hopkins was dispatched with two
ships, two brigs, and a sloop to the Bahama Islands, where he made himself
master of the ordnance and military stores; but the gunpowder, which had been
the principal object, was removed. On his return he captured several vessels;
but was foiled in his attempt on the Glasgow frigate, which found means to
escape, notwithstanding the efforts of his whole squadron.

The attempt upon the southern colonies, being the first part of the
ministerial plan for 1776, being defeated, what remained to be attempted was,
an invasion of the Northern provinces from Canada, and an expedition against
the city of New York. The conduct of the former was given to general Burgoyne;
the (...) to general How. From the attack on New York great advantages were
expected. Its central position it was thought, would enable the British
generals (...) carry on the war with equal facility, either in Connecticut or
in the southern provinces, and to quit or vary the scene of action as they
pleased; whilst its (...) time situation, being mostly enclosed with islands,
(...) only promised to ensure success originally, but to (...) an easy defense
and protection by the ships of (...). By the junction of the army from Canada
(...) under general How, it was also proposed to distre^^ the colonies in the
most effectual manner, by cutting off the communication between the northern
and southern provinces; and the abundant fertility (...) plenty of the province
of New York, seemed to ^^der it a most eligible station for any body or troops.

Whilst the British northern army remained in Canada, general Carleton; as head
of the province, too^ the command. After the expulsion of the American from the
province, they had crossed the lake Champla^^, and taken up their quarters at
Crown Point, as has be^^ already mentioned. Here they remained for some (...)
in safety, as the British had no vessels on the lake, and consequently general
Burgoyne could not pursue them. To remedy this deficiency, there was no
possible method, but either to construct vessels on the spot, or (...) to
pieces some vessels already constructed, and dra^ them up the river into the
lake. This, however, wa^ effected in no longer a space than three months; and
the British general, after incredible toil and difficulty, saw himself in
possession of a great number of vessels, by which means he was enabled to
pursue his enemies, and invade them in his turn. The labor undergone at this
time by the sea and land forces must indeed have been prodigious; since there
were conveyed over land, and dragged up the rapids of St. Lawrence, no fewer
than thirty large long boats, 400 batteaux, besides a vast number of
flat-bottomed boats, and a gondola of 30 tons. The intent of the expedition was
to push forward, before winter, to Albany, where the army would take up its
winter quarters, and next spring effect a junction with that under general
How, when it was not doubted that the united force and skill of these two
commanders would speedily put a termination to the war.

By reason of the difficulties with which the equipment of this fleet had been
attended; it was the beginning of October before the expedition could be
undertaken. It was now, however, by every judge, allowed into be completely
able to answer the purpose for which it was intended. It consisted of the
Inflexible, a large vessel with three masts, carrying 18 twelve pounders; two
schooners, the one carrying 14, the other 12 six pounders; a large
flat-bottomed radean with 6 twenty four and 6 twelve pounders; and a gondola
with 8 nine pounders. Besides these, were 20 vessels of a smaller size, called
gun-boats, carrying each a piece of brass ordnance from nine to twenty four
pounders, or howitzers. Several long boats were fitted out in the same manner;
and besides all these, there was a vast number of boats and tenders of various
sizes to be used as transports for the troops and baggage. It was manned by a
number of select seamen, and the guns were to be served by a detachment from
the corpse of artillery; the officers and soldiers appointed for this expedition
were also chosen out of the whole army. The whole was put under the command of
captain Pringle.

To oppose this formidable armament, the Americans had but an inconsiderable
naval force, under the command of general Arnold. It consisted of a schooner
which mounted only 12 six and four pounders, (...) fifteen vessels of inferior
force. The British could (...) no step to accomplish their designs on the
northern frontiers of New York until they had the command of Lake Champlain.
Accordingly their (...) proceeded up the lake, Oct. 11.
and, on the 11 (...) October, engaged the American fleet. The inequality
between the contending fleets, was somewhat lessened by an unfavourable wind,
which prevented (...) British ship inflexible and some other vessels of (...)
from getting into action. The principal damage ^^tained by the Americans, was
the loss of a scho^^ and gondola. At the approach of night the action (...)
discontinued; and the vanquished effected their esca^^^ during the darkness of
the night, by the judgment (...) ability of their commander. By the next mor^^
(...) whole fleet under general Arnold was out of (...) but the British having
a favorable wind, overtook (...) Americans, and brought them to action near
(...) Point. An engagement of two hours ^^^^ed, Oct. 13.
which was well supported on both (...). Some of the American vessels which
(...) most ahead escaped to Ticonderoga. Two galleys (...) five gondolas
remained and made a desperate resista^^^ One of the galleys struck and was
taken. General Arnold finding escape impossible and resistance una^^^ing,
determined to run his vessels on shore. This (...) executed with equal judgment
and boldness. He (...) the Congress galley, on board of which he was, together
with the five gondolas, ashore, in such a position, (...) to enable him to land
his men and blow up the vessel nor did he quit his own galley till she was in
flam^^^ lest the British should board her and strike his (...) "The result of
this action, though unfavourable to the Americans, raised the reputation of
general Arnold higher than ever. In addition to the fame of a (...) soldier, he
acquired that of an able sea officer." The garrison of Crown Point retired to
Ticonderoga. Thither general Carleton intended to have pursued them; but the
difficulties he had to encounter appeared so many and so great, that he thought
it proper to march back to Canada, and desist from any farther operations till
next spring. On the part of the British, although victorious, the object of a
campaign, in which 13,000 men were employed, and near a million of money
expended, was rendered in a great measure abortive. Whereas on the part of the
Americans, although some men, and a few armed vessels were lost, yet time was
gained, their army saved; and the frontier of the adjacent states secured from
a projected invasion.

The ill success which had attended the provincial arms in Canada, did not in
any degree damp the general spirit of the people. Matters had been carried to
such extremities, that little hope of a reconciliation seemed to remain. The
Americans were exasperated to the utmost degree by the proceedings of
parliament, which placed them out of the royal protection, and engaged 16,000
foreign mercenaries in the plan of subduing them. These were hires from the
langrave of Hesse Caffel, the duke of Brunswick, and the hereditary prince of
Hesse Caffel, by a treaty concluded on the 29th of February 1776. Congress
began, therefore, about the middle of May, to put in execution the scheme with
which they had been so long charged on the other side of the Atlantic, May
(...) that of declaring the colonies independent, and separating from Britain
entirely. As a proper introduction to a declaration of this kind, a circular
letter, or manifesto, was seat through the different colonies, in which war set
forth the necessity of suppressing the authority of the crown entirely, and
taking all the powers of government into their own hands. In support of this
position, they instanced the prohibitory act; (...) rejection of their
petitions for redress of grievances (...) reconciliation; and the intended
exertion of all (...) force of Britain, aided by foreign troops, for their
destruction. They concluded with a recommendati^^ those colonies, whose
government was not already sufficiently well settled, to proceed to the
establishment such a form as was necessary to the internal peace (...) the
country, and the present exigency of affairs (...) the defense of their lives,
liberties, and properties against the hostile invasions and cruel depredation
(...) their enemies.

This address proved universally acceptable, except the provinces of
Pennsylvania and Maryland; and (...) deputies sent to congress by the latter
even left the assembly, after voting peremptorily against independent. The
situation of the colonies, however, was extre^^ embarrassing, and the arguments
on both sides (...) might have puzzled the most quick sighted politi^^ On the
one hand, the separation from Great Bri^^^^ even supposing that it could be
easily (...) be attended with many inconveniences. The ^^^^tion of the great
parent state, and the utility of (...) power of a common sovereign to balance
so many ^^arate, and probably discordant commonwealths, be^^^^ many political
and commercial advantages derived (...) the union with Britain, were
self-evident. On (...) other hand, they considered their liberty as their
^^^est good, without which all other advantages cou^^^ of no value. Were they
to (...) to a great (...) army consisting of foreigners as well as Bri^^^^,
(...) even partly of their own slaves, what terms could (...) hope for? The
moment they laid down their (...) they must be at the mercy of the enemy. But
to (...) purpose did they take up these arms? If to security liberty, then
should they lay them down without (...) security, such an act must be supposed
an acknowledgment that their first resistance was rebellion, and the pardon
offered was the only security for the future, or satisfaction for the present,
they could expect. As Britain, therefore, had uniformly rejected their
entreaties, and now abandoned them to plunder without remorse, except on
unconditional submission, it was plainly by war alone that their object was to
be gained.

Another weighty consideration was, that as long as they acknowledged the
supremacy of Great Britain, their councils and generals would be equally
destitute of authority civil or military; -- the war they carried on must be
feeble, irregular, and unsuccessful; -- orders would be given which nobody
would obey, and conspiracies and mutinies formed which none could have a just
power to punish or repress. Neither would any foreign power support them
against the hostile attempts of Great Britain, as long as they held themselves
to be her subjects. "We do not break the connection," said they; "it is already
broken and dissolved by act of parliament; and thus abandoned, all laws human
and divine, not only permit, but demand of us, to provide every internal and
external means of our preservation."

Whilst this eventful subject occupied the public mind, several writers placed
the advantages of independence, and a republican government, in various lights.
Among these, Thomas Pain, of Philadelphia, a native of England, took the lead.
The style, manner, and language of the author is singular and fascinating, and
well calculated to rouse the passions. He undertook to prove, in a pamphlet
entitled Common Sense, Published in 1775.
the necessity, practicability and advantages of independence. He observed that
every body allowed it would inevitably happen at some future period; and urged
several reasons to evidence that the moment was at hand. That no lurking
affection for the sovereign might impede the measure, kingly government and
hereditary succession were turned into ridicule. He likewise brought to his aid
several passages in the Old Testament, from which he concludes, that the
Almighty has entered his protest against monarchical government. That the
institution of kings was the most prosperous invention the devil ever set on
foot, for the promotion of idolatry. Kings were placed in such a light, as
tended not only to destroy all attachment to them, but, to make them
distasteful, their office was attempted to be rendered odious; from whence the
transition to the royal person was easy. Nothing could have been better timed,
to accomplish the end in view, than this performance. It was received with
applause; read by almost every American; and recommended as a work replete with
truth, and against which none but the partial and prejudiced could form any
objections. In union with the feelings and sentiments of the people, it
produced surprising effects. It satisfied multitudes that it was their true
interest immediately to cut the gordian knot by which the colonies had been
bound to Great Britain, and to open their commerce as an independent people, to
all the nations of the world.

These arguments, resounding from all quarters, seconded by the enmity against
the mother country, which was now bred in the minds of the people, soon decided
the matter. The Maryland delegates were instructed to return to congress, and
act as they found most proper for the interests of their country. In
Pennsylvania it had been fairly debated in their provincial assemblies, where
it was carried by vast majorities that the delegates should agree to the
determinations of congress: and John Dickinson, one of the delegates from that
province was displaced, because he had spoken and voted against the motion for
independency, made in congress by Richard Henry Lee, of Virginia, on the
seventh of June.

On the first of July, congress resolved itself into a committee of the whole,
upon the subject of independency; but neither colonies nor members being
unanimous, it was postponed till the next day. After a full discussion, the
measure of declaring the colonies free and independent was approved, by nearly
an unanimous vote. And the fourth of July, 1776, announced to the world the
erection of this new empire. July 4.
The title of this act was; "A Declaration by the Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled." And was expressed in the following
words:

WHEN, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness -- that to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute a new government, laying its foundation on such
principles, and organizing its power in such form, as to them shall seem most
likely to effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate
that government long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes; and accordingly all experience had shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies, and such is
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of
government. The history of the present king of Great Britain is a history or
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states. To prove this, let
facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws (...) immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing, with manly
firmness, his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused, for a long time after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the state remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the danger of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to, the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these colonies:

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection, and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and persidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends
and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions, we have petitioned for redress in the
most humble terms: our repeated positions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time of attempts made by their legislature, to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them, by the ties of our common kindred,
to disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections
and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war,
in peace, friends.

We, therefore, the representatives of the United States of America, in General
Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the
rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by authority of the good
people of these colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be, FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES; that they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown; and that all political
connection between them and the state of Great Britain is and ought to be
totally dissolved; and that, as free and independent states, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do. And
for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor.

JOHN HANCOCK, President.
NEW HAMPSHIRE.
Josiah Bartlett, William Whipple, Matthew Thornton.
MASSACHUSETTS.
Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat Pain, Elbridge Gerry.
RHODE ISLAND.
Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery.
CONNECTICUT.
Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams, Oliver Wolcott.
NEW YORK.
William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis Morris.
NEW JERSEY.
Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John Heart, Abraham
Clark.
PENNSYLVANIA.
Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, John Morton, George Clymer,
James Smith, George Tailor, James Wilson, George Ross.
DELAWARE.
Caesar Rodney, George Read.
MARYLAND.
Samuel Chase, William Paca, Thomas Stone, Charles Carroll, of Carrollton.
VIRGINIA.
George With, Richard Henry Lee, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Harrison, Thomas
Nelson, jun. Francis Lightfoot Lee, Carter Braxton.
NORTH CAROLINA.
William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Penn.
SOUTH CARO^^NA.
Edward Rutledge, Thomas Heyward, jun. Thomas ^^nch, jun. Arthur Middleton.
GEORGIA.
Button ^winnett, Lyman Hall, George Walton."


On the 8th of July, at twelve o'clock, the declaration of independence was
proclaimed at the state-house in Philadelphia, amidst the greatest
acclamations. The next day, in consequence of general orders, it was read at
the head of each brigade of the continental army at New York, and every where
received with loud huzzas, and the utmost demonstrations of joy. The same
evening, the equestrian statue of the king was laid prostrate on the ground,
and the lead of which it was made was doomed to be run into bullets.

The declaration of independence was made at a time when no royal governor had
even the shadow of authority in any of the colonies; and when no British troops
had any footing in the United States. A formidable force was indeed collected
on the coasts ready for invasion, and in face of that armament this decisive
step was taken. The Americans now knew the ground on which they stood, and
every thing assumed a new appearance. The sophistical distinctions between the
limits of authority on the one side, and of liberty on the other, were done
away. Every person was now able to form his own judgment; the question being
simply whether America should be conquered or independent.

The institution of new forms of government began to take place in the
different states, as had been recommended by congress, in the month of May this
year. Although the kingly office was abolished, yet, in most of the subordinate
departments of government, ancient forms and names were retained. Each state
appointed a supreme executive head, with the title of governor or president.
They agreed, likewise, in deriving the whole powers of government, either
mediately or immediately from the people.

As a farther security for the continuance of republican principles, in the
American constitutions, they agreed in prohibiting any hereditary honors and
distinction of ranks. All religious establishments w^^ abolished. Some retained
a constitutional distinction between Christians and others, with respect to
eligibility to office, but the idea of supporting one denomination at the
expense of others, or of raising any one (...) of Protestants to a legal
preeminence, was universally reprobated. The alliance between Church and State
was completely broken, and each was left to support itself independent of the
other. It was sixteen months after this time, before the plan of confederation
was so far digested as to be ready for communication to the states. Nor was it
ratified by all the states till nearly three years more had elapsed.

Many difficulties occurred in settling the rational contributions from each
state. The value of lands (...) finally fixed upon as the criterion. The
representati^^ of the states was not so easily settled, but the large states
yielded the point, for the present, and consented that each state should have
an equal suffrage; being fearful of weakening their exertions against the
common enemy.

As a radical change of the whole system of the first constitution took place a
few years after the termination of the war, it is neither necessary nor
consistent with the limits of this work to give any account of it. Suffice it
to say, that it answered the purpose of the times, "when the citizens of
America were young in the science of politics, and when a commanding sense of
duty, enforced by the pressure of a common danger, precluded the necessity of a
power of compulsion."

It is amusing to recollect, at this distance of time, that one effect of
independence was an aversion to every thing which bore the name and marks of
royalty. Sign boards on which were painted the king's arms, or the crown and
scepter, or the portraits of any branches of the royal family, were pulled down
or defaced. Pictures and escutcheons of the same kind in private houses were
inverted or concealed. The names of streets, which had been called after a king
or queen were altered; and the half pence, which bore the name of George III.
were either refused in payment, or degraded to farthings. These last have not
yet recovered their value.

It was not long before the constancy both of the rulers and subjects of the
new empire were to undergo a severe trial. Hitherto they had been upon the
whole successful in their operations: but now they were doomed to experience
misfortune, misery, and disappointment; the enemy overrunning their country,
and their own armies not able to face them in the field. Immediately after the
repulse the British had sustained at Charleston, they appeared off New York,
with a formidable armament. This was composed of the fleet and army which had
left Boston, along with the new raised forces in Britain, and 13,000 Hessians
and Waldeckers. The whole number destined to act on this occasion was not less
than 35,000 men; though all these never were at any time brought into one
engagement. Such a force, however, had never before appeared in any part of
America; nor was it perhaps ever exceeded by any European army of equal number,
whether we consider the goodness of the troops, the abundant provision of all
manner of military stores and materials, or the excellence and number of
artillery of all kinds. It was besides supported by a very numerous fleet, well
adapted for the service, consisting of six ships of the line, thirty frigates,
besides other armed vessels, and a vast number of transports. The fleet was
commanded by lord How, and the land forces by his br^^her general How, men of
approved valor and experience, who had already signalized themselves in the
service of their country. General How, a considerable time before his brother
arrived, had set sail from Halifax, and lay before New York, but without
attempting to commence hostilities until he should be joined by his brother.
The Americans had, according to custom, June 25.
fortified New York and the adjacent islands in an extra^^dinary manner.
However, general How was suffered to land his troops on Staten Island, where
he was soon joined by a number of the inhabitants. About the middle of July,
July 14.
lord How arrived with the grand armament; and being one of the commissioners
appointed to receive the submission of the colonists, he published a circular
letter to this purpose to the several governors who had been expelled from
their provinces, desiring them to make the extent of his commission, and the
powers he was invested with by parliament, as public as possible. Here,
however, congress saved him trouble, by ordering his letter and declaration to
he published in all the newspapers, "That every one might see the insidiousness
of the British ministry, and that they had nothing to trust to besides the
exertion of their own valor."

Lord How next sent a letter to general Washington; but as it was directed "To
George Washington, esquire" the general refused to accept of it, as not being
directed in the style suitable to his station. To obviate this objection,
adjutant general Patterson was sent with another letter, directed "To George
Washington, etc. etc. etc." But though a very polite reception was given to the
bearer, general Washington utterly refused the letter; nor could any
explanation of the adjutant induce him to accept of it. The only interesting
part of the conversation was that relating to the powers of the commissioners,
of whom lord How was one. The adjutant told him, that these powers were very
extensive: that the commissioners were determined to exert themselves to the
utmost, in order to bring about a reconciliation; and that he hoped the general
would consider this visit as a step toward it. General Washington replied,
that it did not appear that these powers consisted in any thing else than
granting pardons; and as America had committed no offense, she asked no
forgiveness, and was only defending her unquestionable rights. Two days before
adjutant general Paterson had the abovementioned interview, independence was
solemnly proclaimed by the civil authority, as if in defiance of all the then
formidable appearances: after which, the king's arms, and an elegant picture of
his majesty, were destroyed. Upon those proceedings, the episcopal clergy shut
up their churches.

The whole continental army in and near New York, at this critical period, Aug.
8.
amounted only to 17,225 men. These were mostly new troops, and were much
scattered, some being 15 miles apart.

The decision of every thing being now by consent of both parties lest (...)
the sword, no time was lost, but hostilities commenced as soon as the British
troops could be collected. This, however, was not (...) before the month of
August; Aug. 22.
when (...) landed without any opposition on Long Isl^^^ opposite to the shore
of Staten Island, between two small towns, Utrecht and Gravesend. G^^eral
Putnam, with a large body of troops, lay encam^^ and strongly fortified on a
peninsula on the opp^^^^^ shore, with a ^^^ge of hills between the armies,
(...) principal pass of which was near (...) place called (...) ^ush. Here the
center of the British army, consist^^ of Hessians, under general de Heister,
took post; (...) left wing, under general Grant, lying near the sho^^ and the
right, consisting of the greater part of the ^^^ish forces, lay under lord
Piercy, Cornwallis, and general Clinton. Putnam had ordered the passes to (...)
secured by large detachments, which was executed (...) to those at hand; but
one of the utmost importa^^ that lay at a distance, was entirely neglected. It
(...) therefore secured by general Clinton, the night (...) the battle. This
gave an opportunity to a large (...) of troops under (...) Piercy and Clin^^^
pass the mountains and attack the A^^^^cans in the rear, Aug. 27.
while they were enga^^ with the Hessians in front. Through this piece (...)
negligence, their defeat became inevitable. Those (...) were engaged with the
Hessians first perceived (...) mistake, and began a retreat toward their camp;
(...) the passage was intercepted by the British troops, (...) drove them back
into the woods. Here they (...) met by the Hessians; and thus were they for
(...) hours slaughtered between the two parties, no way escape remaining but by
breaking through the Br^^^^^ troops, and thus regaining their camp. In this
att^^^ many perished; and the right wing, engaged with g^^eral Grant, shared
the same fate. The victory (...) complete: six brass ordnance were taken; and
the Americans lost on this fatal day, considerably upwards of 1000 men. Among
the prisoners were two general officers, Sullivan and lord Sterling; 3
colonels, 4 lieutenant colonels, 3 majors, 18 captains, 43 lieutenants, and 11
ensigns, with a number of privates. Among the slain, a regiment, consisting of
young gentlemen of fortune and family in Maryland, was almost entirely cut in
pieces, and of the survivors not one escaped without a wound. The British
accounts stated the killed, wounded, and prisoners, at 3000.

On the part of the British, this victory was cheaply gained; their loss in
killed and wounded not exceeding 450 men, of whom the former did not amount to
a fifth part. The ardour of the British troops, after the victory, was so
great, that they could scarcely be restrained from attacking the lines of the
provincials.

"In this action, a body of provincials were put to (...) after they had thrown
down their arms, and asked for quarter. The reason assigned for this piece of
severity, was, that they had discharged their pieces before they had asked for
quarter. They were told that if they had expected quarter, they ought to have
asked it before they fired; but now that they had fired, and done all the
mischief they could, they had no mercy to expect."

During the continuance of this unfortunate engagement, general Washington
passed over from New York, and is said to have burst into the most poignant
exclamation of grief, when he saw the inevitable destruction which involved
some of his best troops. He had then, and subsequent to the engagement, passed
over to Long Island the greatest part of his army, hoping and wishing that
general How would attempt to storm the works on the island. These, although
unfit to stand a regular siege, were strong enough to resist a coup de main.
The British general, however, chose to proceed by siege, and broke ground
within (...) yards of Putnam's redoubt.

A council of war being called, it was determined evacuate the island. Aug. 29.
The intention (...) prudently concealed from the army, so (...) they knew not
whither they were going, but imagi^^ it was to attack the enemy. The field
artillery, (...) baggage, and about 9000 men, were conveyed to the city of New
York, over East River, when it is more than a mile wide, Aug. 30.
in less (...) thirteen hours, and without the knowle^^^ of the British, though
not 600 yards distant. Pro^^dence seems to have ordered every circumstance
(...) second the skill and conduct of the American commander. The wind, which
seemed to prevent (...) troops getting over at the appointed hour, after^^^^^
shifted to their wishes. Toward morning an ext^^^^ thick fog came on, which is
very unusual at that (...) of the year, which hovered over Long Island, and
(...) concealing the Americans, enabled them to com^^^^ their retreat without
interruption, though the day (...) begun to dawn some time before it was
finished. (...) a mistake of one of the officers in the transmission (...)
orders, the American lines were evacuated for (...) three quarters of an hour,
before the last embark^^^ took place; but the British, though so near, that
(...) working parties could be distinctly heard, being ^^veloped in the fog,
knew nothing of the matter. (...) lines were repossessed until six o'clock in
the morning when every thing except the heavy cannon was (...) moved. General
Washington, though often intrea^^ would not leave the island until general
Mifflin, (...) commanded the rear guard, left the lines. In about half an hour
after the lines were finally abando^^^ the fog cleared off, and the British
were seen taking possession of the American works.

This victory, though complete, was very far from being so decisive as the
congress imagined. Lord How, supposing that it would be sufficient to
intimidate the congress into some terms, sent general Sullivan, who had been
taken prisoner in the late action, to congress, with a message, importing, that
though he could not consistently treat with them as a legal assembly, yet he
would be very glad to confer with any of the members in their private capacity;
setting for (...) the same time the nature and extent of his powers as
commissioner. But the congress were not so humbled as to derogate in the least
from the dignity of character they had assumed. They replied, that the congress
of the free and independent states of America could not consistently send any
of its members in another capacity than that which they had publicly assumed;
but as they were extremely desirous of restoring peace to their country upon
equitable conditions, they would appoint a committee of their body to wait upon
him, and learn what proposals he had to make.

This produced a new conference. The committee appointed by congress was
composed of Dr. Franklin, Mr. Adams, and Mr. Rutledge. They were very politely
received by his Lordship; but the conference proved as fruitless as before
independency had been declared; and the final answer of the deputies was, that
they were extremely willing to enter into any treaty with Great Britain that
might conduce to the good of both nations, but that they would not treat in any
other character than that of independent states. This positive declaration
instantly put an end to all hopes of reconciliation; and it was resolved to
prosecute the war with the utmost vigor.

Before hostilities had commenced in this quarter, the congress attempted to
detach the foreigners, who had come with the royal troops, from the service of
his Britannic majesty. The following resolution, da^^ the 14th of August, was
adopted and circulated am^^ those, on whom it was intended to operate:
"Re^^^ed, that these states will receive all such foreig^^^ who shall leave the
armies of his Britannic majesty (...) America, and shall choose to become
members of (...) of these states, and they shall be protected in the (...)
exercise of their respective religions, and be inve^^^^ with the rights,
privileges and immunities of na^^^^ as established by the laws of these states,
and moreo^^^ that this congress will provide for every such per^^ fifty acres
of unappropriated lands in some of the states, to be held by him and his heirs,
as absol^^^ property."

Lord How, on the other hand, now published manifesto, in which he declared
the refusal of cong^^ and that he himself was willing to confer with all (...)
disposed persons about the means of restoring pu^^ tranquillity; endeavoring
in this manner to sep^^^ those who preferred a reconciliation with Great (...)
from those who were the friends of independence.

After the affair of Long Island, the American (...) was universally
dispirited. The militia ran off by ^^^panies, and their example infected the
regular re^^ments. Matters are thus described by general Me^^^ who commanded
the flying camp, in a letter (...) September the 4th, "General Washington has
not far as I have seen, 5000 men to be depended on (...) the service of a
campaign; and I have not 10^ Both our armies are composed of raw militia,
perp^^ually fluctuating between the camp and their farm; poorly armed, and
still worse disciplined. These (...) not a match for, were their numbers equal
to, ve^^^ troops, well fitted and urged on by able officers. Numbers and
discipline must at last prevail. Giving soldiers, or even the lower orders of
mankind, the chose of officers, will forever man (...) ^^^cipline of armies."

General Washington having called a council of war, it was determined to (...)
on the defensive, and not to risk the army for the sake of New York. Sept. 7.
A middle line between abandouing and defending it was, however, adopted for a
short time. The public stores were moved to Dobbs's ferry, about 26 miles from
the city. 12,000 men were ordered to the northern extremity of New York Island,
and 4,500 were left in the city. Before the British landed, it was impossible
to tell what place would be first attacked, for this reason works were erected
for the defense of a variety of places, as well as of New York; and these were
occupied by the remainder of the troops. They had also strongly fortified a
pass called King's Bridge, whence they could secure a passage to the continent
in case of any misfortune.

"The same short sighted politicians, says Dr. Ramsay, who had before censured
general Washington, for his cautious conduct, in not storming the British lines
at Boston, renewed their clamours against him, for adopting this evacuating and
retreating system. Supported by a consciousness of his own integrity, and by a
full conviction that those measures were best calculated for securing the
independence of America, he, for the good of his country, voluntarily subjected
his fame to be overshadowed by a temporary cloud."

General How, having prepared every thing for a descent on New York Island,
began to land his men, Sept. 15.
under cover of ships of war, between Kepps' Bay and Turtle Bay. The troops
landed in two divisions, the Hessians in one place, and the British in another.
As soon as general Washington heard the firing of the men of war, he rode with
all dispatch toward the lines; but to his great mortification, he found that
the troops, on the first appearance of danger, ran off in the utmost
precipitati^^ and those ordered to support them, Parsons's and ^^lows's
brigade, flying in every direction, and in (...) greatest confusion. His
attempts to stop them (...) fruitless, though he drew his sword, threatened to
(...) them through, and cocked and snapped his pistols.

On the appearance of a small part of the enemy, (...) more than sixty or
seventy, their disorder was increas^^ and they ran off without firing a single
shot, and (...) the general in a hazardous situation, so that his att^^^ants,
to extricate him out of it, caught the bridle of (...) horse, and gave him a
different direction.

Three large ships were stationed in the North Ri^^ opposite to those in East
River; which kept up a constant cannonading with grape and langrage shot, (...)
across the island, which though 15 miles long, exceeds not two in any part in
breadth. The Hessians, upon their landing, seized and secured in a neighbour^^^
building as enemies, some persons who had been plac^^ there to serve as guides,
which for a while subject^ them to a difficulty.

When the British were completely landed, the marched on toward the King's
Bridge road. The American brigades, that had fled upon the enemy's approaching
the lines, stopped not till met by colonel Glover's and five other brigades,
who were hastening down to them. Upon the junction, the whole marched forward
and took post on some heights, when suddenly about 8000 of the enemy appeared
on the ne^ height, and halted. General Washington at first consented, that his
troops should march forward, and give them battle; but, on a second
consideration, he gave counter orders, as he could not have any dependence on
the militia and the flying camp, which composed half the number then present.
When the Americans retired, and no prospect of action remained, the British
generals repaired to the house of Mr. Robert Murray, a gentleman of the Quaker
persuasion. The lady of the house entertained them most civilly, and regaled
them with some cakes and wine. They were well pleased with the entertainment,
and stayed there rather more than two hours; governor Tryon, seasoning the
repast, at times, by joking Mrs. Murray about her American friends, for she was
known to be a steady advocate for the liberties of the country. In the mean
time the Hessians and the British, except a strong corpse which had marched to
take possession of the city, remained upon their arms inactive; which gave
general Putnam the opportunity of escaping with about 3500 men, including the
guards, who had been left to shift for themselves, when colonel Glover had been
ordered away from New York. Putnam, in order to avoid meeting any troops that
might be advancing upon the direct road to the city, went by the road which
lies along side the North River, and marched to the end, where it turns off
short to the right, and leads on to another and narrower, toward
Blooming-dale. By this last road he secured his retreat; although nothing could
have been easier than to have prevented his getting into it. A good body of
troops, with a couple of field pieces, could have taken such a position, in
about twenty minutes or less, as would have certainly cut off Putnam's retreat.
On this occasion it was said, humourously, that "Mrs. Murray saved the American
army." On the day that general Howe's forces landed and the following one, they
took 354 privates and 17 officers prisoners.

The British and provincial armies were not now above two miles distant from
each other. The former lay encamped from shore to shore for an extent of two
miles, being the breadth of the island. The provincials who lay directly
opposite, being masters of all the passes and defiles betwixt the two camps,
were enabled (...) defend themselves against an army much more nu^^^ous than
their own, and their passage to the contin^^ was secured by the possession of
King's Bridge, wh^^^ was strongly fortified.

On the day after the shameful flight of part of (...) American army, a
skirmish took place between (...) battalions of light infantry and highlanders
comman^ (...) by brigadier Lesslie, and some detachments from (...) American
army, under the command of lieutenan^ ^^lonel Knowlton of Connecticut, and
major Le^^^ Virginia. The colonel was killed and the major (...) wounded. Their
men behaved with great brav^^ and being supplied with fresh troops, fairly
beat, (...) enemy from the field. Most of these were the (...) men who had
disgraced themselves the day before, (...) running away. Struck with a sense of
shame, (...) had offered themselves as volunteers, and requested (...)
commander in chief to give them an opportunity (...) retrieve their honor. In
this manner the general ^^ployed his troops in continual skirmishes, in order
(...) inure them to actual service, and at the same time (...) annoy the enemy
as much as possible; by which me^^^ they soon recovered their spirits, and
behaved with th^^ usual boldness.

As the situation of the two armies was now high^^ inconvenient for the British
generals, it was resol^^ to make such movements as might oblige general
Wa^^ington to relinquish his strong situation. The pos^^^ion of New York had
been less beneficial than (...) expected. A few days after it was evacu^^ed by
the Americans, Sept. 21.
a dreadful fire broke out, which consumed about a thousand ho^^es; and had it
not been for the active exertions of the sailors and soldiery, the whole town
might have b^^^ consumed, the wind being high, and the weather remarkably dry.
Some British writers attribute this calamity to the Americans, who, say they
having been forced to abandon the city, formed the atrocious design of setting
it on fire, to render it of as little use to the captors as possible: That the
fire broke out in several places at once, and some of the incendiaries being
detected in the act, were thrown hea^^ong into the flames, or killed on the
spot by the soldiers; but no mention is made of these circumstances, in the
account of this conflagration, by Dr. Gordon or Dr. Ramsay. The former relates
that "the fire broke out at a dram shop, close in with the water side, on
Whitehall slip, about one o'clock in the morning. The reports spread of its
breaking out in several places at the same time, were erroneous." And the (...)
observes, that this fire was "most probably occasioned by the disorderly
conduct of some British sailors, who had been permitted to regale themselves on
shore."

General How, in order to cut off general Washington's communication with the
eastern states, left lord Piercy, with a sufficient force to garrison New York,
and embarking his army in flat-bottomed boats, passed through Hell Gate, Oct.
12.
and landed on Frog's Neck, in West Chester county. The provincial army, fit
for duty, present and on command, at different posts, militia included, now
amounted to about 19,000 men. Gordon.
Two days after the movement of the royal army, general Lee arrived from
Charleston, and at a council of war, pressed the necessity of evacuating Fort
Washington, and the whole island of New York. General Green opposed the
evacuation of Fort Washington, and Fort Lee opposite to it, on the Jersey
shore, as they would divert a large body of the enemy from joining their main
force, and would likewise cover the transportation of provisions and stores up
the North River, for the service of the American troops. (...) opinion
prevailed. New York Island was evacuated but garrisons were left in Fort
Washington and (...) Lee: three thousand men being assigned for the defe^^, of
the former.

General How having received a supply of men (...) provisions, after a halt of
six days, advan^^^ near to New Rochelle, Oct. 18.
situated on the (...) which separates Long Island from the co^^^nent. The
troops on their march sustained conside^^ble loss by a party of Americans, whom
general (...) posted behind a wall. After this, receiving still (...)
reinforcements, they made such movements as th^^^^ened to distress the
provincials very much by (...) off their convoys of provisions from
Connecticut, (...) thus force them to an engagement. This, however general
Washington determined at all events to (...) well knowing that delay was, in
the end, victor^^^^ him. He therefore extended his forces into a (...) line,
opposite to the way in which the enemy march^^ keeping the river Brunx between
the two armies, (...) the North River in his rear. Here again the pro^^^cials
were employed in small skirmishes with the (...) army; until at last the latter
moved in two col^^^^^ and took a position with the Brunx in front, (...) which
the Americans assembled their (...) force at White Plains behind intrench^^^^
On the 28th the British crossed the (...) and carried two posts, Oct. 25.
and a broken and scatt^^^^ ^^gagement (...), in which some hundreds f^ll;
(...) nothing decisive took place. The British (...) ^^mained upon their arms
during the night, with (...) parent design of attacking the provincia^s camp
(...) morning.

It was observed in the morning that general Washington had drawn back his
encampment in the (...) and greatly strengthened the lines by additional works.
The British general, therefore, deferred all farther attack till the arrival of
more troops, which he expected from New York. Upon the arrival of these troops,
the British made dispositions in the evening for attacking the provincials
early on the last of October; but an extreme wet night and morning prevented
this design from being carried into execution. General Washington having gained
intelligence of this design from a deserter, quitted his camp on the night of
the 1st of November, and took higher ground toward the North Castle district.
One of the provincial colonels, being drunk, set fire to the town of White
Plains, as well as to the houses and forage near the lines, unnecessarily and
without orders.

General How seeing that the Americans could not be enticed to an engagement,
Nov. 5.
and that the nature of the country did not admit of their being forced to it,
determined not to lose time in a fruitless pursuit, and to take this
opportunity of driving them out of the strong holds in York Island and in the
vicinity; an operation which their army could not now possibly prevent. In
this, the British general met with complete success. The Americans, on the
approach of the king's forces, retreated from King's Bridge into Fort
Washington, which, being attacked in four different places at once, was quickly
reduced. The number of prisoners in the fort, and taken in lines, amounted to
about 3000. They were considered by the articles of capitulation as prisoners
of war, and the officers were allowed to keep their baggage and side arms. The
loss of the British, inclusive of killed and wounded, was about 1200. Shortly
after this, lord Cornwallis, with a considerable force, passed over to attack
Fort Lee, situated on the Jersey side of North River. The garrison, which
consisted of 2000 men, was saved by an immediate evacuation, but with the loss
of their artillery and stores.

General Washington retreated to Newark, where his whole force consisted of no
more than 3500 men. It appears he now considered the cause in the greate^^
danger; and said to colonel Reed, "Should we retr^^^ to the back parts of
Pennsylvania, will the Pennsylvanians support us?" The colonel answered, "If
the lower counties are subdued, and give up, the back counties will do the
same." Upon which the general said, passing his hand over his throat, "My neck
does not feel as though it was made for a halter. We must retire to Augusta
county in Virginia. Numbers will be obliged to repair to us for safety; and we
must ^^y what we can do in carrying on a predatory war: and if overpowered, we
must cross the Alleghany mountains." The general, after tarrying near a week
without being molested, obtained information that lord Co^^wallis was in
pursuit of him; Nov. 28.
he therefore marched to Brunswick, leaving Newark the very morning that his
lordship entered it. As his lordship's van advanced to Brunswick, by a forced
march (...) the 1st of December, general Washington retreated (...) Princeton,
having first taken care to break down a part of Brunswick bridge, and so
secured his troops from being harassed. Lord Cornwallis having orders not to
advance beyond Brunswick, discontinued his pursuit: however he sent an express
to general How at New York, acquainting him, that, by continuing it briskly,
he could disperse the army under general Washington, and (...) his heavy
baggage and artillery, before he could (...) the Delaware. General How
returned for answer that he would be with him in person immediately; but did
not join him till the sixth. General Washington hoped to have made a stand at
Brunswick; but (...) the day he quitted it, the service of the Jersey and
Maryland brigades expired, and neither of them would serve an hour longer; he
therefore wrote to general Lee, "Hasten your march as much as possible, or your
arrival may be too late." On the 7th of December, lord Cornwallis's corpse
marched to Princeton, which the Americans quitted the same day. The pursuit was
followed so close, that the British reached the Delaware, Dec. 8.
just as the rear guard of general Washington's army, under colonel Henley,
gained the opposite shore, about twelve o'clock at night. The Americans having
taken care to secure all the boats, lord Cornwallis, whose rear division halted
within six miles of Trenton, was prevented from crossing into Pennsylvania next
day as he intended. Had lord Cornwallis crossed into Pennsylvania, as he
proposed, the consequence would probably have been fatal to the Americans.
General Washington, when he crossed, had but 2,200 men: but the time of their
service expiring, they left him in such a manner, that the second day after, he
had but 1700.

Thus the Jersies were laid entirely open to the incursions of the British
troops, and so fully were these provinces taken possession of by the royal
army, that its winter quarters extended from New Brunswick to the river
Delaware: and nothing could have prevented Philadelphia falling into their
hands, had they had boats to have transported their army. Though they missed
the boats, yet Trenton and the neighborhood could have supplied materials,
which industry might have soon constructed into sufficient conveniences for
the transportation of troops over a smooth river, and of no great extent in
some places. So critical was this period, that general Washington trembled for
the fate of America, which nothing but the infatuation of the enemy could have
saved. The General's words in his own letter.


As the retreating Americans marched through the Jersies, scarcely one of the
inhabitants joined them, whilst numbers were daily flocking to the royal army,
to make peace and obtain protection. Not only the common people changed sides
in this gloomy state of public affairs, but some of the leading men in New
Jersey and Pennsylvania adopted the same expedient. Among these, Mr. Galloway,
and the family of the Allens, of Philadelphia, were most distinguished: the
former, and one of the latter, had been members of congress. Only a few people
of fortune stood firm (...) the cause. It was the middle rank of people in
general that remained steadfast in this day of trial.

General Lee, with more than 3000 men, though repeated expresses were sent to
him, continued in (...) rear of the royal forces, marching so slowly that (...)
commander in chief could not account for it. It (...) length proved fatal to
his personal liberty: having i^ prudently taken up his lodgings at
Baskingridge, (...) some distance from his troops, information was giv^^ to
colonel Harcourt, who happened to be at that (...) in the neighborhood with a
small detachment of ligh^ horse, to observe the motions of the provincial troop.

The colonel conducted the exploit with (...) address and activity, Dec. 13.
as to captivate (...) carry off the general. The British offic^^ greatly
exulted on the capture of general Lee; th^^ boasted they had taken the American
palladium; (...) was the opinion they had of the general deficiency (...)
military skill among the Americans, and the inexpe^^ence of their officers. The
loss of this general (...) much regretted, the more especially as he was of
superior quality to any prisoner in the possession of (...) colonists, and
could not therefore be exchanged. (...) field officers were offered in exchange
for him, (...) refused; and the congress were highly irritated at the report
that he was to be treated as a deserter, having been a half pay officer in the
British service at the commencement of the war. In consequence of this, they
issued a proclamation, threatening to retaliate on the prisoners in their
possession whatever punishment should be inflicted on any of those taken by the
British, and especially that their conduct should be regulated by the treatment
of general Lee. Jan. 6.


A copy of the above resolution was transmitted to the council of Massachusetts
Bay; and they were desired to detain lieutenant colonel Campbell, and keep him
in safe custody till the further order of congress. "The Massachusetts council,
instead of conforming solely to the words in the order, sent him to Concord
gaol; where he was lodged in a dungeon, twelve or thirteen feet square, whose
sides were black with grease and litter of successive criminals. Two doors,
with double locks and bolts, shut him from the yard, with an express
prohibition from entering it, either for health, or the necessary calls of
nature. A loathsome black hole, decorated with a pair of fixed chains, was
granted him for his inner apartment; from whence a felon had been removed but
the moment before, and in which his litter and excrements remained a fortnight
after it was appropriated to the use of the colonel. The attendance of a single
servant on his person was denied him, and every visit from a friend positively
refused. When he had transmitted an account of these and other matters to
general sir William How, on the 14th of February, and the same had been
communicated to general Washington, a letter was directly written on the 28th,
in which the general says, "You will observe that exactly the same treatment is
to be shown to colonel Campbell and the Hessian officers, that general How
shows to general Lee; and as he is only confined to a commodious house with
genteel accommodations, we have no right or reason to be m^^^ severe upon
colonel Campbell, who I would wish, should be immediately removed from his
present situation, and put into a house where he may live comfortably." The
British had in their power and subject (...) their call, near 300 provincial
officers, whilst the Americans had not more than 50 belonging to the British.
The resolve, therefore, for putting into close confinement colonel Campbell and
the Hessian officers, in order to retaliate Lee's treatment, seemed injurious
in every point of view, and to have been entered into without due attention to
the consequences."

The command of the troops after Lee's capture, fell to general Sullivan; who
soon after crossed the Del^ware, and joined general Washington. The general,
whilst retreating before lord Cornwallis, had sent general Mifflin to
Philadelphia to raise the Pennsylvania militia. The representations of
congress, and the animated addresses of general Mifflin to his fellow citizens,
had the desired effect, and the yeomanry of the back counties as well as those
of the lower, readily came forward in support of the common cause.

During the royal successes in the Jersies, general Clinton with four brigades
of British and Hessian troops, with a squadron of men of war under sir Peter
Parker, was sent to attempt Rhode Island. It was taken without the loss of a
man; the American force being incapable of making effectual resistance, so that
on the day when general Washington crossed the Delaware, the British took
possession of the island, and at the same time blocked up commodore Hopkins's
squadron, and a number of privateers at Providence.

In the mean time, congress proceeded with the most indefatigable diligence to
recruit their army, and bound their soldiers to serve for a term of three
years, or during the continuance of the war. The army designed for the ensuing
campaign, was to consist of 88 battalions; of which each province was to
contribute its quota; and 20 dollars were offered as a bounty to each soldier,
besides an allotment of lands at the end of the war. In this allotment it was
stipulated, that each soldier should have 100 acres; an ensign 150; a
lieutenant 200; a captain 300; a major 400; a lieutenant colonel 450; and a
colonel 509. No lands were promised to those who enlisted only for three years.
All officers or soldiers disabled through wounds received in the service, were
to enjoy half pay during life. To defray the expense, congress borrowed five
millions of dollars at five per cent. for payment of which the United States
became surety. They likewise sent commissioners to the court of France, to
apply for assistance, Dec. 10.
whose negociations will be hereafter mentioned. At the same time, in order to
animate the people to vigorous exertions, a declaration was published, in which
they set forth the necessity there was for taking proper methods to insure
success in their cause: they endeavored to palliate as much as possible the
misfortunes which had already happened; and represented the true cause of the
present distress to be the short term of enlistment.

This declaration, together with the imminent danger of Philadelphia,
determined the Americans to exert themselves to the utmost in order to
reinforce general Washington's army. They soon received farther encouragement,
however, by an exploit of that general against the Hessians. As the royal army
extended in different cantonments for a great way, general Washington,
perceiving the imminent danger to which Philadelphia was exposed, resolved to
make some attempt on those divisions of the enemy which lay nearest that city.
These happened to be the Hessians, who lay in three divisions, the last only 20
miles distant from Philadelphia. Dec. 25.
On the 25th of December, having collected as considerable a force as he could,
he set out with an intent to surprise that body of the enemy which lay at
Trenton. His army was divided into three bodies; one of which he ordered to
cross the Delaware at Trenton Ferry, a little below the town: the second at a
good distance below, at a place called Bordentown, where the second division of
Hessians was placed; whilst he himself, with the third, directing his course to
a ferry some miles above Trenton, intended to have passed it at midnight, and
attack the Hessians at break of day. But by reason of various impediments, it
was eight in the morning before he could reach the place of his destination.
The enemy, however, did not perceive his approach till they were suddenly
attacked. Colonel Ralle, who commanded them, did all that could be expected
from a brave and experienced officer; but every thing was in such confusion,
that no efforts of valor or skill could now retrieve matters. The colonel
himself was mortally wounded, his troops were entirely broken, their artillery
seized, consisting of six pieces of brass cannon; and 23 Hessian officers, and
886 of the same nation taken prisoners. About 600 only escaped by the road
leading to Bordentown. After this gallant exploit, general Washington again
returned into Pennsylvania.

This action, though seemingly of no very decisive nature, was sufficient at
that time to turn the fortune of wa^ in favor of America. It tended greatly to
lessen (...) apprehensions which the provincials had of the Hessians, at the
same time that it equally abated the confidence which the British had till now
put in them. It likewise contributed more to the formation of a new provincial
army, than either the authority, commands, or exhortations of congress.

Neither force, distress, artifice, or persuasion, had yet influenced congress
to entertain the most distant idea of purchasing peace, by returning to the
condition of British subjects. However, affairs appeared so desperate about
this time, that some members, distrustful of their ability to resist the power
of Great Britain, proposed to authorize their commissioners at the court of
France to transfer to that country the same monopoly of their trade, which
Great Britain had hitherto enjoyed. But upon mature consideration, every
proposal of concession was rejected. The more enlightened members observed,
that, "Though the friendship of small states might be purchased, that of France
could not." It was therefore supposed, that the only measure, likely to induce
France to an interference, would be an adherence to their former resolution of
independence, and proffered freedom of trade to all nations. This they resolved
to do, trusting the event to Providence, and risking all consequences. Copies
of their resolutions to this effect were sent to the principal courts of
Europe. These dispatches fell into the hands of the British, who made no other
use of them than publishing them to the world; which was the very thing
congress wished for.

On the 27th of December, the congress invested general Washington with almost
dictatorial power throughout the United States, Dec. 27.
for the limited term of six months, unless sooner determined by their
authority. He was empowered to displace and appoint all officers under the rank
of brigadier general -- to reform and new model the military arrangements, in
such manner as he judged best for the public service -- to raise sixteen
battalions of infantry; 3000 light horse; three regiments of artillery, and a
corpse of engineers, in addition to those already voted by congress -- to
establish their pay -- to form magazines -- to take whatever he may want for
the use of the army, if the inhabitants will not fell it, on paying a
reasonable price for the same -- to enforce the acceptance of continental
currency -- to present the names and offenses of the disaffected, together with
the witnesses to prove them.

Reinforcements came in from several quarters to general Washington, so that he
was soon in a condition once more to pass the Delaware, and take up his
quarters at Trenton, where he was emboldened to maintain his station,
notwithstanding the accounts that were received of the enemy's rapid advance
toward him. Lord Cornwallis, accordingly, made his appearance in full force;
and, on the evening of his arrival, the little town of Trenton contained the
two hostile armies, separated only by a small creek, which was fordable in many
places. This was, indeed, the crisis of the American revolution; and had his
lordship made an immediate attack, in pursuance of what is reported to have
been the advice of sir William Erskine, general Washington's defeat seems to
have been inevitable: but a night's delay turned the fate of the war, and
produced an enterprise, the magnitude and glory of which, can only be equalled
by its success. General Washington having called a council of war, stated the
calamitous situation to which his army was reduced; 1777. Jan. 2.
and having heard the various opinions of his officers, finally proposed a
circuitous march to Princeton, as the means of avoiding, at once, the
imputation of a retreat, and the danger of a battle, with numbers so inferior,
and in a situation so ineligible. The idea was unanimously approved; and, as
soon as it was dark, the necessary measures were taken for accomplishing it. A
line of fires was kindled, which served to give light to the Americans, whilst
it obscured them from the observation of the enemy: and by a providential
interposition, the weather, which had been for some time past warm, moist, and
foggy, suddenly changed to a hard frost; and, in a moment, as it were, rendered
the road, which had been deep and heavy, firm and smooth as a pavement. 1777.
Jan. 3.
At break of day general Washington arriving near Princeton would have
completely surprised the British, had not a party, which was on their way to
Trenton, descried his troops when they were about two miles distant, and sent
back couriers to alarm their unsuspecting fellow soldiers in their rear. These
consisted of the 17th, the 40th, and 55th regiments of British infantry, and
some of the royal artillery, with two field pieces, and three troops of light
dragoons. The center of the Americans, consisting of the Philadelphia militia,
whilst on their line of march, was briskly charged by a party of the British,
and gave way in disorder. The moment was critical. General Washington pushed
forward, and placed himself between his own men, and the British, with his
horse's head fronting the latter. The Americans, encouraged by his example, and
exhortations, made a stand, and returned the British fire. The general, though
between both parties, was providentially uninjured by either. A party of the
British fled into the college and were there attacked with field pieces which
were fired into it. The seat of the muses became for some time the scene of
action. The party which had taken refuge in the college, after receiving a few
discharges from the American field pieces, came out and surrendered themselves
prisoners of war. In the course of the engagement, sixty of the British were
killed, and a greater number wounded, and about 300 of them were taken
prisoners. The rest made their escape, some by pushing on toward Trenton,
others by returning toward Brunswick. The Americans lost only a few, but
colonels Haslet and Potter, and captain Neal of the artillery, were among the
slain. General Mercer received three bayonet wounds, of which he died in a
short time. He was a Scotchman by birth, but from principle and affection had
engaged to support the liberties of his adopted country, with a zeal equal to
that of any of its native sons. In private life he was amiable, and his
character as an officer stood high in the public esteem.

During the action in Princeton, the British in Trenton were under arms, and on
the point of making an assault on the evacuated camp of the Americans. With so
much address had general Washington moved completely off the ground with his
whole force, stores, baggage, and artillery, unknown to, and unsuspected by his
adversaries.

That part of the royal army, which having escaped from Princeton, retreated
toward New Brunswick, was pursued for three or four miles. Another party,
which had advanced as far as Maidenhead, on their way to Trenton, hearing the
frequent discharge of small arms in their rear, wheeled round, and marched to
the aid of their companions. The Americans, by destroying bridges, retarded
these, though close in their rear, so long as to gain time to themselves to
move off, in good order, to Plukemin.

Affairs now assumed a different aspect. Lord Cornwallis found it necessary to
return from the Delaware, to the defense of the magazines at Brunswick. The
provincials still avoided any decisive action; but, in a few days overran both
the Jersies and became masters of the coast opposite Staten Island, at the same
time that their principal posts were chosen with such judgment, that it never
was found practicable to dislodge them. The royal army retained only the two
posts of Brunswick and Amboy, both holding communication by sea with New York.
In th^se the army under lord Cornwallis continued during the whole winter very
much straitened, the troops undergoing the hardships of a severe and incessant
duty, whilst their numbers were thinned by a continued series of skirmishes,
productive of little advantage on either side, farther than inuring the
Americans to military service, and weakening the royal army, whose numbers
could not be replaced with the same ease as the provincials.

The bad effects of the late disorderly conduct of the royal army were now most
seriously felt. The soldiers, particularly the Hessians, had given full scope
to the selfish and ferocious passions of human nature. The inhabitants were
cruelly plundered, and in particular instances rapes and murders were
committed. Such, in all ages, has been the complexion of the bulk of armies,
that immediate and severe punishments are indispensibly necessary to keep them
from flagrant enormities. But it is certain that these culprits, in most
instances, eluded punishment; either from the relaxation of discipline, or the
want of due proof to lead to conviction. The whole province now joined as one
man, to revenge their former injuries. Every load of forage and every article
of provision which did not come from New York, was purchased at the price of
blood. So hostile was the province now become, that such as were incapable of
bearing arms acted as spies, and watched continually for those who bore them.
Thus the British were constrained to act with as much circumspection as if they
had been besieged by a victorious army, instead of being themselves the
conquerors. The character of general Washington was exalted to the highest
pitch among his countrymen, and in Europe he was held in such estimation, as to
be styled the American Fabius, from the famous Roman general of that name, who
defended his country against Hannibal with success.

For the cause of the decline of the British affairs, no fault was ever
alleged, with the smallest show of reason, on the part of the generats or the
troops they commanded, except the disorderly conduct of the soldiers already
mentioned; and which, from the employment of the Hessians in the service
originally, seemed to be altogether unavoidable. The severity and inhumanity
exercised toward the American prisoners in New York, operated powerfully
against the royal cause. General Gates was heard to say, "Had general How seen
to it, that the prisoners, and Jersey inhabitants, when subdued, had been
treated with as much humanity and kindness as general Carleton exercised
toward his prisoners, it would have been all over with the Americans."

Many other causes, however, concurred to retard the progress of their arms,
during the whole course of the war. Among these the principal may be supposed
to arise from the vast extent of the American continent, with its uncommon
division into large tracts of territory, some cultivated, and others in a state
of nature; the great length of sea coast in its front, and the immense wastes
at the back of the inhabited countries, affording shelter to the provincials in
all possible circumstances; the numberless impregnable posts, and natural
barriers, formed by the various combinations of woods, mountains, lakes, and
marshes. Added to these, the British found, to their cost, the unanimity of the
colonies, and the judicious application of their strength, by suiting the
defense of the country, to the nature, genius and ability of the people, as
well as to the natural advantages of the country itself; thereby rendering
pitched battles useless, and consining the operations of war entirely to the
defense of posts, making surprises, and fighting skirmishes. Add to this also,
that the people were unfettered by strong cities; so that the reduction of the
capital of a province had little or no effect upon the rest; and the army could
retain no more territory than that which it immediately occupied, which was
again lost as soon as it departed to another quarter.

The British likewise found the unanimity of the colonies, in the fidelity of
their adversaries to one another. They very seldom had true information of the
situation of affairs either in the American camps or councils: And perhaps this
was not one of the least causes of the frequent failure of their enterprises.
Very few instances occurred, especially in the first years of the war, of any
of the provincial soldiers deserting to the British. Those who deserted,
generally went to their own homes or elsewhere into the country; whereas, on
the other hand, numbers deserted to the provincials, and carried with them such
intelligence as procured them a favorable reception.

During the course of this campaign, attempts were made to stir up the Indians
to make an attack on the back parts of the southern colonies. They were now
informed, that a British force was to land in West Florida; and after
penetrating through the countries of the Creek, Chickesaw, and Cherokee
Indians, where they expected to be joined by the warriors of all these nations,
were to attack the Carolinas and Virginia; whilst another formidable armament,
both of sea and land forces, was to make a powerful impression on the coasts of
these provinces. Circular letters to the same purpose were distributed by a Mr.
Stewart, principal agent for Indian affairs, among the back settlers, requiring
them to repair to the royal standard as soon as it should be erected in the
country of the Cherokees, setting forth the plan of operations, and demanding
subscription to a written declaration of their allegiance, that they might be
distinguished from the enemies to the royal cause.

With this proposal, the natural avarice, levity of temper and natural
disposition of the Indians, induced them to comply. Even the Six Nations, who
had formerly agreed to the observance of a strict neutrality, now joined the
general confederacy, and committed some acts of hostility, which, however, were
afterward disowned by their chiefs. The Creeks began the war in the southern
parts with all that violence and barbarity which distinguishes American
savages; but finding themselves not supported as had been promised, they
suddenly stopped short, excused themselves as well as they could to the
congress, and refused to assist the Cherokees, who applied to them for that
purpose. The latter were then left to carry on the war alone, which they did
for a short time with the utmost fury and barbarity. The perpetrators were,
however, soon checked, and their cruelties fully retaliated. The militia of the
adjacent provinces assembled, marched into the country of the Cherokees, and
not only defeated them in every encounter, but demolished their towns,
destroyed their corn, and killed such numbers, that the nation being nearly
exterminated, the wretched survivors were glad to accept a peace upon any terms
the victors chose to prescribe; none of the neighboring nations daring to
interpose in their behalf.

Thus ended, at present, all hopes from the assistance of the Indians. The
effects of this expedition were exceedingly prejudicial to the royal cause, as
it not only excited the utmost rancour of the Americans who had revolted, but
even the well affected to the British government themselves. Such as had on
this occasion declared for the cause of Britain, not only to a man expressed
their abhorrence of such cruel measures, but some of their chief leaders are
said to have avowed a recantation of their principles upon that very account.

Whilst these transactions were going forward in America, 1776.
the people of Britain remained in a state of torpid indifference, expecting
daily to hear of the submission of the colonies, from the splendid accounts of
conquest exhibited in the newspapers, and the idea of the extreme imbecility of
the Americans, which had been so industriously propagated and kept up. The high
language of authority, dignity and supremacy, which had filled the mouths of
many for some years, fed the vanity of those who could not easily define, or
who perhaps had never fully considered, the extent of the terms, or of the
consequences which they were capable of producing; and the flattering idea of
lessening the national burdens by an American revenue, whilst it was fitted to
the comprehension of the meanest capacity, was not less effective in its
operation upon those of a superior class and order. To the powerful principles
of national pride and avarice, was added a laudable disposition to support
those national rights which were supposed to be invaded, and a proper
indignation and resentment to that ingratitude and insolence which were charged
upon the Americans, and to which only the present troubles were attributed, by
those who were most active in fomenting the principles of hostility, which at
that time prevailed, far more than they had done at the beginning of this
contest.

In such circumstances it is not to be wondered at, if a majority of the people
gave at least a kind of tacit approbation to the war; but as it was not
attended with national antipathy or rivalship, established enmity, or even a
present competition for glory, they did not feel themselves so much interested
in its success, or altogether so anxious about its consequence, as they would
in those of another nature. On the other hand, that great body of the people,
who had at all times reprobated the measures which led to the present troubles,
and who considered them as not less dangerous to the constitution than ruinous
to the power and glory of the nation, could not be supposed sanguine in their
wishes for a success which they dreaded as liable to more fatal consequences
than any loss or defeat. The great distance of the seat of war, also rendered
its effects less interesting. For distance produces in some degree the effect
of time with respect to sensibility; and the slaughter, cruelties, and
calamities, which would wring the heart, if they happened in the next county,
are slightly felt at three or four thousand miles distance. The distance also
prevented all apprehension of immediate danger; the expenses of the contest
were not yet sensibly felt; and the bulk of mankind never think of remote
consequences. For when, at length, the American privateers not only scoured the
Atlantic ocean, but spreading their depredations through the European seas,
brought alarm to the coast of Britain; when the destruction which befell the
homeward bound richly laden West India fleets, poured equal ruin upon the
planters in the islands and the merchants at home; when an account of the
failure of some capital house was almost the news of every morning; even in
that state of public loss and private distress, an unusual phlegm prevailed,
and the same tranquil countenance and careless unconcern was preserved, by
those who had not partaken of the calamity. A circumstance which is not
sufficiently accounted for, even from the vast numbers who thought themselves
officially, or by connection or principle bound to give countenance to the war,
nor the great number of those who profited by its continuance.

Toward the end of the year 1776, the French and Spaniards began to show a
strong attachment to the Americans. The continental privateers appeared in
great numbers in their ports, and the prizes they carried in were sold openly,
and without disguise. The British court did not think it prudent at that time
to push matters to extremities with the house of Bourbon; they, therefore, only
made remonstrances; the only effect of these was, that sales were made less
openly. In the West Indies, however, the depredations were carried on to a much
greater extent than in Europe, and avowedly patronised by all the French
colonies. Even French ships took out American commissions; and, with a few, or
sometimes even no American sailors on board, made war on the British trade with
impunity. Letters of marque and reprisal were not granted against the
inhabitants of the colonies until the spring of the year 1777; but the British
ships of war took a vast number of prizes on their part, though this number was
far from being able to balance the value of those taken by the Americans; which
during the year 1776, alone, amounted to more than a million sterling.

Besides the direct loss by captures, the British trade suffered otherwise by
the prodigious rise of insurance; that upon the West Indies now rising to no
less than 23 per cent. The increasing armaments of France and Spain also
threatened an approaching war with these powers; so that toward the end of
October, 1776, the king issued a proclamation for raising the bounty to seamen,
who enlisted, to 5 l, per man. Sixteen additional ships of the line were also
suddenly put into commission; and another proclamation was issued, recalling
all seamen who were in any foreign service. This was quickly followed by two
others; the one laying an embargo on the exportation of provisions from Great
Britain and Ireland, the other for the observation of a general fast.

The idea of being attacked by the combined powers of France and Spain, whilst
engaged in a contest with the colonies, began at last to awaken the fears of
the people. Suspicions of plots and treasons occurred; and these were increased
to a great degree by the attempts of an enthusiastic miscreant, known by the
name of John the Painter, but whose real name was James Aitken. This man was a
native of Edinburgh, and bred a painter. Possessing an extraordinary spirit of
rambling, with a strong propensity to vice, he had passed in the course of a
few years through a variety of those scenes and adventures which attend the
most profligate and abandoned state of a vagabond life.

Among his other exploits he had passed through several marching regiments of
foot, from each of which he deserted as soon as opportunity served, after
receiving the bounty money. In his various peregrinations through the different
parts of England, he alternately committed highway robberies, burglaries, petty
thefts, rapes, and worked at his trade, as occasion invited, villainy prompted,
or fear or necessity operated. At last he passed over to America, where he
remained for two or three years. His being of a melancholy solitary nature,
which neither sought for associates in crimes, nor admitted of partners in
pleasure, as it contributed much to his preservation for so long a time from
the justice of those laws which he was continually breaking, served equally to
throw in utter darkness all those parts of his life, which he did not himself
think fitting or necessary to communicate. His transactions in America are
accordingly unknown, any farther, than that he traversed, and worked at his
trade, in several of the colonies.

As his pilgrimage on the continent, was in the beginning and during the
progress of the troubles, it may well be imagined, that the violence of the
language, and sentiments held in political matters, by that class of the people
with whom he lived and conversed, gave birth to that madness of enthusiasm in
him, which afterward filled him with the most deadly antipathy to Britain. He
accordingly returned to England, and soon after, if not originally, adopted the
design of entirely subverting the power of the government and nation, by the
sole machinations of his own industry and ingenuity. This arduous task was to
be accomplished by setting fire to the royal dock yards, and burning the
principal trading cities and towns, with their shipping. In the prosecution of
this atrocious design, he again traversed a great part of the kingdom, in order
to observe the state of the several docks, and the manner in which they were
guarded, which last he found as careless as could be wished. Having procured
all the intelligence he desired, his next care was to provide fire works,
machines, and combustibles proper for the execution of his purpose; and had it
not been for his ignorance in the proper mode of applying or constructing these
machines, it is probable that the naval power of Britain might have been
irretrievably ruined.

One of these machines, which extinguished of its own accord, was found in the
hemp house at Portsmouth, which it had failed to set on fire. He succeeded,
however, in his design of setting the rope house on fire; but the flames were
soon subdued, without communicating to the other magazines.

His next attempt was at Bristol, where, having failed two or three times in
his endeavors to burn the shipping, Jan. 7. 1777.
he at last determined to secure their destruction by setting fire to the
houses next the qu^y. In this he partly succeeded. Six or seven warehouses were
consumed; but still the shipping remained safe. So many attempts, which where
abortive, were always discovered, and his machines being found, could not but
excite the greatest alarm. It could not be imagined that all this could proceed
from the mere political enthusiasm of a wretched vagabond. The two great
parties into which Britain was divided, mutually accused each other. The most
bigoted and furious on the one side attributed them to the disaffection and
republican principles of the other; whilst those of the same denomination on
the other side were equally convinced, that they were the mere inventions or
malicious acts of the tories, for the purpose of blackening their adversaries.

Soon after the departure of this miscreant from Bristol, he was taken up on
some suspicious circumstances, but behaved with an uncommon air and boldness,
nor did he appear in any manner embarrassed in his defense. At last he was
circumvented by another painter, called Baldwin, an American, who pretended to
sympathize with him under his misfortunes, and to hold principles similar to
his own: thus the whole history of his crimes was brought to light. Dodsley's
Annual Register for 1777.
"He told Baldwin that he had seen Mr. Silas Deane, when he was in France, who
had given him some money; had encouraged him to set fire to the dock yards at
Portsmouth, Plymouth, etc. as the best means of distressing Great Britain; and
had promised to reward him according to the service he should do to the
American cause. He said that Mr. Deane, as an earnest of what should follow,
had given him a recommendation to and bills upon a merchant in London to the
amount of 300 l. which, however, he had found it necessary to burn to prevent a
discovery; and that in consequence of this encouragement, he procured a pass
from the French king." Gordon, Vol. II. p 446.


On his trial at Portsmouth, notwithstanding the shock which the appearance and
evidence of his pretended friend against him must have given, he behaved with
the same boldness and address he had hitherto manifested -- made a good defense
-- shrewd observations on the nature of the evidence, and the baseness of the
witness -- and received sentence of death with perfect indifference. He was
afterward executed at Portsmouth dock gate, and then hung in chains. "After
condemnation, and before being taken away to execution, he denied his having
recommendations and bills, and burning the same. It was whilst working at
Fitchfield, in Hampshire, that he conceived the idea of setting sire to the
dock yards. He then went, as he said, to France, and applied to Mr. Deane, who
told him, that when the work was done he should be rewarded. He added, that on
his return, and after setting fire to the rope yard at Portsmouth, he went to
London and waited on Dr. Bancroft, to whom he had a verbal recommendation from
Mr. Deane, but that the doctor gave him no countenance, and did not approve of
his conduct." Gordon, Vol. II. p. 477.
He acknowledged his crime, to one of the principal officers at Portsmouth,
whom he sent for, and likewise gave some cautions with respect to the future
preservation of the royal dock yards from similar dangers. Dodsley's Annual
Register for 1777.


The proof of the connection which the American agent was supposed to have had
in this design, so alarming to the British nation, rested only upon the
assertion of this abandoned incendiary; notwithstanding which, it was credited
by a great part of the people in Britain; and created a rancour and animosity
against the Americans, which the common operations of war had not hitherto
engendered.

CHAP. XXII.
The Loyalists in New York embodied -- Americans fail in their attempt on Fort
Independence -- Orders issued by the American general against plundering -- Low
state of the American army unknown to the British -- Supplies of Arms arrive
from France -- Stores at Peek's Kill destroyed -- Magazines destroyed at
Danbury -- General Wooster killed -- Americans invade Long Island under Colonel
Meigs -- General How takes the Field -- The Militia oppose him from all
quarters -- Fails in his attempt to bring General Washington to Action --
Retires to Amboy -- Turns and advances upon the Americans -- Skirmishes -- Lord
Stirling defeated -- General Washington returns to his strong Camp -- Royal
army prepare for the grand Expedition -- General Prescot carried of from Long
Island -- Fleet and Army leave Sandy Hook -- Congress and General Washington
alarmed at the loss of Ticonderoga -- Fleet arrives in the Chesapeak -- Army
lands at Turkey Point -- General Washington advances to the relief of
Philadelphia -- Battle at Brandywine -- Reflections on the Battle -- Congress
flee to Yorktown -- Philadelphia taken -- Battle at Germantown -- Passage of
the Delaware opened to Philadelphia -- General H^^^s efforts to bring the
Americans to a general action fruitless -- Winters in Philadelphia -- Americans
encamp in Huts at Valley Forge during the Winter -- Invention of the American
Turtle, and Battle of the Kegs -- Reflections on the Campaign.

AS sir William How now perceived that the army he commanded, however powerful
in the field, was far from being sufficient to effect the conquest of such an
extensive and difficult country, or even to keep possession of what he had
gained, he resolved to strengthen it by every possible method. For this
purpose, he collected as many of the refugees as could be persuaded to enlist
into a body. Over these he appointed officers, chosen from among themselves,
who for their attachment to the royal cause, had been obliged to abandon their
properties, or who lived under his protection in New York Island; governor
Tryon being chosen their commander.

A commission of brigadier general had been conferred on Mr. Oliver Delancy, a
loyalist of great interest in New York, and he was authorized to raise three
battalions. Every effort was made to raise the men, both within and without the
British lines, and also from among the American prisoners; but with all these
exertions, only 597 were procured. Mr. Courtland Skinner, a loyalist well known
in Jersey, was also appointed a brigadier, and authorized to raise five
battalions; but all that he could raise by the middle of summer, amounted only
to 517; by degrees, however, they were afterward augmented considerably. These
new levied forces were to be stationed in New York and the adjacent islands, in
order to give a freer scope of operation to the grand army; and allow it to
exert its whole strength to effect that for which it was originally destined;
whilst the vast numbers of large rivers, which every where intersected the
country, laid it open to the naval power, to which the Americans had nothing to
oppose, and by which they were all along exceedingly distressed.

With all these advantages, however, it was yet found impossible to effect any
great or permanent conquest. The causes formerly mentioned still continued to
operate, and to militate effectually against the royal army, and, indeed, to
appearance, must have been too powerful for any number of men which Britain
could be supposed to bring into the field. The utmost that could now be done,
therefore, was to carry on a kind of predatory war, and this, however it might
distress particular places, or amuse the people in Britain with ideas of
conquest, could never contribute any thing effectual to the subjugation of the
country.

The provincials formed a plan, about the end of January, for taking Fort
Independence, near King's Bridge, and by so doing to obtain a passage into New
York Island. About 4000 militia of the Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New York
states, in four divisions, under generals Heath, Wooster, Parsons, and Lincoln,
were destined for the service. General Heath, having the chief command,
summoned the garrison to surrender, with threats in case of noncompliance.
Nine days after the siege had commenced, the enemy, being reinforced, made a
sally, but were repulsed. Soon after the besiegers retired, upon a report that
some ships had gone up the North River. General Heath was much censured for his
conduct in this expedition by many of those who accompanied him. His summons,
as he did not fulfill his threats, subjected the army to the ridicule of their
enemies. The Americans suffered much from the weather, and not less from the
failure of the expedition. Many of them afterward crossed the North River, and
proceeded to Morristown, where general Washington wintered with his small army.

About the time this fruitless expedition commenced, plundering had become so
prevalent among the American troops, that the commander in chief had it
inserted in general orders -- "The general prohibits, both in the militia and
continental troops, in the most positive terms, the infamous practices of
plundering the inhabitants, under the specious pretense of their being tories.
It is our business to give protection and support to the poor distressed
inhabitants, not to multiply and increase their calamities. After this order,
any officer found plundering the inhabitants under the pretense of their being
tories, may expect to be punished in the severest manner. The adjutant general
to furnish the commanding officer of each division with a copy of these orders,
who is to circulate copies among his troops immediately."

It was thought by many a matter of astonishment, that the British suffered the
dangerous interval between the disbanding of one American army, and the raising
of another, to pass away without attempting something of consequence, against
the remaining shadow of an armed force. Probably general Howe's information of
the affairs of the provincials was as defective, at this time, as it had all
along been to the royal commanders; or, perhaps, he did not choose to run any
risk of deranging the ministerial plan laid down for the campaign, especially
his intended junction with general Burgoyne, by making an attack on the
American army, which, if not doubtful in its issue, he had reason to believe,
from past experience, would at least be attended with great loss on his side.

Had general How made a quick movement and attacked the provincials at that
time, the event would probably have been fatal to America. The recruiting
service went on so slowly, and was attended with so many untoward
circumstances, that general Washington, far from being formidable in the month
of March, observes, in a letter dated the 6th of that month, "If the enemy do
not move, it will be a miracle: nothing but ignorance of our numbers, and
situation, can protect us." He afterward owned, that during the latter part of
the winter, he and his army remained at the mercy of the royal troops, with
sometimes scarcely a sufficient body of men to mount the ordinary guards,
liable every moment to be dispersed, if the enemy had thought proper to march
against them. The general's whole force, including militia, at Morristown, and
the several outposts, amounted often to not more than 1500 men: and it has been
asserted, upon apparently good authority, that he repeatedly could not muster
more at Morristown than between three and four hundred. In writing officially
upon the subject to the governor and council of Connecticut, the
representation he gave of affairs, drew tears from the eyes of those who heard
the letter read. Whilst general Washington was at this low ebb with his army,
gentlemen of five thousand pounds fortune or more, and many others who were men
of substance, though not equal to that, did duty as sentinels at his doors and
elsewhere.

Hitherto there had been a great deficiency of arms and ammunition, as well as
of men. Fifteen hundred of the new troops from Massachusetts would have been
upon their march to join the army, but the general court could not supply them
with arms. This perplexity was, however, of short continuance. On the day of
its commencement, or the following, a vessel of 14 guns, from France, arrived
at Portsmouth, with 11,987 stand of arms, and 1000 barrels of gunpowder.
Congress, about the same time, were under a similar distress to supply general
Washington's army, March 24.
and met with timely relief by the arrival of a vessel with 10,000 stand,
besides a great number of gun locks.

Though general How made no capital stroke at the commander in chief of the
Americans; yet he concerted an operation against the post at Peek's Kill, which
general McDougal occupied, where a considerable quantity of provisions and
stores was deposited. A detachment of 500 men, under colonel Bird, was convoyed
by the Brune frigate to Peek's Kill, March 23.
nearly fifty miles from New York. The provincials, finding themselves unable
to resist, set sire to the stores, and the British soldiers completed the
conflagration, and destroyed some small craft laden with provisions. Colonel
Bird, hearing that a reinforcement was expected by the Americans, re-embarked
the same day.

The stores destroyed at Peek's Kill, being found greatly inferior in magnitude
and importance to what the general had been led to expect, another expedition
was undertaken against Danbury, on the borders of Connecticut, and contiguous
to Courtland Manor, where it was said immense stores had been collected. Major
general Tryon, assisted by general Agnew and sir William Erskine, with a
detachment of 2000 men, embarked, passed the sound, and having landed between
Fairfield and Norwalk, April 26.
reached Danbury in twenty hours: perceiving that the country was rising to
intercept his return, and being destitute of carriages to remove the stores,
general Tryon immediately gave orders to burn and destroy the whole. The troops
accomplished these orders without injuring the property of such as were reputed
tories. 18 houses, 800 barrels of pork and beef, 800 barrels of flour, 2000
bushels of grain, 1700 tents, and some other articles were lost to the
Americans.

The royalists, on their return, were harassed by militia under generals
Wooster, Arnold, and Silliman, who retarded their march, until a greater force
could be assembled to effect the design of cutting off their retreat. Wooster
hung upon the rear of the detachment, whilst Arnold, by crossing the country,
gained their front, in order to dispute their passage through Ridgefield, nor
could the excellent order and formidable appearance of the British forces,
which had large covering parties, well furnished with field pieces, on their
flanks and rear, nor the tumultuary manner in which the American militia, not
very numerous, had assembled, prevent them from taking advantage of every
situation to interrupt the progress of the royal army.

In one of these skirmishes, general Wooster, an experienced officer, was
mortally wounded, whilst fighting with all the vigor and fire of youth, though
then seventy years old. He died a few days after, much honored and regretted
by his country.

General Arnold, with about 500 men, next opposed them in the town of
Ridgefield, where, having barricadoed the road, he kept up a brisk fire upon
them, and sustained their attack till they made a lodgement on a ledge of rocks
on his left. After the British had gained this eminence, a whole platoon
levelled at general Arnold, when not more than 30 yards distant. His horse was
killed, but he escaped. Whilst he was extricating himself from his horse, which
he did with great agility, a soldier ran up to stab him with his bayonet; upon
which Arnold suddenly drew a pistol, and shot his enemy dead as he approached.

Next day, the Americans, having received some reinforcements with cannon,
harassed the rear of the British in several detached parties, and profited by
every difficulty of ground, keeping up a scattering fire upon them until they
got within protection of their shipping.

The British accounts state their own loss to have been only 172 killed and
wounded; of which the latter were more than two thirds: and that of the
Americans to have been double the number. No officer of distinction was lost on
the British side. Three field officers were wounded; one of whom was brigadier
general Agnew. The Americans computed 2 or 300 men of the British to have been
killed or wounded; and only 20 killed and 40 wounded on their side. Among the
former, besides general Wooster, was Dr. Atwater, a gentleman of great
respectability and influence, and colonel Lamb was among the latter. Although
the British accomplished the object of their expedition, yet the mischief done
to the Americans was not at all equivalent to the trouble and loss they
sustained.

Congress, in acknowledgment of the merit and services of general Wooster,
resolved that a monument should be erected to his memory. They also resolved,
that a horse, properly caparisoned, should be presented to general Arnold, in
their name, as a token of their approbation of his gallant conduct.

In return for this incursion, the provincials undertook a similar one against
Long Island, where they were informed that a quantity of forage, grain, and
other necessaries lay at the little port called Sagg Harbor, protected only by
a company of foot and an armed schooner.

This expedition was conducted by colonel Meigs, a brave and enterprising
officer, who had attended Arnold in his expedition to Quebeck, and had been
taken prisoner in the attempt to storm that place. On the 23d of May, he passed
his detachment of 170 men, in whale boats, over the found which separates
Connecticut from Long Island, and landed on the north side of the island, under
the convoy of two armed sloops, and another unarmed to bring off prisoners; but
having a narrow bay to cross before they could reach the place of their
destination, they were now obliged to carry their boats across a neck of land
before they could reach it. Having surmounted this difficulty, colonel Meigs,
with about 150 men, landed on the south branch of the island, within about four
miles of Sagg Harbor, leaving their boats secured in the wood under a guard.
They arrived at the place before day, April. 24.
and speedily accomplished their purpose, notwithstanding the resistance of the
soldiers, and the crews of the vessels, together with the vigorous efforts of
the schooner, which kept up a continual fire of round and grape shot at not
more than 150 yards distance. Twelve brigs and sloops which lay at the wharf
were burnt, and every thing on shore entirely destroyed. Six of the soldiers
were slain; and ninety prisoners were brought off, consisting of the officer
who commanded the men, with most of the masters and crews of the vessels which
they had destroyed; and the party returned to Guildford, in Connecticut, in no
longer space than 25 hours after they had departed from it, having in that
short time traversed 90 miles by land and water, besides destroying the
vessels, without having a single man either killed or wounded. Colonel Meigs
had an elegant sword presented him by congress for his good conduct in this
expedition.

The season for action was now far advanced, and toward the latter end of May
general Washington being somewhat reinforced, quitted Morristown, and took a
strong position at Middlebrook; his army, however, did not exceed 7292 at the
opening of the campaign. June 9.
Soon after this movement was effected, the British marched from Brunswick, and
extended their van as far as Somerset courthouse, but in a few days returned to
their former station.

The great object of the campaign, on the side of New York, seems to have been,
that sir William How should penetrate through the Jersies to the Delaware, to
clear those provinces of the provincial troops, and reduce the inhabitants to
such a state of subjection, that a safe and open communication between the army
and the city of New York might be established. The single movement which the
American general had now made, however, effectually prevented the
accomplishment of this design, or indeed of any thing else of consequence. His
camp, winding along the course of the hills, was strongly entrenched,
fortified, and well covered with artillery. He commanded a view of the British
encampment on the hills of Brunswick, and a great part of the intermediate
country toward that place and Amboy. His army also increased daily in numbers.
Several bodies of the New England troops under generals Gates, Parsons, and
Arnold, advanced to the borders of the North River, where they were ready to
pass over to the Jersies, whenever there was occasion; whilst the Jersey
militia collected with the greatest alacrity from all quarters; so that
whatever position the royal army could take, it was still watched on all sides
by its enemies. A mistake, fortunate for the Americans, made the militia
assemble in great force on this emergency. Signals had been agreed upon, and
beacons erected on high places, to give instantaneous notice of the approach of
the British. A few hours before the royal army began to march, the signal of
alarm, on the foundation of a false report, had been made. The farmers,
resolved to try the effects of resistance, in preference to a second
submission, with arms in their hands, ran to the place of rendezvous from
considerable distances. They had set out at least twelve hours before the
British, and on their appearance were collected in formidable numbers. General
How left no means untried to induce his rival to quit the strong position he
had taken. He pushed on detachments, and made feints as if he intended to pass
him, and cross the Delaware. This maneuver proving ineffectual, he advanced in
front of general Washington's lines, where he continued for four days exploring
the approaches to his camp, and accurately examining the situation of his
posts; hoping to find some unguarded place, upon which an attack might be made
with some probability of success; or that chance, inadvertence, impatience, or
error, might occasion some movement or circumstance, which might lead to a
general engagement. All these hopes, however, were frustrated. General
Washington knew the value of his situation; and as he could neither be
provoked, nor surprised in such a manner as to oblig^ him to quit the
advantages he derived from it, so he had too much penetration and foresight to
lose them by circumvention or artifice; and he had too long profited by this
cautious conduct, of never committing the fortune of America to the hazard of a
single battle, to depart from it on this occasion, when it was not even
demanded by any urgent necessity.

General How now found it necessary to change his measures. On the 19th of
June, he suddenly retreated with some apparent marks of precipitation; June 19.
and withdrawing his troops from Brunswick, took the road with his whole army
toward Amboy. The apparently retreating British, were pursued by large
detachments of the Americans, commanded by generals Maxwell, lord Sterling and
Conway, who gained some trifling advantages; whilst some excesses, committed by
the soldiers during their retreat, inflamed the provincials still more with a
desire of retaliation and revenge. In this, and the former retreat to
Brunswick, farm houses were burnt and destroyed, nor did they spare those
buildings which were dedicated to the Deity. At last, general Washington
himself, with the whole army, left his strong camp on the hills, and advanced
to Quibbletown, to be near at hand for the support of his advanced parties.
This was no sooner perceived by the British commander, June 24.
than he marched back from Amboy with the utmost expedition, hoping to cut off
some of the American detachments, or bring on a general engagement near
Quibbletown; or if neither of these could be accomplished, it was intended,
that lord Cornwallis, with his division, should take a considerable circuit,
and thus gain possession of some strong passes, which would oblige the American
general to quit the advantageous ground he had taken. In all this, however, he
was frustrated, through the skill and vigilance of his rival. General
Washington no sooner perceived the real intent of the enemy, than he withdrew
his army from the plains, and with the utmost expedition regained his strong
camp, securing the passes, at the same time, so effectually, that nothing could
be attempted against them. Lord Cornwallis, indeed, fell in with lord Sterling,
who had posted himself in a strong situation with about 3000 troops, who seemed
inclined to dispute his passage. These were broken, however, in a very short
time, with the loss of a few men and three brass field pieces; but the
neighborhood of the woods prevented the pursuit from being continued with any
effect.

General How being now convinced that it would be impossible to induce general
Washington to quit his strong position, and hazard a general engagement; and
suspecting that it would be too hazardous to attempt passing the Delaware,
whilst the country was in arms, and the American army in full force in his
rear, determined to make an attempt on Philadelphia by sea; which must be
attended by these manifest advantages, that it would be impossible for general
Washington to know where the storm was to fall. He must, therefore, keep his
post, and the king's army would make a considerable progress, before he could
be in a condition to oppose them; and such a progress would not leave him that
choice of posts from which he had hitherto derived such advantage. In order
more effectually to deceive and perplex general Washington, the British general
ordered some transports, with a ship cut down to act as a floating battery, up
the North River, a little before the embarkation was completed; a feint which
succeeded so far as to induce the American general to detach a considerable
body of his army across that river.

Whilst the preparations necessary for this expedition were going forward, the
Americans found means to make amends for the capture of general Lee by that of
general Prescot, who was seized in his quarters in Rhode Island, together with
his aid de camp, in much the same manner as general Lee had been. This was
exceedingly mortifying to the general himself, as he had not long before set a
price upon general Arnold, by offering a sum of money to any one that
apprehended him; which the latter answered by setting a lower price upon
general Prescot: the latter was, however, exchanged in the following year for
general Lee.

The month of July was far advanced before the preparations for the expedition
against Philadelphia were completed; July 23.
and it was the 23d before the fleet was able to sail from Sandy-Hook. The
force employed in this expedition consisted of 36 battalions of British and
Hessians, a regiment of light horse, and a body of loyalists raised at New
York. The remainder of these, with 17 battalions, and another body of light
horse, were stationed at New York under sir Henry Clinton. Seven battalions
were stationed at Rhode Island. After a week's sailing, those forces, amounting
in all to about 16,000 men, arrived at the mouth of the Delaware; but there
having received intelligence, that the navigation of the river was so
effectually obstructed, that no possibility of forcing a passage remained; or
more probably that general Washington had marched within a short distance of
Philadelphia; it was resolved to proceed farther southward to Chesapeak Bay in
Maryland, from whence the distance to Philadelphia was not very great, and
where the provincial army would find less advantage from the nature of the
country than in the Jersies.

The navigation from Delaware to Chesapeak took up the best part of the month
of August, and that up the bay itself was extremely difficult and tedious. At
last, having sailed up the river Elk, as far as was practicable, Aug. 25.
the troops were landed without opposition at Turkey Point, and set forward on
their intended expedition.

General Washington having heard that the British fleet had put out to sea
after having looked into the Delaware, was confirmed in the opinion he had
formerly entertained, that the whole was a feint, calculated to draw the
American army farther from the North River, so as to prevent their being at
hand to oppose a junction between How and Burgoyne. With this view, the
American general took a middle station; from which he could speedily return to
the North River, or advance to the relief of Philadelphia.

Whilst both general Washington and congress were sufficiently engaged, by
their attention to the movements, and apprehension of the designs, of the
powerful fleet and army which was conducted by the brother generals and
commissioners, they were alarmed with the news of general Burgoyne's success on
the Lakes and the abandonment of Ticonderoga by general St. Clair; which will
be hereafter related in the account of the northern campaign. These were
events, so unexpected, that they could not fail to perplex their counsels, and
impede their defensive preparations in other parts. Congress, however, behaved
with great firmness in this exigency. They directed general Washington to
appoint other commanders, and to summon such numbers of the militia from the
eastern and central provinces, as he should deem sufficient for restraining the
progress of the enemy.

The British fleet, after leaving the capes of Delaware, were not heard of for
near three weeks, except that they had been seen once or twice steering
southwardly. It was therefore concluded that the object of the British was
Charleston, in South Carolina, and, as the army could not march in time for its
relief, it was resolved to attempt something on New York Island, or, by uniting
with the northern army, to give more effectual opposition to Burgoyne; whose
affairs at this time were in a most prosperous train, as will be hereafter
described. Conformably to this system, a small change of position took place.
The day before this resolution was adopted, the British fleet had entered the
Chesapeak; and intelligence thereof reached the American army in a few (...).
The ^oop; were now put in motion to (...). Every appearance of confidence was
assumed by them as they passed through Philadelphia, that the citizens might be
intimidated from joining the British; and a number of the principal
inhabitants, suspected of disaffection to the American cause, were taken into
custody, and sent to Virginia.

Sir William How, soon after he had landed his troops in Maryland, put forth a
declaration, in which he informed the inhabitants, that he had issued the
strictest orders to the troops "for the preservation of regularity and good
discipline, and that the most exemplary punishment should be inflicted upon
those who should dare to plunder the property, or molest the persons of any of
his majesty's well disposed subjects." Sept. 3.
The royal army set out from the eastern heads of the Chesapeak on the 3d of
September, leaving their tents and baggage behind, and trusted their future
accommodation to such quarters as their arms might procure. They advanced till
they were within two miles of the American army, which was then posted near
Newport. General Washington soon changed the position, and took post on the
high ground near Chadd's Fort, on Brandywine Creek, with an intention of
disputing the passage. His army consisted of 14,000 men, but the real effective
force that could be brought into action did not exceed 8000; that of the
British amounted to 16,000, when they left New York, but although the whole of
these were not brought into action, the British were still superior in number
to the provincials. General Washington was in a manner obliged to risk an
action for the defense of Philadelphia. The opinion of the inhabitants, though
founded on no circumstances more substantial than their wishes, imposed this
species of necessity.

A general action was therefore hazarded. On the 11th of September, Sept. 11.
at day break, the British army advanced in two columns. The right under
general Knyphausen, marched directly to Chadd's Ford, which lay in the center
of the American lines, where they expected the principal attack, their right
and left covering some less practicable fords for several miles on either hand.
A heavy cannonade commenced about 10 o'clock on both sides, and repeated
dispositions for passing the ford were made by the British general in order to
deceive the Americans. This feint had the desired effect. The American general,
supposing the whole force of the royal army to be in his front, detached large
parties across the river to impede or frustrate this design, and kept up a
continual series of skirmishes with the British troops, sometimes advancing,
and at others obliged to retreat, until at last they were obliged to retreat
with considerable loss. In the mean time lord Cornwallis, at the head of the
second column, took a large circuit to the left, until he gained the forks of
the Brandywine, where, from the division of the river, it could be more ea^^^
forded. Having accordingly passed both branches about two in the afternoon, he
took the shortest road down the river, in order to fall upon the right flank of
the provincials.

General Washington having been apprised of this movement, about two hours
before, endeavored as well as he could to provide against its effect, by
detacking general Sullivan, with as many troops as he (...) spare, to oppose
Cornwallis. This task was exe^^^ with great military skill. General Sullivan
posted his troops in the strong grounds above Birmingham church, his flanks
being covered with very thick woods, and his front with artillery very
advantageously disposed. The ardour of the British and Hessian troops, however,
overthrew every obstacle. The action began about 4 o'clock, and the Americans,
after a spirited opposition, were driven from their posts, and pursued into the
woods in their rear. Considerable resistance was made by a part of the right
wing, which had not been broken. These took another strong position in a wood,
and were not dislodged for some time.

As the main and collected body of the British army continued to advance; they
fell in with a strong party of the provincials which had not been engaged.
These had posted themselves advantageously, in order to cover that wing of the
army which had been defeated, and maintained their ground so vigorously, that
they could not be driven from it before the night was considerable advanced,
when the darkness prevented the conquerors from reaping any benefit of their
victory.

General Knyphausen, at last, after having amused the provincials all day, made
good his passage in the evening, when he found that they were already deeply
engaged on the right. He carried the intrenchment, and took the battery and
cannon, which defended Chadd's Ford; and at the same instant, some British
troops who had been engaged in the woods, and at last made shift to penetrate
through them, happening to make their appearance, the Americans were thrown
into such consternation, that an immediate retreat or flight took place.
General Weedon's brigade, and those under general Green covered the retreat of
the flying troops: and nothing but the darkness of the night prevented a total
and ruinous defeat to the Americans.

Though on this occasion the victory undoubtedly belonged to the British, it
was far from being of that final and decisive kind, which people had been led
to expect in the event of a meeting between the British and American armies, on
nearly equal terms, both as to numbers and the nature of the ground. Such had
been the case at present; and though the Americans were inferior in force, yet
the whole day was nearly consumed before victory was obtained. The Americans
lost in this action, including officers, 300 killed, 600 wounded, and 400 taken
prisoners. Among the latter was the baron de St. Ouary, who served as a
volunteer. They also lost ten small field pieces and one howitzer, of which
all, but one, were brass.

The loss in the royal army was not in proportion, being somewhat under 500, of
which the slain did not amount to one fifth. The officers suffered
considerably, especially in wounded, though no one of higher rank than a
captain was killed.

Here the celebrated marquis de la Fayette first bled in the cause of liberty,
which he had espoused with enthusiastic ardour. His wound was slight, but it
endeared him to the Americans. General Woodford was likewise wounded. Monsieur
du Coudray, a French officer of high rank, and great abilities, was drowned
about this time in the river Schuylkill, whilst on his way to join the American
army.

The evening after the battle of Brandywine, a party of the British was sent to
Wilmington, who took Mr. McKinley, the governor of the Delaware state,
prisoner. They also took a shallop lying in the creek, loaded with the rich
effects of some of the inhabitants, together with the public records of the
county, and a large quantity of public and private money, besides articles of
plate and other things.

The Americans retreated first to Chester, and then to Philadelphia, where
general Washington used the utmost diligence to repair his loss. Within a few
days he came out with a design to risk another action, and advanced as far as
the Warren tavern, on the Lancaster road. Near that place both armies were on
the point of engaging with their whole force, Sept. 18.
but were prevented by a storm of rain which lasted for a whole day and night.
When the rain ceased, the Americans found that their ammunition was entirely
ruined; so they retired to a place of safety.

The British left their position near the White Horse tavern, and began to
march toward Reading, where the provincials had a quantity of stores, upon
which, general Washington took a new position, and left the British in
undisturbed possession of the roads leading to Philadelphia.

General How having intelligence that general Wayne was lying in the woods
with a corpse of 1500 men and four pieces of cannon, Sept. 20.
in the rear of the left wing of his army, detached general Gray, on the 20th
of September, late at night, with two regiments and a body of light infantry,
to surprise him. Gray gained Wayne's left about one o'clock in the morning.
Some out sentries were very early missed by an American officer going his
rounds, and an alarm being given, the general paraded them in the light of
their fires, instead of withdrawing them to the back of their encampment. Thus
the British were directed where to rush on with their bayonets, as ordered by
their commander. About three hundred were killed and wounded on the spot. They
took between 70 and 80 prisoners, including several officers, a great many
arms, and eight wagons loaded with baggage and stores. The enterprise was
conducted with such address that the loss of the assailants did not exceed
eight.

Congress, which after a short residence at Baltimore had returned to
Philadelphia, were obliged a second time to consult their safely by flight.
They retired first to Lancaster and then to Yorktown. Nothing now prevented sir
William How from taking possession of Philadelphia. He therefore left the bulk
of his forces in Germantown, and, with a small part, made his triumphant entry
into the city, and was received with a hearty welcome of numerous citizens,
Sept. 26.
who, either from principle, interest, or cowardice, had hitherto separated
themselves from the class of active whigs.

Lord How was no sooner acquainted with the success of his brother, than he
took the most speedy and effectual measures for conducting the fleet and
transports round to the Delaware. The voyage was intricate, tedious, and
dangerous; and nothing less than his superior skill and ability, which was
exerted in the conduct and management of (...) great a number of ships, could
have prevented the loss from being considerable; but, as the passage to
Philadelphia was yet impracticable, the fleet drew up and anchored along the
shore of Pennsylvania from Reedy Island to Newcastle.

The first object of the British troops, after taking possession of the city,
was to cut off, by means of strong batteries, the communication between the
upper and lower parts of the river; which was executed, notwithstanding the
opposition of some American armed vessels; one of which, the Delaware frigate,
carrying 36 guns, was taken. The next task was to open a communication with it
by sea; and this was a work of no small difficulty. A vast number of batteries
and forts had been erected, and immense machines formed like chevaux de frixe,
from whence they took their name, funk in the river to prevent its navigation.
As the fleet now cooperated with the army, this work, however difficult, was
accomplished; nor did the provincials give much opposition, as well knowing
that all places of this kind were now untenable. General Washington, however,
took the advantage of the royal army being divided to attack the camp of the
principal division of it that lay at Germantown, Oct. 4.
in the neighborhood of Philadelphia. In this he met with very little success;
for though he reached the place of destination by three o'clock in the morning,
the patroles had time to call the troops to arms. The morning was likewise
extremely foggy. This, by concealing the true situation of the parties, who
made the attack at different places, occasioned mistakes, and made so much
caution necessary as to give the British time to recover from the effects of
their first surprise, which the bold attack of the Americans had occasioned.
The latter, notwithstanding, made a very resolute assault: but they were
received with so much bravery, that they were compelled to abandon the attempt,
and retreat in great disorder; with the advantage, however, of carrying off
their cannon, though pursued for a considerable way, after having upwards of
200 killed, and about 500 wounded, and upwards of 400 taken prisoners, among
whom were 54 officers. On the British side, the loss amounted to 430 wounded
and prisoners, and 70 killed; but among the last were general Agnew and colonel
Bird, with some other excellent officers.

There still remained two strong forts on the Delaware to be reduced. These
were Mud Island and Red Bank. The various obstructions which the Americans had
thrown in the way rendered it necessary to bring up the Augusta, a ship of the
line, and the Merlin frigate, to the attack of Mud Island; but during the heat
of action both were grounded. Upon this, the Americans sent down four fire
ships, and directed the whole fire from their galleys against them. The former
were rendered ineffectual by the courage and skill of the British seamen; but
during the engagement both the Augusta and Merlin took fire and were burnt to
ashes, and the other ships obliged to withdraw. The Americans, encouraged by
this unsuccessful attempt proceeded to throw new obstructions in the way: but
the British general having found means to convey a number of cannon and to
erect batteries within a gunshot of the fort by land, and bringing up three
ships of the line which mounted heavy cannon, the garrison, after making a
vigorous defense for one day, perceiving that preparations were making for a
general assault on the next, abandoned the place in the night. Those who
defended Red Bank followed their example, and abandoned it on the approach of
lord Cornwallis. In the attacks on these forts the British lost a considerable
number of men. In that on Red Bank alone, there were not less than 400 men
killed and wounded; and their leader, count Donop, was mortally wounded and
taken prisoner. A great number of the American shipping, now finding themselves
entirely destitute of any protection, sailed up the river in the night time.
Seventeen, however, remained, whose retreat was intercepted by a frigate and
some armed vessels; on which the Americans ran them ashore and burnt them, to
prevent their falling into the enemy's hands.

Whilst sir William How was succeeding in every enterprise in Pennsylvania,
intelligence arrived that general Burgoyne and his whole army had surrendered
prisoners of war to the Americans at Saratoga, as will be related in the
account of the northern campaign. General Washington soon after received a
considerable reinforcement from the northern army, which had accomplished this
great event. With this increased force he took a position at and near White
Marsh. At the same time the British general had received a similar
reinforcement from New York; and conceiving that general Washington, from the
disposition of his army, might perhaps incline to venture an engagement,
marched from Philadelphia on the 4th of December at night; Dec. 4.
and next morning took post on Chestnut Hill, in the front of the right wing of
the American army; but general Washington, though he ardently wished to be
attacked, would not relinquish a position from which he hoped for reparation
for the adversities of the campaign. General How remained three days in the
neighborhood, Dec. 7.
and explored the right and left wings of their camp, supposing that some part
of it might be found liable to an attack. Every part was found equally
inaccessible; and though frequent skirmishes ensued, and the royal army
advanced within a mile of the American lines, nothing could entice or provoke
general Washington to leave his position. General How, therefore, gave up the
thoughts of any farther attempt for the season, as his officers and soldiers
suffered the most grievous severities of the weather from the want of tents,
and other field equipage; he, accordingly, on the 8th of December, began his
march for Philadelphia, in full view of the Americans, without being in the
least incommoded on his return.

Three days after, Dec. 11.
the American army marched from White Marsh to Swedes' Ford, and afterward to
Valley Forge, Dec. 19.
on the Shuykill, about 15 miles from Philadelphia, where they remained in huts
during the winter. In this march the army might have been tracked by the blood
of their feet, upon the hard frozen road, occasioned by the want of shoes and
stockings. This extreme want of clothing put the general under the necessity of
granting warrants to impress what the holders would not willingly part with,
agreeably to the power with which congress had invested him.

About this time the British fleet at Philadelphia received an alarm of so
uncommon a nature, that some account of it becomes necessary. Early in the war,
Mr. David Bushnel of Saybrook, in Connecticut, invented a machine for submarine
navigation, different from any thing hitherto devised by the art of man. This
machine was so constructed as that it could be rowed horizontally, at any given
depth, under water, and could be raised or depressed at pleasure. To this
machine, called the American Turtle, was attached a magazine of gun powder,
which was intended to be fastened under the bottom of a ship, with a driving
screw, in such a way as that the same stroke which disengaged it from the
machine should put the internal clock work in motion. This being done, the
ordinary operation of a gun lock, at the distance of half an hour, or any
determinate time, would cause the powder to explode and leave the effects to
the common laws of nature. The simplicity, yet combination discovered in the
mechanism of this wonderful machine, have been acknowledged by those skilled in
physics, and particularly hydraulics, to be not less ingenious than novel. Mr.
Bushnel invented several other curious machines for the annoyance of the
British shipping, but from accidents, not militating against the philosophical
principles, on which their success depended, they but partially succeeded. He
destroyed a vessel in the charge of commodore Symmonds. One of his kegs also
demolished a vessel near the Long Island shore. About Christmas 1777, he
committed to the Delaware river a number of kegs, destined to fall among the
British fleet at Philadelphia; but this squadron of kegs, having been separated
and retarded by the ice, demolished but a single boat. This catastrophe,
however, produced an alarm, unprecedented in its nature and degree; which has
been humourously described by the late honorable Francis Hopkinson, in a song,
styled "The Battle of the Kegs."

The issue of the campaign upon the Delaware afforded room for the most serious
reflections to the British. Their arms were crowned with the most brilliant
success. Two very considerable victories were obtained. In all lesser actions,
excepting the affair at Red Bank, they were equally triumphant. Yet with all
this tide of success, all the fruit they derived from their victories at the
close of the campaign, amounted to no more than simply a good winter lodging
for their army in the city of Philadelphia; whilst the troops possessed no more
of the adjacent country than what they immediately commanded with their arms.
It was still more discouraging, that general Washington had given repeated
proofs that however he might engage them when he thought it to his advantage,
it was impossible for the royal army to bring him to action against his
consent. This gave occasion to much uneasiness in Britain, where the news of
the first successes had caused the greatest exultation, which was now succeeded
by very gloomy reflections on the peculiar and fatal circumstances, which, from
the nature of the country, and other operating causes, had distinguished this
war, from all others in which they had ever been concerned, and in which
victory and deseat were nearly productive of the same consequences.

CHAP. XXIII.
Canada -- Conduct of the Northern expedition committed to Lieutenant General
Burgoyne -- Expedition under Colonel St. Ledger -- State of the Force employed
-- General Burgoyne sets out from Quebeck -- His speech to the Savages -- His
proclamation -- Ticonderoga besieged -- Abandoned by General. St. Clair --
Pursuit by Land and Water -- American Galleys and Batteaux destroyed -- Rear of
the Americans overtaken by Colonel Frazer -- Colonel Francis defeated and
killed -- St. Clair retreats to the woods with the remains of the Army --
Americans set fire to and abandon Fort Anne -- Extraordinary difficulties
encountered by the Royal Army in the march to Fort Edward -- General St. Clair
arrives at Fort Edward -- Hurt done to the royal cause by the Indians -- Murder
of Miss M'Rea -- General Gates succeeds St. Clair in the command -- St. Ledger
besieges Fort Schuyler -- He defeats General Harkimer on his way to the relief
of the Fort -- The Indians desert him -- Obliged to raise the siege --
Difficulties of General Burgoyne -- General Stark defeats Colonels Baum and
Breyman in an attempt to surprise the Magazines at Bennington -- General
Burgoyne passer North. River at Saratega, and advances to attack the American
army at Still Water -- Severe actions on the 19th of September and 7th of
October -- Distressed situation of the Royal army -- General Gates misinformed
of the state of the British camp -- Narrow escape of a strong detachment sent
to take possession of it -- The British army nearly surrounded on all sides --
No possibility of retreat -- Convention concluded with General Gates -- The
British lay down their Arms -- State of both armies -- Sir Henry Clinton's
devastations on North River -- Possibility of his relieving Burgoyne asserted
-- Convention suspended -- Consequences of the capture of Burgoyne -- Captures
at Sea -- Attempt to displace General Washington.

ONE great object in the ministerial plan for the campaign of 1777, was, to
effect a free communication between New York and Canada, and to maintain the
navigation of the intermediate lakes. On the other hand, the Americans were
very early attentive to their security in that quarter, and had placed every
possible obstruction in their way.

This expedition had been projected by the British ministry as the most
effectual method that could be taken to crush the colonies at once. The four
provinces of New England had originally begun the confederacy again Britain,
and were still considered as the most active in the continuation of it; and it
was thought, that any impression made upon them, would contribute in an
effectual manner to the reduction of all the rest. For this purpose, an army of
4000 chosen British troops and 3000 Germans were put under the command of
general Burgoyne; general Carleton was directed to use his interest with the
Indians to persuade them to join in this expedition; and the province of
Quebeck was to furnish large parties to join in the same. Those who commanded
under general Burgoyne were, general Philips of the artillery, generals Fraser,
Powell, and Hamilton, with the German officers generals Reidesel and Speecht,
all officers of distinguished merit. The soldiers were all excellently
disciplined, and had been kept in their winter quarters with all imaginable
care, in order to prepare them for the expedition on which they were going. The
brass train of artillery that was sent out, was perhaps the finest, and the
most excellently supplied, both as to officers and men, that had ever been
allotted to second the operations of an equal force. To aid the principal
expedition, another was projected on the Mohawk River, under colonel St. Ledger,
who was to be assisted by sir John Johnson, son to the famous sir William
Johnson who had so greatly distinguished himself in the war of 1755.

A considerable force was left in Canada for its internal security, and sir Guy
Carleton's authority was restricted to the limits of that province. His
military command extended before to every part of America, whither he might
find it sitting to conduct the army under his direction. Though the British
ministry attributed the preservation of Canada to his abilities, yet he was now
called upon to act a secondary part in subserviency to the grand expedition
committed to general Burgoyne. His behavior in this trying and difficult
situation was conformable to the greatness of his soul. He showed that
resentment could not warp him from his duty, and he applied himself with the
same diligence and energy, to forward and support the expedition in all its
parts, as if the arrangement had been entirely his own.

Lieutenant general Burgoyne arrived in Quebeck on the 6th of May, May 6.
and exerted all diligence to prosecute in due time the objects of the
expedition. He proceeded up Lake Champlain, and, on the 21st of June, having
landed near Crown Point, June 21.
he encamped on the western side of the lake, where being joined by a
considerable body of Indians, the general made a speech, in which it is said he
exhorted these new allies, but ineffectually, to lay aside their ferocious and
barbarous manner of making war; to kill only such as opposed them in arms; and
to spare prisoners, with such women and children as should fall into their
hands. After issuing a proclamation, in which the force of Britain, and that
which he commanded, was set forth in very ostentatious terms, the campaign
opened with the siege of Ticonderoga. The place was very strong, and garrisoned
by 2546 continentals, and 900 militia, under general St. Clair; nevertheless,
the works were so extensive, that even this number was scarce sufficient to
defend them properly. They had therefore omitted to fortify a rugged eminence
called Sugar Hill, the top of which overlooked and effectually commanded the
whole works; imagining, perhaps, that the difficulty of the ascent would be
sufficient to prevent the enemy from taking possession of it. On the approach
of the first division of the army, the provincials abandoned and set fire to
their out works; and so expeditious were the British troops, that by the 5th of
July every post was secured which was judged necessary for investing it
completely. July 6.
A road was soon after made to the very summit of that eminence which the
Americans had supposed could not be ascended; and so much were they now
disheartened, that they instantly abandoned the fort entirely, taking the road
to Skenesborough, a place to the south of Lake George; while their baggage,
with what artillery and military stores they could carry off, were sent to the
same place by water. But the British generals were determined not to let them
pass so easily. Both were pursued and both overtaken. Their armed vessels
consided only of five galleys; two of which were taken, and three blown up; on
which they set fire to their boats and fortifications at Skenesborough. On this
occasion the provincials lost 200 boats, 130 pieces of cannon, with all their
provisions and baggage. Their land forces under colonel Francis made a brave
defense against general Fraser; July 7.
and superior in number, had almost overpowered him, when general Reidesel with
a large body of Germans came to his assistance. The Americans were now
overpowered in their turn; and their commander being killed, they fled on all
fides with great precipitation. In this action 200 were killed, as many taken
prisoners, and above 600 wounded, many of whom perished in the woods for want
of assistance.

During the engagement general St. Clair was at Castleton, about six miles from
the place; but instead of going forward to Fort Anne, the next place of
strength, he repaired to the woods which lie between that fortress and New
England. General Burgoyne, however, detached colonel Hill with the ninth
regiment, in order to intercept such as should attempt to retreat toward Fort
Anne. On his way he met with a body of the Americans, said to be six times as
numberous as his own; but after an engagement of three hours, they were obliged
to retire with great loss. After so many disasters, despairing of being able to
make any stand at Fort Anne, they set sire to it and retired to Fort Edward. In
all these engagements the loss of killed and wounded in the royal army did not
exceed 200 men.

General Burgoyne was now obliged to suspend his operations for some time, and
wait at Skenesborough for the arrival of his tents, provisions, etc. but
employed this interval in making roads through the country about St. Anne, and
in clearing a passage for his troops to proceed against the Americans. The
direct distance from Fort Anne, where the batteaux navigation ended, or even
from Skenesborough to Fort Edward, was no more than what in easy ground, or a
cultivated country, would be termed a moderate ride for exercise; yet such is
the savage state of that country, and such were the difficulties thrown in the
way by the provincials, that the progress of the army thither was rendered very
tedious and laborious; scarcely indeed exceeding one mile a day; a
circumstance, to after ages, and in a cultivated state of the country, perhaps
hardly credible. Almost every part of the passage was a wilderness. The
provincials had cut large trees on both sides of the road, in such a manner as
to fall across and lengthways, with their branches interwoven; so that the
troops had several layers of these frequently to remove, in places where they
could not possibly take an opposite direction. The face of the country was
likewise so broken with creeks and marshes, that, in this short space, they had
no fewer than forty bridges to construct, besides others to repair; one of
which was of log work, two miles in length. In short, after undergoing the
utmost difficulty that could be undergone, and making every exertion that man
could make, he arrived with his army before Fort Edward about the end of July.
July 30.
Here general Schuyler had been for some time endeavoring to recruit the
shattered American forces, and had been joined by general St. Clair with the
remains of his army; the garrison of Fort George also, situated on the lake of
that name, had evacuated the place and retired to Fort Edward on Hudson's River.

Notwithstanding the great success of the British general, the people, far from
showing the least disposition to submit, seemed only to consider how they might
make the most effectual resistance. For this purpose, the militia was every
where raised and draughted to join the army at Saratoga; and such numbers of
volunteers were daily added, that they soon began to recover from the alarm
into which they had been thrown.

The terror excited by the Indians, likewise, instead of disposing any of the
inhabitants to court the British protection, had a tendency directly opposite.
They had no other means of security, but to abandon their habitations and take
up arms. The friends of the royal cause, as well as its enemies, suffered from
their indiscriminate barbarities. The murder of Miss M'Rea, especially, excited
universal horror. This young lady, in the innocence of youth, and the bloom of
beauty -- she daughter of a steady loyalist, and engaged to be married to a
British officer, was, whilst dressed to receive her promised husband, murdered
by her savage conductors, the auxiliaries of the British army. Occasion was
thereby given to inflame the populace, and to blacken the royal cause. The
cruelties of the Indians and the cause in which they were engaged, were
associated together, and presented in one view to the alarmed inhabitants. This
melancholy story, though true, was no premeditated barbarity. The circumstances
were as follow: Mr. Jones, her lover, from an anxiety for her safety, engaged
some Indians to remove her from among the Americans, and promised to reward the
person who should bring her safe to him, with a barrel of rum. Two of the
Indians who had conveyed her some distance on the way to her intended husband,
disputed which of them should present her to Mr. Jones. Both were anxious for
the reward; and one of them killed her with his tomahawk, to prevent the other
from receiving it. General Burgoyne obliged the Indians to deliver up the
murderer, and threatened to put him to death. His life was only spared, upon
the Indians agreeing to terms, which the general thought would be more
efficacious than an execution, in preventing similar mischiefs.

The wisdom and propriety of general St. Clair's retreat from Ticonderoga was
soon after evident, even to those, who censured his conduct; as the army, saved
by that means, stood as a barrier between the inhabitants and general Burgoyne.
This abated the panic of the people, and became a center of rendezvous for them
to repair to: And when an inquiry into his conduct took place afterward, all
the charges against him were found groundless, and he was honorably acquitted.
In the mean time general Gates was placed at the head of the northern army. At
the same time general Arnold repaired to Saratoga with a considerable train of
artillery; but receiving intelligence that colonel St. Ledger was proceeding
with great rapidity in his expedition on the Mohawk River, he removed to Still
Water, a place about half way between Saratoga and the junction of the Mohawk
and Hudson's River.

Colonel St. Ledger had advanced in the beginning of August as far as Fort
Schuyler, formerly called Fort Stanwic; the siege of which he pressed with
great vigor. On the 6th of August, understanding that a supply of provisions,
Aug. 6.
escorted by 800 or 900 men, under general Harkimer, was on the way to the
fort, he dispatched sir John Johnson with a number of tories and Indians, who
surprised the Americans and took the convoy. A scene of great confusion
followed. Some of Harkimer's men ran off, but others posted themselves behind
logs, and continued to fight with bravery and success. The loss on the side of
the Americans was 160 killed, besides many wounded. The British accounts state
400 killed and 200 taken prisoners. Dodsley's Annual Register for 1777.
General Harkimer was among the former. Several of the principal people in that
part of the country were among the killed and wounded. Colonel Willet, the
second in command in the fort, under general Gansevoort, sallied out with 250
men, about the time of this battle, and routed two of the Indian and tory
encampments, carrying off provisions, baggage, arms and five colors, which on
their return to the fort were displayed under the continental flag.

Colonel St. Ledger now endeavored to induce the garrison to surrender, by
stating the impossibility of their receiving relief, and threatening them in
case of resistance; but the commander replied, that he was determined to defend
it to the last extremity, against all enemies whatever, without any concern for
the consequences of doing his duty: And so little were the garrison
intimidated, that colonel Willet and lieutenant Stockwell, passed by night
through the besiegers' works, and, eluding the vigilance of the enemy, made
their way through the greatest dangers and dissiculties to hasten the march of
general Arnold to their assistance.

Thus the affairs of Colonel St. Ledger seemed to be in no very favorable
situation notwithstanding his late success, and they were soon totally ruined
by the desertion of the Indians. They had been alarmed by the report of general
Arnold's advancing with 2000 men to the relief of the fort; and whilst the
colonel was attempting to give them encouragement, another report was spread,
that general Burgoyne had been defeated with great slaughter, and was now
flying before the provincials. On this he was obliged to do as they thought
proper; and the retreat could not be effected without the loss of the tents and
some of the artillery and military stores.

General Burgoyne, in the mean time, notwithstanding all the difficulties he
had already sustained, found that he must still encounter more. The roads he
had made with so much labor and pains were destroyed, either by the wetness of
the season or by the Americans; so that the provisions he brought from Fort
George could not strive at his camp without the most prodigious toil. On
hearing of the siege of Fort Schuyler by colonel St. Ledger, he determined to
move forward, in hopes of enclosing the enemy betwixt his own army and that of
St. Ledger, or of obtaining the command of all the country between Fort Schuyler
and Albany; or, at any rate, a junction with colonel St. Ledger would be
effected, which could not but be attended with the most happy consequences. The
only difficulty was the want of provisions; and this it was proposed to remedy
by reducing the provincial magazines at Bennington. For this purpose, colonel
Baum, a German officer of great bravery, was chosen with a body of 500 men. The
place was about twenty miles from Hudson's River; and to support colonel Baum's
party, the whole army marched up the river's bank, and encamped almost opposite
to Saratoga, with the river betwixt it and that place. An advanced party was
posted at Batten Kill, between the camp and Bennington, in order to support
colonel Baum. In their way the British seized a large supply of cattle and
provisions, which were immediately sent to the camp; but the badness of the
roads retarded their march so much, that inrelligence of their design was sent
to Bennington. Understanding now that the American force was greatly superior
to his own, the colonel acquainted the general, who immediately dispatched
colonel Breyman with a party to his assistance; but through the same causes
that had retarded the march of colonel Baum, this assistance could not arrive
in time. General Stark, in the mean time, who commanded at Bennington,
determined to attack the two parties separately; and for this purpose advanced
against colonel Baum, Aug. 16.
whom he surrounded on all sides and attacked with the utmost violence. The
troops defended themselves with great valor, but were to a man either killed
or taken prisoners; among the latter was colonel Baum. Colonel Breyman, after a
desperate engagement, had the good luck to effect a retreat through the
darkness of the night, which otherwise he could not have done, as his men had
expended all their ammunition, being 40 rounds to each. In these two actions
the Americans took 4 brass field pieces, 12 brass drums, 250 dragoon swords, 4
ammunition wagons, and about 700 prisoners. The loss of the Americans,
inclusive of their wounded, was about 100 men.

General Burgoyne, thus disappointed in his attempt on Bennington, applied
himself with indefatigable diligence to procure provisions from Fort George;
and having at length amassed a sufficient quantity to last for a month, he
threw a bridge of boats over the river Hudson, which he crossed about the
middle of September, encamping on the hills and plains near Saratoga. As soon
as he approached the provincial army, at this time encamped at Stillwater,
under general Gates, he determined to make an attack; for which purpose he put
himself at the head of the central division of his army, having general Fraser
and colonel Breyman on the right, Sept. 19.
with generals Reidesel and Philips on the left. In this position he advanced
toward the Americans on the 19th of September. But the Americans did not now
wait to be attacked: on the contrary, they attacked the central division with
the utmost violence; and it was not until general Philips with the artillery
came up, and at 11 o'clock at night, that they could be induced to retire to
their camp. In this action a continual blaze of sire was kept up, and both
armies seemed to be determined on death or victory. The Americans and British
alternately drove, and were driven by each other. Men, and particularly
officers, dropped every moment, and on every side. Several of the Americans
placed themselves on high trees, and as often as they could distinguish an
officer's uniform, took him off by deliberately aiming at his person. The
British troops lost about 500 in killed and wounded, and the Americans about
319. The former were very much alarmed at the obstinate resolution shown by the
Americans, but this did not prevent them from advancing toward them, and
posting themselves the next day within cannon shot of their lines. But their
allies the Indians began to desert in great numbers; and at the same time the
general was in the highest degree mortified by having no intelligence of any
assistance from (...) Henry Clinton, Sept. 21.
as had been stipulated. He now received a letter from him, by which he was
informed that sir Henry intended to make a diversion on the North River in his
favor. This afforded but little comfort: however, he returned an answer by
several trusty persons, whom he dispatched different ways, stating his present
distressed situation, with instructions to press the immediate execution of the
proposed cooperation, and mentioning that the provisions and other necessaries
he had would only enable him to hold out till the 12th of October.

In the mean time the Americans, in order to cut off the retreat of the British
army in the most effectual manner, undertook an expedition against Ticonderoga;
but were obliged to abandon the enterprise after having surprised all the out
posts, and taken a great number of boats, with some armed vessels, and a number
of prisoners.

The army under general Burgoyne, however, continued to labor under the
greatest distresses; so that in the beginning of October he had been obliged to
diminish the soldiers' allowance. On the 7th of that month he determined to
move toward the Americans. Oct. 7.
For this purpose he sent a body of 1500 men to reconnoitre their left wing;
intending, if possible, to break through it in order to effect a retreat. The
detachment, however, had not proceeded far when a dreadful attack was made upon
the left wing of the British army, which was with great difficulty preserved
from being entirely broken by a reinforcement brought up by general Fraser, who
was killed in the attack, and, on account of his distinguished merit, was the
subject of particular regret. After the troops had with the most desperate
efforts regained their camp, it was most furiously assaulted by general Arnold;
who, notwithstanding all opposition, would have forced the intrenchments, had
he not received a dangerous wound, which obliged him to retire. Thus the attack
failed on the left, but on the right the camp of the German reserve was forced,
colonel Breyman killed, and his countrymen defeated with great slaughter, and
the loss of 9 pieces of brass artillery and all their baggage. This day was
fatal to many brave men. Sir James Clark, Burgoyne's aid de camp, was mortally
wounded. The general himself had a narrow escape, a musket shot passing through
his hat, and another through his waistcoat. Majors Williams and Ackland were
taken, and the latter was wounded. The loss of the Americans was inconsiderable.

This was by far the heaviest loss the British army had sustained since the
action at Bunker's Hill. The list of killed and wounded amounted to near 1200,
exclusive of the Germans; but the greatest misfortune was, that the Americans
had now an opening on the right and rear of the British forces, so that the
army was threatened with entire destruction. This obliged general Burgoyne once
more to shift his position, that his opponents might also be obliged to alter
theirs. This was accomplished on the night of the 7th, without any loss, and
all the next day he continued to offer the Americans battle; but they were now
too well assured of obtaining a complete victory, by cutting off all supplies
from the British, to risk a pitched battle. Wherefore they advanced on the
right side, in order to enclose him entirely; which obliged the general to
direct a retreat toward Saratoga. But the Americans had now stationed a great
force on the ford at Hudson's River, so that the only possibility of retreat
was by securing a passage to Lake George; and to effect this, a body of workmen
were detached, with a strong guard, to repair the roads and bridges that led to
Fort Edward. As soon as they were gone, however, the Americans seemed to
prepare for an attack; which rendered it necessary to recall the guard, and the
workmen being of course left exposed, could not proceed.

The royal troops were under arms the whole day of the 8th, Oct. 8.
in continual expectation of an action, and were cannonaded during the greatest
part of it; but all that happened was a succession of skirmishes which
occasioned loss on both sides. General Lincoln was wounded in his leg by a
random shot, when riding in company with general Gates. About sunset, a strange
spectacle was presented to view. The corpse of general Fraser was brought out
of the unfortunate British camp, and carried up the hill, attended only by the
officers who had lived in his family, for he desired it might be carried,
without parade, by the foldiers of his corpse, to the great redoubt, and there
buried. It necessarily passed within view of both armies: generals Burgoyne,
Philips, and Reidesel, standing together, were unable to restrain their natural
propensity to pay their last attention to his remains -- jealous lest their
conformity to his request might be construed into neglect -- they followed the
corpse to the grave. The incessant cannonading during the solemnity; -- the
steady attitude, and unaltered voice with which the chaplain, Mr. Brudenell,
officiated, though frequently covered with dust, thrown up on all sides of him
by the shot; -- the mute but expressive mixture of sensibility and indignation
upon every countenance, together with the duskiness of the evening, might make
one of the finest subjects for the pencil of a master that the field ever
exhibited. But had general Burgoyne acquainted the American commander with the
intended procession, there is no doubt but the magnanimity and generosity of
general Gates would have varied the scene, and done due honor to the memory of
his brave enemy.

In the mean time, the boats which conveyed provisions down Hudson's River were
exposed to the continual fire of the American marksmen, who took many of them;
so that it became necessary to convey the provisions over land. In this extreme
danger, it was resolved to march by night to Fort Edward, forcing the passages
at the fords either above or below the place; and, in order to effect this the
more easily, it was resolved that the soldiers should carry their provisions on
their backs, leaving behind their baggage and every other encumbrance. But
before this could be executed, intelligence was received that the Americans had
raised strong intrenchments opposite to these fords, well provided with cannon,
and that they had likewise taken possession of the rising ground between Fort
George and Fort Edward, which in like manner was provided with cannon.

"On the morning of the 11th of October, general Gates called the general
officers together, Oct. 11.
and informed them of his having received certain intelligence, which might be
depended upon, that the main body of Burgoyne's army was marched off for Fort
Edward with what they could take, and that a rear guard only was left in the
camp, who after a while were to push off as fast as possible, leaving the heavy
baggage behind. On this it was concluded to attack the camp in half an hour.
The officers repaired to their commands. General Nixon's, being the eldest
brigade, crossed the Saratoga creck first. Unknown to the Americans, Burgoyne
had a line formed behind a parcel of brush wood to support the post of
artillery, where the others meant to make their attack. General Glover was on
the point of following Nixon, when he saw a British deserter whom he examined.
The soldier told him the truth, that the whole army was in camp; that a small
detachment had been sent off a day or two ago, but had returned, on finding the
passes occupied by the Americans. General Glover dispatched his aid de camp to
general Gates with the deserter behind him, and at the same time sent a message
to general Nixon, which reached him in the critical minute; before he could
re-cross, the fog, which had prevailed, cleared off, and his rear was galled by
the enemy's cannon, which killed several of his men: a quarter of an hour later
would probably have proved fatal to his whole brigade, and given a new turn of
affairs in favor of the royal army. Thus the rise and fall of mighty empires
may depend upon the minutest incidents. Are these to be considered as blind
unmeaning casualties? Are they not rather the direct acts of a Divine Being,
for the establishment of his own purpose, by a Providence superintending the
jarring devices of mortals?

All this time the American army was increasing by the continual arrival of
militia and volunteers from all parts. Their parties extended all along the
opposite bank of Hudson's River, and some had even passed it in order to
observe the least movement of the British army. The whole force under general
Gates was computed at 16,000 men, whilst the army under general Burgoyne scarce
amounted to 6000; and every part of their camp was reached by the grape and
rifle shot of the enemy, besides a discharge from their artillery, which was
almost incessant. In this state of extreme distress and danger, the army
continued with the greatest constancy and perseverance till the evening of the
13th of October. Oct. 13.
General Burgoyne finding that the troops had only three days provision in
store, on short allowance, and no apparent means of retreat remaining, called
into council all the generals, field officers, and captains commanding corpse.
There was not a spot of ground in the whole camp for holding the council of
war, but what was exposed to cannon or rifle shot. While the council was
deliberating, an eighteen pound ball crossed the table. By the unanimous advice
and concurrence of the council, the general was induced to open a treaty with
general Gates. The first proposals of the latter were rejected, and the sixth
article with disdain, wherein it was required, that the British army should lay
down their arms in the intrenchments. Burgoyne's counter proposals were
unanimously approved; and being sent to Gates were agreed to, on the 15th,
without any material alteration. The proposals not being signed by either
party, and captain Campbell returning in the night of the 16th to Burgoyne,
with the news of the reduction of Fort Montgomery and other intelligence, the
general submitted it to consideration, whether it was consistent with public
faith, and, if so, expedient to suspend the execution of the treaty, and trust
to events. The opinion of different officers was asked in regard to the
condition of their respective corpse, and what might be expected from them
severally in desperate cases. Some entertained doubts of part of the troops, if
the negotiation ceased; and others of a greater part for want of bodily
strength, if desperate enterprises were to be afterward undertaken. The
majority of the council determined, that the public faith was bona side
plighted. Ra^^ of Bal^arras in the house of (...).
Burgoyne, from the intelligence brought in the night by Campbell, entertained
a slight hope of remote relief, and accordingly gave his voice against the
majority; but the majority having determined differently, the concurrence for
signing the treaty was unanimous. Idem.
Gates, jealous lest the signing would be unnecessarily delayed, and fearful of
the consequences which might follow, should general Vaughan with his troops
come up in time to Burgoyne's assistance, determined to bring the matter to an
immediate issue. On the morning of the 17th, Oct. 17.
he got every thing in readiness for attacking the royal army. This done, he
took out his watch, the time agreed upon for signing being come; sent colonel
Greaton on horseback to Burgoyne with a message, requiring the general to sign;
and allowed him no more than ten minutes to go and return. He was back in time.
The treaty was signed; all hostile appearances ceased; and the Americans
ma^^^ed into their lines, to the tune of Yankee Doodle.

The terms granted were moderate: the army were allowed to march out with all
the honors of war and its camp artillery, to the verge of the river, where
they were to deposit their arms. The troops were to be allowed a free passage
to Europe, on condition of their not serying again in North America during the
war. The army were not to be separated, particularly the men from the officers;
roll calling, and other duties of regularity to be admitted; the officers on
parole to be allowed to wear their side arms, and to be quartered according to
their rank; all private property to be held sacred, and the public delivered
upon honor; no baggage to be searched or molested; all persons, of whatever
country, appertaining to, or following the camp, to be fully comprehended in
the capitulation; and the Canadians to be returned to their own country liable
to its conditions. All these, as far as general Gates was or could be
concerned, were executed with the utmost punctuality. Nay, so much attention
was paid to the delicacy of military honor, that when the British troops went
to the place appointed to lay down their arms, the provincials were strictly
kept within their lines, and not allowed to be spectators of so great
humiliation on the part of Britain. Such conduct was the more praise worthy, as
some late as well as former circumstances, had highly enraged the militia. The
extraordinary and severe measures pursued by the British on the North River, as
related below, might also have afforded much color for a different mode of
conduct.

When the arms were deposited agreeably to treaty, the royal troops were served
with bread by the Americans, as they had none left, nor flour to make it. They
had only one day's salt meat remaining.

The number of those who surrendered at Saratoga amounted to 5791; the list of
sick and wounded left in the camp when the army retreated to Saratoga, to 528;
and the number of those lost by other accidents since the taking of
Ticonderoga, to near 3000. 35 brass field pieces, 7000 stand of arms, clothing
for an equal number of soldiers, with the tents, military chest, etc.
constituted the booty on this occasion. The American forces, at the time of the
convention, were in all 13,222, of which 4129 were militia. In commemoration of
this event, congress voted that a gold medal should be struck and presented in
the name of the United States to major general Gates.

Sir Henry Clinton, in the mean time, had sailed up the North River, Oct. 6.
and destroyed the two forts called Montgomery and Clinton, with Fort
Constitution, and another place called Continental Village, where were barracks
for 2000 men. Seventy large cannon were carried away, besides a number of
smaller artillery, and a great quantity of stores and ammunition; a large boom
and chain reaching across the river from Fort Montgomery to a point of land
called St. Anthony's Nose, and which cost not less than 70,000 l. sterling,
were partly destroyed and partly carried away, as was also another boom of
little less value at Fort Constitution. The loss of the British army was but
small in number, though some officers of great merit were killed in the
different attacks.

Another attack was made by sir James Wallace with some frigates, and a body of
about 3,600 land forces under general Vaughan. The place which now suffered was
named Esopus: Oct. 13.
the fortifications were destroyed, and the town itself was wantonly reduced to
ashes, as that called Continental Village had been before.

Whether policy or revenge led to this destruction of property is uncertain,
but it cannot admit of a doubt, that it had no tendency to relieve general
Burgoyne. General Gates had express upon express, urging him to send down
troops to oppose the ravages of the enemy. On the 14th he wrote to governor
Clinton; "I have ordered the commanding officer at Fort Schuyler to send Van
Shoak's regiment without delay to Albany -- desired brigadier general Gansevort
to repair to that city, and take the command of all the troops that may
assemble there -- and have sent down the two Esopus regiments, the Tryon county
militia, and most of the militia of Albany county." But he would not weaken his
hold of Burgoyne by any detachment of continentals from his own army, or of New
England militia.

The passage of the North River was made so practicable by the advantages
gained on the 6th of October, that sir Henry Clinton, with his whole force,
amounting to full 3000 men, might not only have reached Albany, but general
Gates's encampment, before the 12th; the day till which Burgoyne had agreed to
wait for aid from New York, or at least twenty four hours before Burgoyne's
necessity compelled his submission to articles of capitulation. Why this
opportunity was neglected has never been satisfactorily explained. Whilst
general Vaughan was busied in destroying Esopus, he might with a flood tide
have reached Albany in four hours, as there was no force to hinder him. Had he
proceeded thither, and burnt the stores, general Gates, as he himself
afterward declared, must have retreated into New England.

After the convention was signed, general Gates moved forward to stop the
devastations of the British on the North River, but they, on hearing the fate
of general Burgoyne, retired to New York. About the same time those of the
British who had been left in the rear of the royal army, destroyed their
cannon, and abandoning Ticonderoga, retreated into Canada. Thus the whole
country, which had for several months experienced the confusions of war, was
instantaneously restored to perfect tranquillity.

The intelligence of this great event spread no less joy through the United
States, than grief and dejection throughout Britain. The generality of the
people in Britain had presumed that all the northern parts of the United States
would be subdued before the end of the campaign. The quality of the troops, the
zeal, talents and courage of the commander, together with the good fortune
which for some time followed him, justified their expectations in a great
degree; but the catastrophe proved the folly of planning distant expeditions,
the success of which depended upon the coincidence of circumstances, which
were, at most, only within the verge of possibility.

When the captured troops began their march to Boston, the Americans lined the
road and hill on each side. When passing through the center of them, they were
looked at, in this reverse of fortune, with a generous sedateness; not even the
least gesture was made use of by way of insult. On their arrival at Boston they
were quartered in the barracks on Winter and Prospect Hills. The general court
of Massachusetts passed proper resolutions for the accommodation of prisoners;
but from the feebleness of their authority, at that time, over the property of
their fellow citizens, it was difficult to provide immediately for so large a
number of officers and soldiers, in such a manner as their convenience
required, or as from the articles of the convention they had a right to expect.
The officers remonstrated to general Burgoyne, that six or seven of them were
crowded together in one room, without any regard to their respective ranks, in
violation of the 7th article of the convention. Notice of this being forwarded
to general Gates, he sent general Burgoyne's letter to congress. Taking hold of
the declaration of the general, that "the public faith was broken," and eager
to justify the measures they were desirous of adopting, they concluded from
thence, that the captured troops, on their embarkation, would make a junction
with the British garrisons in America. The declaration of the general, whilst
in the power of congress, was construed by them as destroying the security
which they before had in his personal honor; alleging, that, in every event,
he might adduce his previous notice to justify his future conduct. They
therefore postponed the embarkation of the troops, making a nice distinction
between the suspension and abrogation of the convention; and alleged, that
ground for suspecting an intention to violate it, was a justifying reason for
suspending its execution on their part, till it was properly ratified by the
court of Great Britain. General Burgoyne explained the intention and
construction of the passage objected to in his letter, and pledged himself that
his officers would join with him in signing any instrument that might be
thought necessary for confirming the convention; but congress would never
recede from their resolution. If was easily seen, that the measure which they
had adopted was not so lightly taken as to be easily given up; and that
explanations and securities could produce no effect on their determination.

The capture of Burgoyne gave new strength to the minority of the British
parliament; prevented the government there from acting with collected force,
which an union of sentiments would have enabled it to do; encouraged the
Americans by well grounded hopes of final success, and soon procured them
powerful friends in Europe.

The American privateers and continental shipping sent in a number of British
prizes into their own harbors this year, and insulted the coast of Britain in
a manner never before ventured upon by her hardiest enemies; so as to produce
the appointment of a convoy, for the first time ever known, to protect the
linen ships from Dublin and Newry. The General Mifflin privateer, after making
repeated captures, arrived at Breast, and saluted the French admiral, who
returned the salute in form, as to the vessel of a sovereign and independent
state. Though lord Stormont, on his threatening to return immediately to Great
Britain, unless satisfaction should be given, obtained an order for American
privateers and their prizes to leave the French ports, the same was evaded.
However, the king's ships captured many valuable prizes in the West Indies and
on the American coast. But the balance of property was greatly in favor of the
Americans. The continental frigate Hancock, of 32 guns, mostly twelve pounders,
commanded by captain Manly, was taken on the 8th of July, by sir George
Collier, of his majesty's ship the Rainbow. The Hancock's complement was 290
men, nearly as many as the Rainbow's. The Flora frigate, likewise, gave chase
to the Fox of 28 guns, on the 7th of July, and afterward captured her. The Fox
had been taken some time before by captain Manly, on the banks of Newfoundland.

On the first of December the ship Flamand, captain Landais, arrived at
Portsmouth from Marseilles with a rich supply of warlike stores. Among other
articles were 48 pieces of brass cannon, four pounders, with carriages
complete, and 2000 balls; 19 nine inch mortars, with 250 bombs; a quantity of
intrenching tools; 3000 fusees; 1100 of another quality for dragoons; 18,000
pounds of gun powder, and 61,000 of brimstone.

During this year and some time after, the views of a few factious men were
bent on rendering the commander in chief unpopular, and thus pave the way for
his removal from the command of the American army. But his fellow citizens had
such unlimited and well grounded confidence in his patriotism and abilities,
that the machinations of his enemies tended, in the end, only to establish more
firmly that authority which they industriously labored to subvert.

The plan seems to have been to engage the Massachusetts assembly and Virginia
house of burgesses, to give instructions to their delegates in congress, to
more for an inquiry into the causes of the ill success of the campaign of 1776:
and then contrive that such resolves should be agreed to, as would either
remove general Washington or produce his resignation.

The following passages in two of the general's letters to a correspondent, who
applied to him on this subject, are too valuable to be omitted. In the first
letter, dated Valley Forge, January 23d, 1778, he writes "Whether a serious
design of placing general Lee (before captivation) at the head of the army, had
ever entered into the head of a member of congress or not, I never was at the
trouble of enquiring. I am told a scheme of that kind is now on foot by some,
in behalf of another gentleman -- whether true or false -- serious or merely to
try the pulse -- I neither know nor care. Neither interested, nor ambitious
views, led me into the service. I did not solicit the command; but accepted it
after much entreaty, with all that diffidence, which a conscious want of
ability and experience, equal to the discharge of so important a trust must
naturally excite in a mind not quite devoid of thought: and after I did engage,
pursued the great line of my duty, and the object in view (as far as my
judgment could direct) as pointedly as the needle to the pole. So soon as the
public gets dissatisfied with my services, or a person is found better
qualified to answer her expectation, I shall quit the helm with as much
pleasure, and retire to a private station with as much content, as ever the
wearied pilgrim felt upon his safe arrival at the holy land, or haven of hope;
and shall wish most devoutly, that those who come after may meet with more
prosperous gales than I have done, and less difficulty. If the expectation of
the public has not been answered by my endeavors, I have more reasons than one
to regret it; but at present I shall only add, that a day may come, when the
public cause is no longer to be benefited by a concealment of our
circumstances, and till this period arrives, I shall not be among the first to
disclose such truths as may injure it, however my character in the mean while
may suffer." On the 15th of February he had occasion for writing -- "I can
assure you that no person ever heard me drop an expression that had a tendency
to resignation. The same principles that led me to embark in the opposition to
the arbitrary claims of Great Britain, operate with additional force at this
day; nor is it my desire to withdraw my services, while they are considered of
importance in the present contest. But to report a design of this kind, is
among the arts which those, who are endeavoring to effect a change, are
practicing to bring it to pass."

CHAP. XXIV.
Treaty between France and America -- Lord North's Conciliatory Bills --
Rejected by Congress -- The French Treaty received by Congress, and accepted
with joy -- Their Address to the People -- The Alliance between France and
America announced in the British House of Commons -- Louis XVI. admits the
American Deputies to a public audience -- Debates in the British Parliament on
acknowledging the Independence of America -- Proceedings of the hostile fleets
-- The Royal Commissioners hold a conference with a Committee of Congress --
Their proceedings -- Fail in their negociations -- Philadelphia evacuated --
The Battle of Freehold -- The French fleet arrives in America -- Indecisive
proceedings of the hostile fleets and armi^^ -- Sullivan lands on Rhode Island,
and evacuater it -- Predatory excursions of the British -- The Indians and
Tories, their cruel depredations -- The Americans retaliate, in their
Expeditions against them -- Captain Willings' expedition into West Florida --
The British take Savannah, and apparently reduce the state of Georgia --
Deplorable situation of the United States -- M. Gerard desires Congress not to
prolong the war by too high demands -- General Lincoln appointed to command at
the Southward -- Prevost defeats the Americans at Briars' Creek -- His attempt
on Charleston -- The British make an inroad with a land and sea force into
Virginia -- The British take the forts at Verplank and Stoney Points --
Governor Tryon's destructive expedition into Connecticut -- General Wayne
storms Stoney Point -- Major Lee takes the British post at Poulas Hook, but is
unable to retain it -- The Americans unsuccessful in Penobscott -- Their fleet
destroyed.

SOON after the intelligence of the capture of Burgoyne's army reached Europe,
the king of France concluded at Paris treaties of alliance and commerce with
the United States. This important transaction was the fruit of long
negotiation. The colonists had taken up arms, uninfluenced by the enemies of
Great Britain, and conducted their opposition for several months after they had
raised troops, without any reference to foreign powers. As they began the
contest with no other view than to obtain a redress of grievances, they showed
no inclination, in the first period of their opposition, to involve the mother
country in a war, nor to ask aid from her enemies. But when the policy of Great
Britain attempted to deprive the Americans of arms, it became indispensible for
them to seek foreign connexions. For this purpose, Silas Deane was sent to
Paris, early in the year 1776, as a political and commerical agent, with
instructions to solicit the friendship of the French king, Louis XVI. and to
procure military stores. Soon after his arrival, he was instructed to found
count de Vergennes, the French minister for foreign affairs, on the subject of
the American controversy. In the month of June, Mr. Deane obtained a supply of
arms, ammunition, and soldiers' clothing, sufficient for loading three vessels.
It is not yet publicly known what agency the court of France had in furnishing
these supplies, or whether they were sold or given as presents. However, the
business was so conducted, that it might assume such a complexion as
circumstances might render expedient. And, during the whole negotiation, Great
Britain was amused with declarations of the most pacific dispositions on the
part of France, whilst the Americans were supplied with the means of defense.

Congress having agreed upon the plan of the treaty which they intended to
propose to his most Christian majesty, elected Dr. Franklin, Silas Deane, and
Arthur Lee to solicit its acceptance. It was resolved, that no member should be
at liberty to divulge any thing more of these transactions than "that congress
had taken such steps as they judged necessary for obtaining foreign alliances."
The secret committee was directed to make an effectual lodgement of 10,000 l.
sterling, subject to the order of these commissioners. Dr. Franklin, who was
employed as agent in the business, and afterward as minister plenipotentary at
the court of France, enjoyed a greater proportion of foreign fame, than any
other native of America. He was eminently distinguished as a politician, and a
scholar, and, if possible, more so as a man and a citizen. His genius was vast
and comprehensive, and could with equal ease investigate the mysteries of
philosophy and the labyrinths of politics. Shortly after his appointment he
failed for France. His high rank in literature and his agreeable manners, had
procured him the highest respect and veneration when in that country, on his
travels, in 1767; and now his increased same smoothed the way for his reception
in a public character. The three agents having rendezvoused at Paris, opened
their business in a private audience with count de Vergennes on the 28th of
December 1776. Instead of grasping at too much, the French minister aimed at
nothing more than, by granting generous terms to the Americans, to perpetuate
the separation of the colonies from Great Britain. France was at this period no
way prepared for war. The peace of Europe was supposed to be unstable, from a
prevailing belief that the death of the elector of Bavaria was an event
extremely probable. But the principal reason that induced a delay, was an
opinion, that the dispute between the mother country and the colonies would be
compromised.

In these circumstances the French court observed a middle line of conduct.
They avoided equally an haughty reserve, which would have discouraged the
Americans, or a legal countenance of their deputies, which might, by alarming
the rulers of Great Britain, have induced them to a compromise with their
colonies, or have brought on an immediate rupture between France and England.
The French government, therefore, were not over hasty in openly espousing their
cause. They prohibited, threatened, and even punished the Americans; whilst
private persons were winked at, in encouraging, supplying, and supporting them.

The Americans in the mean time assiduously employed their agents at the courts
of Spain, Vienna, Prussia, and Tuscany, in order, if possible, to conclude
alliances with them, or at least to procure an acknowledgment of their
independency. As it had been reported that Britain intended to apply for
assistance to Russia, the American commissioners were enjoined to use their
utmost influence with the German princes to prevent such auxiliaries from
marching through their territories, and to endeavor to procure the recall of
the German troops already sent to America. To France they offered a cession of
such West India islands as should be taken by the united strength of France and
America; and should Britain by their joint endeavors be dispossessed of
Newfoundland, Cape Breton, and Nova Scotia, these territories should be divided
betwixt the two nations, and Great Britain be totally excluded from the
fishery. The proposals to the Spanish court were, that in case they should
think proper to espouse their quarrel, the American states should assist in
reducing Pensacola under the dominion of Spain, provided their subjects were
allowed the free navigation of the river Missisippi and the use of the harbor
of Pensacola; and they further offered, that, if agreeable to Spain, they would
declare war against Portugal, should that power expel the American ships from
its ports.

At this time the congress did not so much expect any direct aid from France,
as the indirect relief of a war between that country and Great Britain. To
promote which, they resolved that "their commissioners at the court of France
should be furnished with warrants and commissions, and authorized to arm and
fit for war in the French ports any number of vessels, not exceeding six, at
the expense of the United States, to war upon British property, provided they
were satisfied this measure would not be disagreeable to the court of France."
This resolution was carried into effect, and, in the year 1777, marine
officers, with American commissions, both failed out of French ports, and
carried prizes of British property into them. They could not procure their
condemnation in the courts of France, nor sell them publicly, but they found
means to turn them into money.

Whilst private agents on the part of the United States were endeavoring to
embroil the two nations, the American commissioners were still urging the
acceptance of the treaty proposed by congress. They received assurances of the
good wishes of the court of France, but were frequently informed that the
importance of the transaction required farther consideration, and were enjoined
to preserve the most profound secresy. Matters remained in this uncertain state
from December 1776 till December 1777. The defeat on Long Island, the reduction
of New York, and the disastrous events of 1776, which have been already
related, sunk the credit of the Americans very low. The subsequent successes at
Trenton and Princeton effaced those impressions, but the fate of Burgoyne
turned the scale. This great event convinced the French, and might have
convinced the British, that the opposition of the Americans was not the work of
a few factious leaders who had usurped the reins of power, but that it was the
work of the people, whose efforts were likely to prove finally successful.
Louis, therefore, determined to espouse their cause.

The commissioners of congress were informed, on the 16th of December, 1777, by
M. Gerard, one of the secretaries of the king's council of state, "That it was
decided to acknowledge the independence of the United States, and to make a
treaty with them. That his most christian majesty desired the treaty once made
should be durable, and their amity to subsist forever, which could not be
expected, if each nation did not find an interest in its continuance, as well
as in its commencement. It was therefore intended that the terms of the treaty
should be such as the new formed states would be willing to agree to if they
had been long since established, and in the fullness of strength and power; and
such as they should approve of when that time should come. That his most
christian majesty was fixed in his determination not only to acknowledge, but
to support, their independence. That in doing this he might probably soon be
engaged in a war, yet he should not expect any compensation from the United
States on that account, nor was it pretended that he acted wholly for their
sakes, since besides his real good will to them, it was manifestly the interest
of France, that the power of England should be diminished, by the separation of
the colonies from its government. The only condition he should require and rely
on would be, that the United States in no peace to be made, should give up
their independence and return to the obedience of the British government."

Conformably to the preliminaries proposed by M. Gerard, 1778. Feb. 6.
his most christian majesty Louis XVI. on the 6th of February, 1778, entered
into treaties of amity and commerce with the United States of America, on the
footing of the most perfect equality and reciprocity; and copies of them were
sent to congress, in order to counteract any proposals that might be made in
the mean time by the British ministry.

This event, though foreseen by many, and often foretold, was disbelieved by
the British ministry; their zeal to reduce the colonies to submission, blinded
them to danger from any other quarter. Transported with indignation against
their late fellow subjects, they were so infatuated with the American war, as
to suppose that the fear of future evils would induce the court of France to
forego the opportunity of securing great and immediate advantages, and at the
same time, humbling a powerful rival.

The alliance between France and America had not been concluded three days
before the British ministers were secretly acquainted with the unwelcome news;
and eight days after, lord North introduced his conciliatory propositions. Feb.
17.
His plan was to enable the crown to appoint commissioners to treat with the
colonies concerning the means of putting an end to the present contest between
them and Great Britain. Five persons were to be invested with ample powers; and
authorized to treat with congress as a lawful assembly, representing America --
with any of the provincial assemblies -- and with any individuals. They were to
be empowered to order a suspension of arms; to suspend the operation of laws;
and to grant pardons, immunities and rewards. The title of Independent States
might be allowed till the treaty had been ratified by the king and parliament.
The commissioners were to negociate, upon a reunion of the empire, for a
reasonable contribution to its common exigencies; but this demand was not to be
insisted on, and to be given up rather than not terminate the quarrel. His
lordship said in his speech, that sir W. How had been, in the late actions and
in the whole course of the campaign, not only in the goodness of troops, and in
all manner of supplies, but also in point of numbers, much superior to the
American army which oppo^ed him in the field; that general Burgoyne had been in
numbers, until the affair at Bennington, near twice as strong as the army of
the enemy: that he promised a great army should be sent out; and that a great
army had accordingly been sent out, to the amount of 60,000 men and upward. The
speech was long, able, and eloquent, and kept him up two full hours. -- A dull
melancholy silence for some time succeeded. It was heard with profound
attention; but without a single mark of approbation. Astonishment, dejection
and fear, overclouded the whole assembly. It was conjectured that some powerful
motive had induced ministry to adopt such an alteration of measures. The idea
was confirmed by the positive assertion of Mr. Fox, that a treaty had been
signed at Paris, between the colonies and France, by which she recognized their
independence. Some of the country gentlemen being piqued at lord North's having
said, that "they had not been misled or deceived," rose with great warmth, and
asserted with indignation, that they had been grossly deceived and misled by
the uniform language of government for three years past. In general the party
declared, that as the point of taxation, which could be the only rational
ground of the war, was now given up, peace should be procured by any means, and
in the speediest manner."

His lordship should have early attended to the hints contained in the letter
to Dr. Fothergill, which the doctor got transcribed and sent him, but the
minister thought the doctor's correspondent too sanguine. The intimation that a
foreign power might interfere, should have produced a determination to treat
immediately -- a message to the American commissioners assuring them of it --
and the introduction, if possible, of the passing of the conciliatory bills
before the delivery of the preliminaries to the commissioners on the 16th of
December; whereas they were not passed till the 2d of March.

The day before the conciliatory propositions were introduced, a particular
incident happened in the house of lords. After the Saratoga convention, general
Gates wrote a very pathetic and interesting letter to the earl of Thanet, with
whom he had formerly lived upon a footing of great intimacy. It related chiefly
to the situation of affairs between Great Britain and America. He lamented the
misfortunes that had befallen his native country, and the danger to which it
was exposed; and then stated the necessity of speedily applying the only remedy
remaining, for the cure of the many evils that afflicted or threatened Great
Britain. This remedy he declared to be an acknowledgment of American
independence, which he said the United States never would part with. "A wise
minister," he added, "by rescinding the resolutions passed to support that
system which no power on earth can establish, will endeavor to preserve so
much of the empire in prosperity and honor, as the circumstances of the times,
and the mal-administration of those who ruled before him, have left to his
government. The United States of America are willing to be the friends, but
never will submit to be the slaves of the parent country. They are by
consanguinity, by language, and by the affection which naturally springs from
these, more attached to England than to any other country under the sun.
Therefore spurn not the blessing which yet remains; instantly withdraw your
fleets and armies; cultivate the commerce and friendship of America. Thus, and
thus only can England hope to be great and happy. Seek that in a commercial
alliance; seek it ere it be too late; for there only you must expect to find
it." The earl of Thanet produced this letter in the house; and after some
controversy it was read: and the duke of Richmond moved that it should lie upon
the table. The motion was rejected after a warm debate, to the concern of
several, who flattered themselves that the letter might have afforded an
opening to a favorable accommodation.

The conciliatory bills were hurried through both houses of parliament, and
before they passed into acts, were copied and sent across the Atlantic, to lord
and general How: and on their arrival, were sent by a flag to congress at
Yorktown, who were as yet uninformed of the conclusion of the treaty with
France; April 21.
nor had they received any information from their commissioners at Paris for
upwards of a year. One packet had in that time been received, but the letters
therein had been taken out before it was put on board the vessel which brought
it from France, and blank paper put in their stead. The committee of congress
appointed to examine the bills, made a report, which was unanimously adopted.
By this they rejected the proposals of Great Britain.

Congress finding that the royal commissioners were industriously circulating
these bills in a partial and secret manner, ordered them to be printed in all
the news papers, with the resolutions of congress upon them, which were in
substance as follows: That whover presumed to make a separate agreement with
Britain should be deemed a public enemy; that the United States could not with
any propriety keep correspondence with the commissioners until their
independence was acknowledged, and the British fleet and armies removed from
America. At the same time, the colonies were warned not to suffer themselves to
be deceived into security by any offers that might be made; but to use their
utmost endeavors to send their quotas with all diligence into the field.

On this occasion governor Tryon enclosed several copies of the bills to
general Washington, in a letter, entreating him to allow them to be circulated;
to which the general returned for answer a copy of a news paper, in which the
bills, together with the resolutions of congress, were inserted: and governor
Trumbull, upon a similar letter and application, returned an answer to the
following effect: There was a day when even this step, from the then
acknowledged parent state, might have been accepted with joy and gratitude; but
that day is past irrevocably; and there are insuperable bars to the very idea
of concluding a peace with Great Britain, on any other conditions, than the
most absolute, perfect, independence.

The season for action was now approaching; and congress was indefatigable in
its preparations for a new campaign, which it was confidently said would be the
last. Among other methods taken for this purpose, it was recommended to all the
young gentlemen of the colonies to form themselves into bodies of cavalry to
serve at their own expense during the war. General Washington at the same time,
to remove all encumbrances from his army, lightened the baggage as much as
possible, by substituting sacks and portmanteaus in place of chests and boxes,
and using pack horses instead of wagons. On the other hand, the British army,
expecting to be reinforced by 20,000 men, thought of nothing but concluding the
war according to their wishes before the end of the campaign. It was with the
utmost concern, as well as indignation, therefore, that they received the news
of lord North's conciliatory bills. This m^^ture was universally looked upon as
a national disgrace; and some even tore the cockades from their hats, and
trampled them under their feet as a token of their indignation.

On the 3d of May, 1778, Mr. S. Deane arrived in America express from France,
and brought with him copies of the two treaties of alliance and commerce with
France, to be ratified by congress. This joyful news was quickly announced to
the people in a gazette, wherein the chief articles of the treaty were
mentioned, together with the pleasing accounts from other parts, setting forth
that almost all the European powers viewed America with an eye of friendship.
The treaties were duly weighed, and considered separately the next day, and
upon each it was unanimously resolved, "That the same be, and is hereby
accepted." The next resolution was, That this congress entertain the highest
sense of the magnanimity and wisdom of his most christian majesty, so strongly
exemplified in the treaty of amity and commerce; and the commissioners
representing these states, at the court of France, are directed to present the
grateful acknowledgments of this congress to his most christian majesty, for
his truly magnanimous conduct respecting these states, in the said generous and
disinterested treaties, and to assure his majesty, on the part of this
congress, it is sincerely wished, that the friendship so happily commenced
between France and these United States may be perpetual."

The congress, after receiving the treaties, had a stronger feeling of their
own importance than before, and resolved, "That the commissioners appointed for
the courts of Spain, Tuscany, Vienna, and Berlin, should live in such style and
manner at their respective courts, as they may find suitable and necessary to
support the dignity of their public character."

On the eighth of May, they agreed to a draught of "An address to the
inhabitants of the United States of America." In this publication, when they
come to the French treaty, they say, "You have still to expect one severe
conflict. Your foreign alliances, though they secure your independence, cannot
secure your country from desolation, your habitations from plunder, your wives
from insult or violation, nor your children from butchery. Foiled in the
principal design, you must expect to feel the rage of disappointed ambition.
Arise then! to your tents, and gird you for battle! It is time to turn the
headlong current of vengeance upon the head of the destroyer. They have filled
up the measure of their abominations, and, like ripe fruit, must soon drop from
the tree. Although much is done, yet much remains to do. Expect not peace,
whilst any corner of America is in the possession of your foes. You must drive
them away from this land of promise, a land flowing indeed with milk and honey.
Your brethren at the extremities of the continent already implore your
friendship and protection. It is your duty to grant their request. They hunger
and thirst after liberty. Be it yours to dispense to them the heavenly gift.
And what is there to prevent it?"

The alliance between France and America was publicly announced to the British
court, on the 13th of March, in a rescript delivered to lord Weymouth, by the
French ambassador: And the communication was made under the pretense of
cultivating a good understanding between France and Great Britain.

The reception of this rescript was notified by the minister to the house of
commons on the 17th; and was accompanied with a message from the king,
intimating that he should be under the necessity of resenting so unprovoked and
so unjust an aggression on the honor of his crown and the essential interests
of his kingdom, and expressing his firm confidence on the zealous and
affectionate support of his faithful people. An address was moved for in answer
to it, to assure the king of the readiness of the people to stand by him in
afferting the dignity of his crown, and the honor of the nation, and to submit
with cheerfulness and spirit to the expenses that would be requisite, which was
carried after a long debate. In the house of lords, the debates upon the like
occasion were attended with an acrimony of language, and a freedom of thought,
that seemed to scorn all restraint; but the question for an address was carried
by a majority of near three to one.

On the 21st of March, a public audience and reception was given to the
American deputi^s, Messrs. Franklin, Deane, and Lee, by the French monarch.
They were introduced by Mr. Vergennes, and received by the king with the usual
formalities and ceremonials. This striking acknowledgment of the
^^enipotentaries from the United States, must have mortified the ministry and
crown of Great Britain; and may be pronounced the political phenomenon of
Europe. The day before it was exhibited, the French ambassador, in consequence
of orders to quit London, set out for Paris.

An inquiry into the state of the nation had been proposed some time back, and
continued with unabated assiduity in both houses. It was warmly contended by
the members in opposition, that the present ministry ought to be removed on
account of their numberless blunders and miscarriages in every instance.
Several of the most respectable members in opposition, and even some of the
opposite party, were of opinion, that the only way to extricate the nation from
its trouble was to acknowledge the independency of America at once; and thus do
with a good grace what must inevitably be done at last, after expending much
more blood and treasure than had yet been lavished in this unhappy contest.
Their independence, they said, was not only already established, but had
obtained such time to six and settle upon its foundations, that it appeared now
too firm to be shaken by the utmost efforts of Britain, even supposing it were
left, without any foreign support, merely to the exertions of its own internal
strength. But in that situation, to form any hope of being equal to its
overthrow, under the acknowledgment and support of the House of Bourbon, was,
they said, an idea only fit to be entertained by bedlamites.

On this occasion lord Chatham made his last and most affecting speech in the
house of lords, "My lords," says he, "the times are alarming; the state is
indeed in danger! and nothing but the poor condition of my health could so long
have prevented me from attending to my duty in parliament at this very
important period. But advice is now so necessary, that although sorely pressed
by the hand of infirmity, I have made an effort, almost beyond my constitution,
to come down to the house to give my best advice to your lordships, and to
express my indignation at the pusillanimous, the disgraceful idea of giving up
the dependence of America on the sovereignty of Britain. Feeble as I am, I
rejoice that I am yet alive, that the grave has not altogether closed on me,
before I had an opportunity of giving my vote against so impolitic a measure,
as the acknowledgment of the independence of America.

"That our public affairs have, for some years past, been shamefully managed, I
have frequently endeavored to convince your lordships; and although I
condemned the measures which have for some time been adopted by the majority of
this house, yet I have been always against the independence of America, and
never would support measures carried on in unrecanted error; but after a full
recantation of these erroneous measures, and after a repeal of all the
oppressive acts, it is the duty of every lever of his country, of every good
citizen, to take care, while, on the one hand, he preserves the rights and
privileges of the colonies, he does not, on the other, tarnish the luster of
his royal master's crown, nor sink the glory of the British nation. The
tendency and plain language of the present motion is, to disgrace our
sovereign, and to bring reproach upon us as a nation. It is, in a manner,
totally to annihilate this once great empire. I choose to speak my sentiments,
even though there may be danger in doing so. I always hated reserve; and never
did approve of halting between two opinions, when there was no middle path to
steer with certainty. The perfidy of France ought to rouse us, and make us
strain every nerve, open every vein, to preserve our national character, and to
preserve us from being scoffed and laughed at by foreigners. It is now
absolutely necessary to declare for peace or war; and when the former cannot be
preserved with honor, the latter ought to be commenced without hesitation.
What is life without reputation? And does that person deserve the name of a
man, of an Englishman, who would not lay down his life, to preserve the ancient
dignity of his country? We may possibly fail in the attempt, but still let us
make an effort, one united effort, to prevent such national disgrace. If we
fall in the attempt, Europe will at least be convinced, that we had as much
virtue left as to fall like men.

"But, it is said, we ought to make peace with America on any terms, and bring
home our troops in order to protect ourselves; in short, that we should allow a
foreign ambassador insolently to tell us, that his master had made a bargain
for that commerce which was our natural right, and entered into a treaty with
our own subjects, without so much as resenting it. -- Merciful God! to what a
low ebb must this once great empire be now reduced, when any of her senators
(pointing to the duke of Richmond) can raise up his head, and with a grave face
openly hold forth such timid, such dastardly counsels? -- This never was the
language of Britain, and never shall be mine. -- What! can it be possible that
we are the same people, who about sixteen years ago were the envy and
admiration of all the world? Is not this England? -- Is not this the senate of
Great Britain? And can we forget that we are Englishmen? Can we have forgot
that the nation has stood the Danish irruptions -- the Scotch inroads -- the
Norman conquests -- the Spanish armada -- and the various efforts of the
Bourbon compacts? -- Why are we blinded by despair? Why should we sit down in
ignominious tameness; and, with a desponding face, say to France, "Take from us
what you will; take all we have; but do, pray, let us live and die in peace."
-- Shame upon such disgraceful, such pitiful counsels! My God! How are we
altered! What can have occasioned so sudden an alteration? Is the king still
the same? I hope he is; but I fear there is something in the dark, something
rotten near him, something lurking between him and his people, which has thus
dismembered his empire, and tarnished his glory. But I trust that we have still
resources, and still have courage to punish the perfidy of France. Why then
should we now give up all? and that too without a blow; without an attempt to
resent the insults offered to us? If France and Spain are for war, why not try
the issue with them? For, I again say, if we should fall in the attempt, let us
fall decently; and if we cannot live with honor, let us die like men. Heaven
forbid that we should be permitted to live one day for the purpose of making
scourges for our own backs!

"At present I cannot point out the means for carrying on the war; but I wish
to recall to your lordships remembrance, the extent and revenue of the crown
when king George III. came to take possession of it. Your lordships will then
be satisfied, that the internal resources of the kingdom are great."

He then asserted the American provinces to be the inheritance of the crown,
which the house had no right to vote away: And that before he would give his
consent to the present motion, the rising hopes of the royal blood should be
brought to the house of lords to grant their consent to giving up what they
have a legal and natural right to expect to possess.

"Feeble and shattered as I am," says he, "yet so long as I have strength to
raise myself on my crutches, -- so long as I can lift my hand, or utter a
syllable, I will vote against the giving up the dependence of America on the
sovereignty of Great Britain. Even if I should stand single, I will, to the
last moment of my existence, vote against a measure so dishonorable to my
country. From my bad state of health, I am sensible that my abilities are not
now such as to insure success even to the best concerted measures; but I shall
always be ready, when called upon, to give an honest advice to my beloved
sovereign.

"I wage war with no set of men, nor do I wish to get into any of their
employments. I think the king has a right to choose his own servants; but if
they shall betray the trust reposed in them, I shall always be for an inquiry
into their conduct; and, if they are found guilty, I hope there is still spirit
enough in the nation to bring ministers to condign punishment. I trust in God,
however, that his majesty will be directed to make a proper choice of his
servants. There never was a king who stood more in need of honest and able
ministers. -- But I feel my constitution fails me. -- I am always much indebted
to your lordships for your indulgence. If my health would permit, if my frail
carcass could be supported, I could speak forever on this subject, when the
dignity of my king and the honor of my country are at stake. The good of the
nation is my sole ambition, and although I do earnestly pray for an honorable
peace, yet I hope never to live so long as to see such disgrace brought on the
kingdom as must arise from a peace produced by pusillanimous counsels, which
any peace with America as independent states must be; I feel my mind agitated
at the thoughts of it. My soul revolts -- it spurns at the idea of American
independency; and therefore I will, on every occasion, give it a negative." --
Here his lordship's speech was cut short by extreme weakness.

The duke of Richmond, after passing the highest compliments on the great
success of lord Chatham's administration, appealed to the noble lord himself if
such successes could be attained, even by the talents of a Chatham, unassisted
by circumstances. Could he obtain a conquest without means, without an army,
without a navy, without money, without a revenue, without credit? He begged
leave to recall to the noble lord's memory, that, when he was called to the
management of affairs, the empire was in a flourishing state; the finances were
delivered to him in the highest state of improvement to which the abilities of
a Pelham could raise them. The national debt was seventy millions less when he
came to the helm than when he left it. Could any analogy be deduced from those
times to the present? America was then with us; she is now against us. Our
commerce was then extended and profitable; we have since lost the most
profitable branches of our trade. The African trade was diminished L1,400,000 a
year. Our merchant ships were now destroyed by those who then protected and
employed them. We have lost shipping to the value of L2,600,000 in the contest
with America, as had been proved at their lordship's bar. These were
circumstances unknown in other times, and required new measures. The bravest
princes, and the proudest states, have been obliged to temporize, and submit to
circumstances; and this was a moment for us to imitate them. But, in fact, what
was the shocking humiliation? Acknowledge the independence of America, and you
have no farther quarrel with France. And what was the mighty difference between
dependence and independence? It was a quarrel about words, a mere difference
about sounds: For, if we gave up taxation, if we gave up the appointment of
governors, and other officers in the provinces, if we did not insist on
keeping up a standing army there, they would only stand bound to us by
inclination and interest, and the name of dependence and independence could
only be descriptive of the same connection. He might be called dastardly and
pusillanimous, for advising peace; but he would show his courage, by persisting
in the same plan, in spite of such painful and undeserved appellations; and he
held himself amply justified in wishing to save his country, by recommending a
pacification on any terms, when so great a man as lord Chatham had publicly
declared, he did not know the means of saving it by making war. The ministers
who had advised the violent measures against America, were the persons who had
deprived the heirs of the crown of their inheritance, and not those who
recommended a salutary acquiescence under the losses which they had rendered
inevitable, and which must increase by resistance.

Lord Chatham rose to reply; but, after two or three unsuccessful attempts to
stand, fell down in a swoon on his seat. Being carried out he recovered a
little, but continued in a languishing condition till the 12th of May, when he
expired, in the 70th year of his age; and left behind him the character of one
of the greatest orators and statesmen that any country has ever produced. His
remains were interred at the public expense; and both parties seemed inclined
to make amends, by the honors they paid to his memory, for the neglect with
which he had been treated during the latter part of his life.

When the sentiments expressed in the last speech of lord Chatham are
considered, it cannot appear any way extraordinary that inferior politicians,
and the great body of the people, fostered prejudices to a still greater
extent, concerning the dependency of the colonies on the mother country; or
that the point of honor, which had before precipitated the nation into the
war, now predominated over every suggestion of prudence and interest.

Accordingly the king and parliament of Great Britain determined at once to
resent the arrogance of France, and prosecute hostilities with America, with
more vigor than ever, should the terms now offered be rejected.

From this time the British and French were busied in fitting out their
respective fleets. Though war was not actually declared, yet there could be no
doubt but that these rival nations were in a state of hostility. A French
squadron, consisting of 12 ships of the line and 4 frigates, April 13.
commanded by count D'Estaing, sailed from Toulon for America, on the 13th of
April. On the 4th of May authentic intelligence of the sailing of the French
fleet arrived at St. James's. On the 8th, a fleet of 12 sail of the line was
ready for sea, under admirals Byron and Hyde Parker. A foul wind detained them
until the 20th, when they sailed from Portsmouth. The British ministry, being
uncertain whither D'Estaing's squadron was destined, sent an express with
orders for the return of the fleet, so that they put into Plymouth. At length,
on the 5th of June they were relieved from their doubts; and admiral Byron set
sail on the 9th, for America, to command in that station, in the room of lord
How, who had required permission to resign.

The fleet destined for the defense of the island of Great Britain was put
under the command of admiral Keppel, an officer of distinguished merit; that of
France was conducted by admiral D'Orvilliers.

The fleets met on the 27th of July, when a running fight took place, but no
decisive action. Admiral Keppel was afterward accused of not having done his
duty, by admiral Palliser, the second in command. He was therefore tried, but
was honorably acquitted. Palliser himself was likewise tried for disobedience
of orders, and was partly acquitted and partly condemned. The event of this
engagement became a source of severe criticism in Britain; and the arguments
were carried on with a warmth and vehemence that set the whole nation into a
ferment of the most outrageous nature. Such was the height of passion that
prevailed through all classes of society, that the critical circumstances of
the nation were wholly forgotten, and the attention of the public was entirely
absorbed in this dispute. The discontent originating from this engagement had
another very serious effect. The ministry were at a loss to get an officer to
head the navy. Sir Charles Hardy, an able commander, but who had been twenty
years retired from actual service, was appointed, rather because nobody else
would accept of it, than any great expectations of his activity or success.
Nothing of consequence happened during his command, but some unavailing parades
of the French fleet in the Channel, without effecting or seeming to wish the
attempting any thing.

General sir Henry Clinton arrived at Philadelphia, May 8.
on the 8th of May, to take the command of the army, in the room of sir William
How; who returned to England, to the great regret of the British officers and
soldiery in general. In the beginning of June, the three commissioners from
Britain, being the earl of Carlisle, Mr. Eden, and governor Johnstone, arrived
in the Delaware, and joined sir Henry Clinton, who was included in the
commission.

The commissioners immediately dispatched a letter, with the acts of
parliament, a copy of their commission, June 9.
and other papers, to the president of the congress; but their secretary, Dr.
Adam Ferguson, who was intended to convey the papers and to act as an agent for
conducting the negotiation upon the spot with the congress, being refused a
passport for that purpose, they were obliged to forward them by common means.

The commissioners proposed, even at this outset, several concessions and
arrangements, which, at an earlier period would have restored peace and
felicity to the whole empire. They offered to consent to an immediate cessation
of hostilities by sea and land. -- To restore a free intercourse, and renew the
common benefits of naturalization through the several parts of the empire. --
To extend every freedom to trade, that the respective interests on both sides
could require. -- To agree, that no military force should be kept up in the
different states of North America, without the consent of the general congress,
or of the particular assemblies. -- To concur in measures calculated to
discharge the debts of America, and to raise the credit and value of the paper
circulation. -- To perpetuate the common union, by a reciprocal deputation of
an agent or agents, from the different states, who should have the privilege of
a seat and voice in the parliament of Great Britain; or if sent from Britain,
in that case to have a seat and voice in the assemblies of the different states
to which they might be deputed respectively, in order to attend to the several
interests of those by whom they were deputed. -- And, in short, to establish
the power of the respective legislatures in each particular state, to settle
its revenue, its civil and military establishment, and to exercise a perfect
freedom of legislation and internal government; so that the British states
throughout North America, acting with Great Britain in peace and war, under one
common sovereign, might have the irrevocable enjoyment of every privilege, that
was short of a total separation of interest, or consistent with that union of
force, on which the safety of the common religion and liberty depends.

The commissioners, not being aware that the style and manner of thinking in
the United States had undergone a far greater revolution than that of the
government, and that with their new situation new attachments had taken place,
vainly endeavored, in their letter, to prepossess congress with the ancient
national antipathy to France.

A decided negative having been already given, previous to the arrival of the
British commissioners, to the overtures contained in the conciliatory bills,
there was little ground left for farther deliberation: and although these
papers produced very considerable debates, which were renewed on different
days, from the 11th to the 17th of June, in the congress, yet the answer which
they returned, through the medium of their president, Henry Laurens, esquire. was
sufficiently brief, however conclusive. They observed to the commissioners,
that, nothing but an earnest desire to spare the farther effusion of human
blood could have induced them to read a paper containing expressions so
disrespectful to his most christian majesty, the good and great ally of these
states, or to consider propositions so derogatory to the honor of an
independent nation. They observed, that the acts of the British parliament, the
commission from their sovereign, and their letter, supposed the people of these
states to be subjects of the crown of Great Britain, and were founded on the
idea of dependence, which was totally inadmissible. They informed them that
they were inclined to peace, notwithstanding the unjust claim from which the
war originated, and the savage manner in which it had been conducted. They
would therefore be ready to enter upon the consideration of a treaty of peace
and commerce, not inconsistent with treaties already subsisting, when the King
of Great Britain should demonstrate a sincere disposition for that purpose. But
the only solid proof of that disposition would be an explicit acknowledgment of
the independence of these states, or the withdrawing of his fleets and armies.

Such were the conditions which a concurrence of events induced on the one
side, and which the operation of the same causes rendered inadmissible on the
other. The congress, at the same time, issued an unanimous approbation of
general Washington's conduct in refusing a passport to Dr. Ferguson.

Although the congress, as a body, did not enter into any litigation with the
commissioners upon the general subject of their mission, yet some of their
members, particularly Mr. Drayton, one of the delegates for South Carolina, and
others, perhaps not officially connected with them, entered the lists of
controversy in the public papers, with no small degree of acrimony as well as
ability. For, as the commissioners seemed to carry along with them an idea,
which at the time of their appointment, was endeavored with great care to be
established in Britain, viz. "that the bulk of the Americans were well affected
to the British government, and that the greater part of the remainder were only
held in a state of delusion by the congress," they accordingly, upon the
failure of their negotiation with that body, directed their future publications
in the manner of appeals to the people at large; seeming thereby to realize in
some degree, the charge so repeatedly made by their antagonists, that their
only object was under the insidious appearance of conciliation, to excite
either a separation among the colonies, or the people to tumult against their
respective governments. And, as the congress not only permitted, but affected
to forward, the publication of all matters upon the subject, so the writers
already mentioned, undertook to obviate the effect which those issued by the
commissioners might have upon the people at large.

The strongest argument which they held out upon this occasion to the people
was, that as they had already concluded a solemn treaty with France, on the
footing of, and for the establishment of their independency -- that if they now
treated with the commissioners upon the ground of dependence, they should at
once break their faith with France, forfeit their credit with all foreign
nations, be considered as a faithless and infamous people, and for evermore be
cut off even from the hope of foreign succor or resource. At the same time
they would be thrown totally on the mercy of those who had already pursued
every measure of fraud, force, cruelty, and deceit for their destruction; as
neither the king, the ministers, nor the parliament of Britain, would be under
a necessity of ratifying any one condition which they might agree upon with the
commissioners, or if they found it necessary to ratify them for present
purposes, it would be only to call a new parliament to undo the whole. Nothing,
they said, could be trusted to an enemy whom they had already found so
faithless, and so obstinately persevering in malice and cruelty. The fraudulent
intention of the proposed negotiation, they said, was strongly evinced, by the
commissioners' holding out conditions which went far beyond their avowed
powers; being neither warranted by the commission, nor by the acts of
parliament which they presented.

The peremptory denial of congress to the first offers of accommodation not
only proved very mortifying to the commissioners, but excited their resentment
to no small degree. The individuals with whom they conversed on the subject of
the conciliatory bill, generally returned for answer, that the day of
reconciliation was past; and that the haughtiness of Britain had extinguished
all filial regard in the breasts of the Americans. In their attempts to treat
with the people at large, governor Johnstone distinguished himself beyond all
the other commissioners, by endeavoring to obtain the object on which he had
been sent, by opening a private correspondence with some of the members of
congress, or other influential characters, and drew upon himself of
consequence, a greater share of the resentment of congress. They accused him as
a spy, whose only view was to sow dissension among them; nay, who had attempted
to bribe Joseph Reed, esquire. Robert Morris, esquire. also George Washington, esquire. and
president Laurens, to desert the cause of their country, and betray it to the
British; absolutely refusing, at the same time, to have any connection with him
as a commissioner. The proceedings in this business were expressed in the form
of a declaration, a copy of which was ordered to be signed by the president,
and sent by a flag to the commissioners at New York.

These proceedings produced a very angry and violent declaration from governor
Johnstone, in which the immediate operations of passion and disappointment were
too conspicuous. The language of his publication but poorly agreed with the
high and flattering compliments he had so lately lavished on the Americans in
those very letters which were laid before congress, and which were the subject
of the present contest. It was dated the 26th of August, and transmitted to
congress; together with a declaration of the same date from lord Carlisle, sir
Henry Clinton, and Mr. Eden, which went to a solomn and total disavowal, so far
as as related to the present subject, of their having had any knowledge,
directly or indirectly, of those matters specified by congress.

Thus were all hopes of further negotiation with congress at an end. And the
issue of this last effort which Great Britain made by way of negotiation, to
regain her colonies, convinced France of the sincerity of her ally, and
promised to secure the success of her favorite scheme, to lessen the power of
Great Britain, beyond the reach of accident.

It would swell this work to an enormous size, were we to enter minutely into
the paper war which ensued: we shall therefore now proceed to give an account
of those more serious operations which the arrival of the commissioners had
scarcely interrupted.

In the beginning of the year, some successful predatory excursions had been
made by the British into the Jerseys, and on the banks of the Delaware, by
which the Americans sustained a prodigious loss. In one of these, the British
destroyed at Bordentown four store houses; and before their return to
Philadelphia they burned two frigates, nine ships, six privateer sloops, twenty
three brigs, with a number of sloops and schooners.

In the end of May, an excursion from Rhode Island was made by 500 British and
Hessians, under the command of lieutenant colonel Campbell. May 25.
These having landed in the night, marched next morning in two bodies, the one
for Warren, the other for the head of Kickemuet River. They destroyed about 70
flat bottomed boats, and burned a quantity of pitch, tar, and plank. They also
set fire to the meeting house at Warren, and seven dwelling houses. At Bristol
they burned the church and 22 houses. Several other houses were plundered, and
some of the soldiers stripped the women of their shoe buckles, gold rings, and
handkerchiefs. They carried off peaceable and defenseless inhabitants of the
country, to be exchanged for an equal number of soldiers taken on their side in
arms. Of this the American general having made a complaint, it was replied,
"that by the laws of America, every inhabitant from sixteen to sixty was liable
to be called on to take up arms, and was therefore to be considered at all
times, and treated as a soldier. It could be no injustice therefore to carry
off, and detain as prisoners of war, as many of them as could be taken, whether
armed or not, to be exchanged for soldiers or sailors."

The design of evacuating Philadelphia was put in execution on the 18th of
June, at 3 o'clock in the morning, Mr. Eden, one of the commissioners, having
brought with him secret instructions from England for that purpose. The troops
proceeded to Gloucester Point, three miles down the river, and before ten the
whole had passed in safety across the Delaware into New Jersey.

General Washington having penetrated into their design of evacuating
Philadelphia, had previously detached general Maxwell's brigade, to cooperate
with the Jersey militia, in obstructing their progress, until he could overtake
them with his army. This detachment was afterward strengthened by a body of
600 men under colonel Morgan; but being unable to cope with the British force,
could do nothing but break down the bridges, after abandoning a strong post
they had occupied, with a view to dispute the passage of the enemy. The troops
therefore, pursued their march for some time without any interruption from the
Americans, though greatly encumbered with a vast quantity of baggage, the
number of loaded horses and wheel carriages being so great as to occupy a line
of twelve miles in length, though in this were included the provisions
necessary for their whole retreat, and which could not have been procured in a
country so extremely inimical to the British cause. The march was exceedingly
retarded by the heat of the weather, which at that time was excessive, the
closeness of the narrow roads through the woods, and the constant labor of
renewing or repairing bridges, in a country every where intersected with creeks
and marshy brooks.

The slow advance of sir Henry Clinton led general Washington to suspect, that
he had a design of bringing on a general action, if he could draw the Americans
into the low country. Having halted within five miles of Princeton, he
represented to the general officers that the enemy's force was between 9 and
10,000 rank and file -- the American army on the ground 10,684 rank and file,
June 24.
besides the advanced brigade under general Maxwell of about 1200, and about
1200 militia, and proposed, "Will it be advisable to hazard a general action?"
They answered in the negative, but recommended a detachment of 1500 men, to be
immediately sent, to act as occasion might serve, in conjunction with the
troops and militia already hanging about the left flank and rear of the enemy.

After various movements on both sides, sir Henry Clinton, with the royal army,
arrived at a place called Freehold; where judging that the Americans would
attack him, June 27.
he encamped in a very strong situation. Here general Washington determined to
make an attack as soon as the army had begun its march. The night was spent in
making the necessary preparations, and Lee, who having been lately exchanged
had joined the army, was ordered to have his division ready by daybreak. But
^ir Henry Clinton, apprehending that the chief object of the Americans was the
baggage, committed it to the care of general Knyphausen, whom he ordered to set
out early in the morning, whilst he followed with the rest of the army some
hours after, in the road toward Middletown, a place distant about twelve
miles, in a high and strong country. The attack was accordingly made; but the
British general had taken such care to arrange his troops properly, June 28.
and so effectually supported his forces when engaged with the Americans, that
general Lee, although his troops behaved with great spirit, thought proper to
retreat; and they were with difficulty preserved from a total defeat by the
advance of general Washington with the whole army; who intended to have renewed
the engagement the next day; but the British troops marched away in the night,
without the loss of either their covering party or baggage; and with such
silence, that general Poor, who lay very near them, knew nothing of their
departure until it was too late to urge a pursuit.

From the discordant accounts of this battle, it is difficult to collect the
real truth. By the consequences it is natural to suppose that very little was
gained on either side. Both parties, however, seem to have exerted themselves
to the utmost, as by the British accounts it appears that fifty-nine of their
soldiers died of mere fatigue, without any wound; and the like happened to
several American soldiers, notwithstanding their being so much accustomed to
the climate. The loss of the Americans in killed and wounded, was about 250;
that of the royal army, inclusive of prisoners, was about 350. Among the latter
were four officers and about forty privates, all so badly wounded, that they
could not be removed. Their other wounded they carried off. Lieutenant colonel
Monckton, one of the British slain, on account of his singular merit, was
universally lamented. Colonel Bonner of Pennsylvania, and major Dickenson of
Virginia, officers highly esteemed by their country, fell in this action.

In this action general Lee was charged by general Washington with disobedience
and misconduct in retreating before the British army. He was tried by a court
martial, and sentenced to be suspended from his command in the American army
for a twelvemonth. Many were displeased with this sentence, because it had been
submitted to his discretion whether to attack or not, and likewise when and in
what manner: and they thought that suspension from command, was not a
sufficient punishment for his crimes, if guilty. They therefore inferred his
innocence from the lenient sentence of his judges.

The British army pursued their march without any interruption to the
neighborhood of Sandy Hook, and on the 5th of July crossed the narrow channel
to Sandy Hook on a bridge of boats, and were afterward safely conveyed to New
York. During the march from Philadelphia, the royal army was much reduced,
upwards of 800 having deserted, a great number of whom were Hessians.

Soon after the battle of Freehold, or Monmouth, at it is sometimes called, the
American army took post at the White Plains, a few miles beyond King's Bridge;
and the British, though only a few miles distant, did not molest them. They
remained in this position from an early day in July till a late one in the
autumn, and then the Americans retired to Middle Brook in Jersey, where they
remained in huts, as they had done at Valley Forge.

In the mean time the French fleet from Toulon had arrived at Virginia. On the
7th of July, lord How received advice of its arrival. Count D'Estaing anchored
on the 8th at night at the entrance of the Delaware. The next morning he
weighed and sailed toward the Hook, and on the evening of the 11th anchored
about four miles without it. Had not bad weather and unexpected impediments
prevented, the count would have surprised Howe's fleet in the Delaware, as the
latter would not have had time to escape after being apprised of his danger.
The destruction of the fleet must have been the consequence of such a
surprisal, and that must have occasioned the inevitable loss of the royal army,
which would have been so enclosed by the French squadron on the one side, and
the American forces on the other, that the Saratoga catastrophe must have been
repeated. Lord Howe's fleet consisted only of 6 sixty-four gun ships, 3 of
fifty, and 2 of forty, with some frigates and sloops; whereas count D'Estaing's
consisted of 12 sail of the line and several large frigates. Among the former,
one carried 90 guns, another 80, and six 74 guns each. The French fleet had,
exclusive of its complement of sailors, 6000 marines and soldiers on board.

The British admiral had the advantage of possessing the harbor formed by
Sandy Hook; the entrance of which is covered by a bay, and from whence the
inlet passes to New York. As it could not be known whether the French would not
attempt passing in force over the bar, it was necessary the British should be
prepared to oppose them. Accordingly, the commanders made every disposition
that consummate military skill could suggest, for withstanding the formidable
power which threatened to assail them. On this occasion a spirit displayed
itself not only in the fleet and army, but through every order and denomination
of seamen, that is not often equalled. Transported with indignation against the
French for interfering in what they called a domestic quarrel, the British
displayed a zeal and magnanimity which could not be exceeded. The crews of the
transports hastened with eagerness to the sleet, that it might be completely
manned. The masters and mates of the merchantmen at New York, took their
stations at the guns with the common sailors: others put to sea in light
vessels, to watch the motions of their enemies. The light infantry, grenadiers,
and even wounded officers contended so earnestly to serve as marines on board
the men of war, that the point of honor was obliged to be decided by lot.

During this time the British had the mortification of seeing the blockade of
their fleet, and the capture of about twenty vessels under British colors. On
the 22d, the French fleet appeared under weigh. The British, in this anxious
moment, supposed that count D'Estaing would force his way into the harbor;
when nothing less than destruction or victory would have ended the contest. Had
the first been their lot, the vast fleet of transports and the army must have
fallen. July 22.
D'Estaing, however, left the Hook and sailed for Newport. He was led to this
measure by the advice of general Washington; the pilots likewise assured him
that it was impossible to carry the large ships over the bar, on account of
their draught of water.

By D'Estaing's departure the British had a second escape. Had he staid a few
days longer, admiral Byron's fleet would have fallen a defenseless prey into
his hands. That squadron had met with unusual bad weather, and being separated
in different storms, and lingering through a tedious passage, arrived
scattered, broken, sickly, dismasted, or otherwise damaged, in various degrees
of distress, upon different and remote parts of the American coast. Between the
departure of D'Estaing and the 30th of July, the Renown of 5^ guns from the
West Indies, the Raisonable and Centurion of 64 and the Cornwall of 74 guns,
all arrived singly at Sandy Hook. A number of provision ships from Cork escaped
also, together with their convoy. They went up the Delaware within fifty miles
of Philadelphia after lord How had quitted the river, before they obtained
information of what had happened. Great rejoicings were made at New York, upon
their safe arrival, especially as provisions were much wanted both by the fleet
and army.

The next attempt of the French admiral was, in conjunction with the Americans
upon Rhode Island, which had been in possession of the British since December
1776. For this purpose, general Sullivan assembled a body of troops in the
vicinity of Providence, with a view to invade the island from the continent,
whilst the French fleet was to enter the harbor of Newport, near its southern
extremity, and after destroying the shipping by a powerful assault on the works
facing the sea, to place the British troops between two fires. The commanding
officer, general Pigot, having been lately reinforced, had about 6000 troops,
and had taken every precaution which the military art could furnish, in order
to obviate the very great danger in which he was. General Sullivan, however,
having collected about 10,000 men, of whom one half at least were volunteers
from New England and Connecticut, August 8.
passed over into the island on the 8th of August, when the French fleet also
entered the harbor, cannonading the batteries as they passed along, and
receiving their fire without any material effect on either side. Their
entrance, however, obliged the British commanders to burn three frigates, and
sink two others.

Lord How no sooner received advice of the danger which threatened Rhode
Island, than he ^^^^ened to its relief. The British fleet exceeded the French
in point of number, but was inferior in point of effective force and weight of
metal. The result of lo^^ Howe's communication with general Pigot was, that in
the present circumstances, he could afford no essential ^^^d. The bad conduct
of D'Estaing, however, soon altered the face of affairs. The wind no sooner
shifted, than, as if he had forgot that his design was, to reduce ^he British
forces in Rhode Island, not to sight their (...), he abandoned the harbor, and
sailed out to attack them. The engagement was prevented by a violent tempest,
in which both fleets suffered extremely, but the French much more than the
British; the consequence of which was, that D'Estaing, having returned to
Newport on the 20th of August, was induced, by the advice of his officers, the
second day after, to set sail for Boston to refit his ships, leaving general
Sullivan to carry on the enterprise against Rhode Island as he thought proper.

The loss sustained by the French fleet was so considerable, that some of their
capital ships were in the utmost danger of being taken. D'Estaing's own ship,
the Languedoc, of 90 guns, having lost all her mast^ was met in that condition
by the Renown of 50 (...) captain Dawson, who engaged her with such fury, that
nothing but the approach of night prevented the ad^^ral from becoming a prize;
nor could she possibly have escaped next morning, had not six French men of
w^^^ come up and forced the British captain to move off. -- The Tonnant of 80
guns, with only her mainmast standing, was attacked the same evening by the
Pre^^^^ of 50 guns, and escaped in the very same way. The most remarkable
action, however, was between the Is^^ of 50, captain Raynor, and the Caesar of
74 guns; both of which had entirely escaped the effects of the tempest. Between
these two a desperate and close engagement, within pistol shot, was maintained
for an (...) and a half; at the end of which time, the Isis had obtained such a
manifest superiority that the Frenchman was glad to put before the wind, in
order to escape from so furious an adversary. The Isis, however, had suffered
so much in her sails and rigging, as (...) capable of pursuit.

In the mean time the extreme bad weather had prevented general Sullivan for
some days from bringing forward his artillery and stores; but on the 17th of
August, he began his operations by erecting batteries, and making approaches to
the British lines. But general Pigot had taken such measures, that without the
assistance of a marine force it was altogether impossible to attack him with
any probability of success. The conduct of D'Estaing, therefore, who had
abandoned them when master of the harbor, gave the greatest disgust to the
people of New England, and Sullivan began to think of a retreat, on the British
fleet being seen off the coast. The garrison, on perceiving his intentions,
fallied out upon him with so much vigor, that it was not without difficulty
that he could effect his retreat; August 30.
which, however, he did in such excellent order, that although he was
repeatedly attacked by the British forces, wherever an opportunity occurred, he
met with very inconsiderable loss, nor did he leave a single article behind.
Nor was his good fortune inferior to his conduct; as sir Henry Clinton arrived
at Rhode Island immediately after his departure, with such a force as must have
decided the fate of the American army, had they been there at that time.

The same day that Sullivan abandoned Rhode Island lord How entered the bay of
Boston, where, to his great mortification, he found D'Estaing already arrived,
and so effectually protected by batteries in Nantasket road, that it was
utterly impossible to attack him with any prospect of success; on which he
proceeded for Rhode Island; but finding that place already out of danger, he
returned to New York, where he resigned the command of the fleet to admiral
Gambier, and returned to England.

Sir Henry Clinton now returned to New York, Sept. 5.
but directed general Gray to proceed to Bedford and the neighborhood, where
several American privateers resorted. On the 5th of September, the party
landed, and in a few hours destroyed 70 sail of shipping, besides a number of
small craft. They also burned wharves, stores, vessels on the stocks, and a
considerable number of dwelling houses. The royal troops proceeded to Martha's
Vineyard. There they destroyed a few vessels, and made a requisition of the
militia arms, the public money, 300 oxen and 2000 sheep, which was complied
with.

Another expedition took place up the North River, under lord Cornwallis and
general Knyphausen, the principal event of which was the destruction of a
regiment of American cavalry, commanded by lieutenant colonel Baylor, whilst
watching to intercept a British foraging party. The officer, who commanded the
party which surprised them, was major general Gray. He had acquired the name of
the "No flint general," from his common practice of taking out the flints, and
confining the men to the use of the bayonet. Grey's men proceeded with such
silence and address, that they out off a serjeant's patrol without noise, and
surrounded the barn near Tapan, in which the dragoons were asleep. A most
shocking scene ensued. Many were put (...) death, or repeatedly wounded, whilst
asking for quarter. A few escaped, and others who were wounded, were restored
in a course of time, to perfect health. Baylor himself was wounded, but not
dangerously. He lost in killed, wounded and taken 67 privates out of 104. About
40 were made prisoners. These were indebted for their lives, it is said, to the
humanity of one of Grey's captains, who gave quarters to the whole fourth
troop, though contrary to the orders of his superior officers.

A third expedition was directed to Little Egg Harbor, in New Jersey, a place
noted for privateers, Oct. 5.
the destruction of which was its principal intention. It was conducted by
captains Ferguson and Collins, and ended in the destruction of the privateers
and other vessels, as well as the place itself. Soon after this, another body
of American troops, called Pulaski's legion, were surprised, and 50 of them put
to the sword; Oct. 15.
among them were baron de Bose and lieutenant de la Borderis. The attack being
in the night, little quarter could be given; more would probably have been
granted, had not a French captain and some privates, who had deserted from
count Pulaski, falsely reported that he had issued public orders to grant no
quarter to British troops. The slaughter would not have ended so soon, had not
Pulaski hastened with his cavalry to support the infantry; and the British,
being only 250 in number, made a hasty retreat, and returned to their boats.

But however reprehensible the conduct of the British and Hessians might have
been in the mode of treating their opponents, as abovementioned, their
severities were far exceeded by those of their allies, the Indians and American
refugees. As leaders in these scenes of destruction, the names of colonel
Butler and Brandt must stand consigned to perpetual infamy. The former, a
Connecticut tory, had been an Indian agent in the wars in Canada; and had great
influence with some of the northern Indians; the other was an half Indian by
blood, and possessed the ferocity, cruelty, and desperate courage, which are
often found united in the savage state. It is easy to conceive how miserable
the situation of those unhappy captives must have been, who fell into their
hands, where no submission could procure mercy, nor any condition, age or sex,
allay their fury.

In the course of their ravages, the ruin of the fine settlement of Wyoming was
particularly affecting. That district, situated on the eastern branch of the
Susquehannah, though naturally seeming to belong to Pennsylvania, had been
peopled by a numerous colony from Connecticut. This, however, was so much
resented by the Pennsylvanians, that, after much altercation, it became the
cause of actual war between the two colonies, which was not terminated until
the contest with the mother country obliged both parties to suspend their
hostilities. The district consisted of eight townships, each containing a
square of five miles, beautifully situated on both sides of the river. The
climate was mild, and the soil luxuriously fertile; every person possessed an
abundance, the fruit of moderate labor and industry. So that upon the whole,
this settlement exhibited such a picture of primeval happiness, as can scarcely
be supposed to be exceeded, indeed very seldom equalled, in the present state
of humanity.

In these happy circumstances, the population of Wyoming had become so great,
that it had already (...) 1000 men to serve in the continental army; and the
supplies which it sent in grain and cattle bore an equal proportion to that
which it afforded in men. Nor had the people been deficient in providing
against those dangers to which their remote situation particularly exposed
them; they had constructed for that purpos^ four forts, which seemed at least
sufficient to cover the country from the incursions of the savages. In this
remote settlement, where government was feeble, the tories were under less
control, and could easily assemble undiscovered. However, at one time, 27 of
them were taken and sent to Hartford in Connecticut, but they were afterward
released. These and others of the same description, instigated by revenge
against the Americans, from whom some of them had suffered banishment and loss
of property, made a common cause with the Indians, and in the beginning of July
1778, attacked the Wyoming settlement with their combined forces, estimated at
1100 men, 900 of which were Indians. One of the smaller forts, mostly
garrisoned by those called tories, was by them given up, or, as it was said,
betrayed; another was taken by storm, where although they massacred the men in
the most inhuman manner, they spared the women and children.

Colonel Zebulon Butler, a near relation to the invader, July 3.
leaving a small number to guard Wilkesburgh, crossed the river with about 400
men, and marched into Kingston fort, whither the women, children and
defenseless of all forts crowded for protection. He suffered himself to be
enticed by his kinsman to abandon the security afforded by this fortress. Under
color of holding a parley for the conclusion of a treaty, he was led into an
agreement to march out to hold a conference in the open field, on the enemy
withdrawing their force. Yet such was his distrust of the enemy's designs, that
he marched out with 400 men, being nearly his whole force. On his arrival he
found no body to treat with, and yet advanced to the foot of the mountain,
where, at a distance, he saw a flag, the holders of which, seemingly afraid of
treachery on his side, retired as he advanced, whilst he, endeavoring to
remove this pretended ill impression, pursued the flag, till his party was
entirely enclosed, when he was suddenly freed from his delusion, by finding it
attacked at once on every side. His behavior in this dangerous situation, was
such as could scarcely have been expected from his former conduct: he and his
party fought with resolution and bravery, keeping up a continual and heavy fire
for three quarters of an hour, and seemed to be gaining ground on his numerous
enemies. In this critical moment, some sudden impulse of fear, or premeditated
treachery in a soldier, which induced him to cry out that "the colonel had
ordered a retreat," determined at once the fate of the party. Universal
confusion ensued, and no quarter was given. Colonel Zebulon Butler, and about
70 of his men escaped; the latter got across the river to Wilkesborough, the
colonel made his way to Fort Kingston, which was invested the next day on the
land side. July 4.
The enemy, to sadden the drooping spirits of the weak remaining garrison, sent
in for their contemplation the bloody scalps of 196 of their late friends and
comrades; and kept up a continual fire upon the garrison the whole day. In the
evening the colonel quitted the fort and went down the river with his family.
He was thought to be the only officer who escaped.

Colonel Dennison, who succeeded to the command of the fort, July 5.
seeing the impossibility of any effectual resistance, not having force
sufficient to man the works for even one effort, went with a flag to Butler to
know what terms he would grant upon a surrender. To this application of
weakness and misery, Butler, with all the phlegm of a real savage, answered, in
two short words, "The hatchet." In these dreadful circumstances, the
unfortunate governor having defended his fort until the most of the garrison
were killed or disabled, was at length compelled to surrender at discretion.
Some of the unhappy persons were carried away alive; but the barbaro^^
conquero^s, to save the trouble of murder in detail, shut up the rest
promiscuously in the houses and barracks, which, having then set on fire, they
enjoyed the savage pleasure of beholding the whole consumed in one general
blaze. They then proceeded to the only remaining fort, called Wilkesburgh,
which, in hopes of obtaining mercy, surrendered without resistance, or without
even demanding any conditions. Here the traged^ was renewed with aggravated
horrors. They found about 70 continental soldiers, who had been engaged merely
for the defense of the frontiers. With these, as objects of particular enmity,
the slaughter was begun, and they were butchered with every circumstance of the
most deliberate, wanton and savage cruelty. A captain Bedlow, who had been
taken prisoner, being stripped naked, had his body stuck full of sharp pine
splinters, and then a heap of knots of the same wood being piled around him,
the whole was set on fire; and his two companions, the captains Ranson and
Durgee, thrown alive into the flames. The remainder of the men, with the women
and children, not demanding so much attention, were shut up as before, in the
houses, which being set on fire, they perished altogether in the flames.

A general scene of devastation was now spread through all the townships. Fire
and sword alternately triumphed. Nay, the merciless ravagers, when the main
objects of their cruelty were exhausted, seemed to direct their animosity
against every part of animated nature; and, as if it were a relaxation or
amusement, cut out the tongues of the horses and cattle, leaving them still
alive only to prolong their agonies.

Though the Americans were fully resolved to take ample vengeance for the
barbarities committed at Wyoming, their attention was so much engaged by
affairs of the utmost importance that they could not for some time undertake
any thing of consequence against those who had been perpetrators of that horrid
tragedy. A small expedition, however, was, during the course of the summer,
undertaken from Virginia, by colonel Clarke, with no more than 200 or 300 men.
The object was to reduce those French settlements which had been planted by the
Canadians on the upper Missisippi, situated in a fine fertile country called
the Illinois, from a nation of Indians of that name. Much of the mischief which
had fallen upon the back settlements was attributed to the governor of those
colonies, who, it was said, had acted as an agent for the British, and besides
his paying a large reward for scalps, had been indefatigable in his endeavors
to excite the Ohio and Missisippi Indians to attack the defenseless parts of
the colonies. In prosecution of this design, the troops were obliged to
traverse 1200 miles of a boundless uncultivated desert, in which they endured
indescribable hardships and fatigue, both by land and water; and on the two
last days of their march to the principal town of the settlement named
Kaskaskias, they were without any subsistence. The town consisted of about 250
houses, and was fortified in such a manner as would have sufficed to withstand
a much stronger enemy. The Americans were so distressed with hunger and fatigue
that they were determined to succeed or perish in the attempt. They arrived at
the town about midnight; and so complete was the surprise, that the town and
sort were taken without opposition, before the people were well awake; and the
inhabitants were so effectually secured, that not a single person escaped to
alarm the neighboring settlements. The governor, Philip Rocheblave, was
considered as such an inveterate enemy to the United States, that he was sent
to Virginia with all the written instructions he had received from Detroit,
Quebeck, and Michillimackinack, for instigating and paying the Indians. The
inhabitants were obliged to take an oath of allegiance to the United States;
and the conquerors took up their head quarters at Kaskaskias. The smaller towns
were subdued without difficulty; and the inhabitants, without compulsion,
flocked in by hundreds, to take the oath to their new masters.

Those called tories, who had been the immediate actors in the massacre at
Wyoming, now became the object of vengeance. In October 1778, (...) expedition
was undertaken against them from the remote and upper parts of Pennsylvania,
Oct. 1.
under the conduct of colonel Butler, of the Pennsylvania troops. The enemy
inhabited the country about the upper parts of the Susquehannah, and were so
intermixed with the Indians, as to be in a manner united to them. The
difficulties which colonel Butler's men encountered in this expedition, could
not be undergone but by men possessed of a great share of hardiness both of
body and mind. They were obliged to carry their provisions on their backs, and
thus loaded, frequently to wade through creeks and rivers. They, however,
accomplished the destruction of the Tory and Indian villages on both sides of
the Susquehannah; but the inhabitants escaped. The fruits of a plentiful
harvest, together with the only saw mill and grist mill in that whole country,
shared the fate of the houses, and every other article useful or necessary to
man. This destructive expedition was completed in sixteen days. Nov. 4.
About four weeks after colonel Butler's return, some hundreds of Indians, a
large body of tories, and about fifty regulars, entered Cherry Valley, within
the state of New York. They made an unsuccessful attempt on Fort Alden, but
they killed and scalped thirty-two of the inhabitants, mostly women and
children, and also colonel Alden and ten soldiers.

An expedition was designed against the Virginia back settlers by Henry
Hamilton, lieutenant governor of Detroit, but, by the spirited exertions of
colonel Clarke, his plan was entirely deranged. Clarke, on hearing the weak
situation in which Hamilton was at St. Vincents, attacked him in the beginning
of the year 1779; and having taken the town, the inhabitants assisted him in
taking the fort. 1779. Feb. 23.
The next day Hamilton, with the garrison, agreed to surrender prisoners of war
on articles of capitulation. Clarke, on hearing that a convoy of British goods
and provisions was on its way from Detroit, sent a party of sixty men who made
prize of the whole.

Colonel G. Van Schaick, with 55 men, marched from Fort Schuyler to the
Onondago settlements, April 19.
and burned and destroyed their houses and provisions. Horses, and stock of
every kind were killed. Twelve Indians were killed, and thirty-four made
prisoners; and their arms and ammunition were either destroyed or carried off.

The account of the war with the Indians being but little connected with the
military transactions to be hereafter described, we shall in this place finish
the review of the savage scenes.

The expeditions against the Indians already related, were, however, but a
small part of the chastisement to which these barbarians were destined. The
languid manner in which the campaign at that time happened to be carried on at
New York, afforded leisure to congress to pour forth upon them that exemplary
vengeance which they had threatened. The objects of this vengeance were the Six
Nations, commonly called the Mohawks, whose confederacy seems to form in these
deserts the wide outlines of a republic. These nations inhabit that immense and
fertile tract of country which lies between New England, the middle states and
the province of Canada; and had long been renowned for the courage, constancy
and fidelity, with which they had adhered to the English in their wars with the
French; and had even assisted them frequently against different nations of
their own countrymen. They had been advised by congress, and they had promised
to observe a neutrality in the war, but they soon departed from this line of
conduct. The Oneidas and a few others were friends to the Americans, but a
great majority took part decidedly against them. Overcome by the presents of
sir John Johnson and other British agents, and their own native appetite for
depredation, they invaded the frontiers, carrying slaughter and desclation
wherever they went.

It was therefore thought expedient to dispatch general Sullivan on this
expedition. The army, when joined on the 21st of August by general James
Clinton, amounted to 5000 men, including batteaux men, waggoners, etc. The
train of artillery consisted of six light field pieces and two howitzers; and,
to quicken the celerity of the march, the army was furnished with 1400 horses.
All these preparations were made against 550 Indians, accompanied by about 250
tories, making no more than 800 in all, headed by Butler, Brandt, Guy Johnson
and Macdonald.

The Indians marched boldly toward their frontiers to meet the invaders. They
possessed themselves of a difficult pass in the woods, between Chemung and
Newtown, in the neighborhood of Teago River, where they constructed a strong
breastwork, of about half a mile in extent, made of large logs; from whence
other works of less-strength reachee for a mile and a half to the top of a
mountain in their rear, where a second breastwork was formed. Here a fierce
attack commenced on the 29th of August 1779, which continued for two hours. The
Indians resisted with uncommon bravery; nor could the breastwork have been
forced without the assistance of the artillery, which the provincial army had
carried along with them. The Indians, however, on perceiving that some
dispositions were made for turning their flank, and thereby cutting off their
retreat, no persuasions could prevail on them to stand their ground any longer.
They fled with the utmost precipitation; and so complete was the victory
obtained by general Sullivan on this occasion, that the enemy never dared to
make another stand to interrupt the desolation of their country.

The next and greatest difficulty which the invaders met with was want of
provisions. Several causes prevented them from procuring above half the
quantity necessary for the expedition, which it was not expected could be
finished in less than a month. But the violent desire of being revenged on the
barbarians against whom they were sent, with the animating speeches of their
commander, removed all impediments: the proposal of short allowance was
received with the loudest shouts of approbation; and the ration for twenty-four
hours was fixed at half a pound of flour, and as much beef per day; the
reduction extending even to salt.

In attempting to proceed into the Indian country, Sullivan found to his
surprise that no guides could be found to direct him; and the only method he
had of finding his way to their towns, was that which direct^ the hunter to the
den of a wild beast, namely, the trac^ of the inhabitant. It was even more
difficult in the present case, as the last of a file of Indians always covers
with leaves the tracks made by his fellows and himself; so that it requires
much experience, as well a^ patience and industry to be able to develope and
tr^^^ them.

All these difficulties were, however, overcome; the towns were found out, and
such a scene of desolation begun as must be read with horror, and which
nothing, not even the implacable nature of their enemies, could justify. Forty
of their towns, the largest containing 128 houses, were destroyed; their corn,
computed at no less than 160,000 bushels, shared the same fate; their fruit
trees were cut down, and themselves pursued and slaughtered, till there was
not, as far as the conquering army could perceive, a single house, field of
corn, or inhabitant remaining in the whole country. Several officers, however,
particularly general Hand and colonel Durbin, wished the general to spare the
fruit trees; but he, when requested to retract his orders, continued
relentless, and said, "The Indians shall see that there is malice enough in our
hearts to destroy every thing that contributes toward their support." Some of
these officers, already mentioned, when sent out, would not see any apple or
peach trees, so that a few were left to blossom and bear for the refreshment of
friend or foe that might chance to pass that way. In this expedition it was
remarked, that the Indians had attained to a much higher degree of knowledge of
the useful arts, ^^an what had ever been imagined by any person. The fize,
construction and neatness of their houses, were objects of admiration to the
American army. In some places the houses were not only large, but elegant, and
built of frame work. The size of corn, some ears of which were twenty-two
inches in length, and the high degree of cultivation of their grounds, also
excited wonder; and so numerous were the fruit trees, that in one orchard,
alone, they ^^t down 1300, many of which were observed to be of (...) age. The
whole of this destructive expedition was comprised in the space of a month, as
no more time could possibly be spared. It is not known how many of the
Americans were lest; but the general brought back only 300 horses out of 1400
which he had taken with him. After this expedition, the frontiers, although not
restored to perfect tranquillity, were greatly freed from the calamities, in
which they had been lately involved.

Before, and after, the termination of the above expedition, some detached
parties distressed several settlements in the United States. A party of 60
Indians, and 27 white men, under Brandt, attacked the Minisink settlement, and
burnt ten houses, twelve barns, July 23.
a fort and two mills, and carried off much plunder, together with several
prisoners. The militia from Goshen and the vicinity, to the amount of 149,
pursued the invaders with so little caution, that they were themselves
surprised and defeated. About the same time, general Williamson and colonel
Pickens, both of South Carolina, burned and destroyed the corn of eight towns,
adjacent to the frontiers of that state, and forced the Indians to remove into
more remote settlements.

In the same month colonel Broadhead carried desolation into the settlements of
the Mingo, Munsey and Seneca Indians. He left Pittsburgh with 605 men, and,
having penetrated about 200 miles from the fort, destroyed a number of Indian
huts and about 500 acr^e of corn.

In the months of August and October 1780, the frontiers of the state of New
York suffered considerably from Indians and their tory associates. 1780.
The principal part of Canijohary, a fine settlement about 56 miles from
Albany, was destroyed. They burned 27 houses at Schoharie, and 20 at Norman's
Creek. In another irruption they attacked Stone Arabia, Canafioraga and
Schohavie. A great extent of country about the Mohawk River was likewise laid
waste, numbers of the settlers killed, and many made prisoners.

The Cherokee Indians seeming to have forgot the consequences of provoking the
Americans to invade their settlements in 1776, 1781.
made an in^ursion into Ninety Six district in South Carolina, massacred some
families, and burned several houses. General Pickens having collected 394
horsemen, pe^etrated into their country, and, in the space of fourteen days,
burned thirteen towns and villages, killed upwards of 40 Indians, and took a
number of prisoner. The invaders, in this expedition, defeated a party of the
enemy, with such decision that only three Indians escaped after having been
once seen. A new and successful mode of fighting them was introduced. The
American militia, after firing three rounds, rushed forwards on horseback, and
charged the Indians with drawn swords. The vanquished Cherokees sued for peace,
on the most submissive terms, and obtained it, upon promising to deliver up
such as should instigate them to make war upon the United States. General
Pickens had the good fortune not to lose a single man upon this occasion, and
had only two wounded.

Toward the end of the war, in 1782, there was a barbarous and unprovoked
massacre of some civilized Indians, 1782.
who had been settled near the Muskingum. These, under the influence of some
pious missionaries of the Moravian persuasion, had been formed into some degree
of civil and religious order. They abhorred war, and would take no part
therein. They said that "The Great Being did not make men to destroy men, but
to love and assist each other." From a love of peace, they advised those of
their own color, who were bent on war, to desist from it. They were also led
by humanity, to inform the white people of their danger, when they knew that
their settlements were about to be invaded. This provoked the hostile Indians
to such a degree, that they c^ried these pacific people quite away from
Muskingum to a bank of Sandusky creek. They, finding corn dear and scarce in
their new habitations, obtained liberty to come back in the fall of the same
year to Muskingum, that they might collect the crops they had planted before
their removal.

When the white people, at and near Monongahela, heard that a number of Indians
were at the Moravian towns on the Muskingum, they gave out that their
intentions were hostile. Without any farther inquiry, 160 of them crossed the
Ohio, and put to death these harmless, inoffensive people, though they made no
resistance. In conformity to their religious principles, these Moravians
patiently submitted to their hard fate, without attempting to destroy their
murderers. Upwards of 90 of this pacific sect were killed by men, who; whilst
they called themselves Christians, were infinitely more deserving of the name
of Savages th^^ those whom they inhumanly murdered.

Soon after this unprovoked massacre, a party of the Americans set out for
Sandusky, to destroy the Indian towns in that quarter; but the Delawares,
Wyand^^^ and other Indians defeated them; some were killed, and several were
taken prisoners. Among the latter was colonel Crawford and his son in law. The
colonel was sacrificed to the manes of those Indians who were massacred at the
Moravian towns; and the other prisoners were tomahawked.

In this manner the savage war was carried on in America. The desolation, and
cruelty inflicted by the Indians, and retorted by the Americans, were
sufficient to excite compassion in the most obdurate hearts.

TILL the autumn of 1778, the seat of war betwixt the British and Americans had
been chiefly confined to New York, 1778.
the Jersies, Pennsylvania, and the borders of Connecticut; whilst the southern
colonies enjoyed a profound tranquillity, excepting only some petty hostilities
between the colonies of Georgia and East Florida. The Americans had in the
beginning of the year projected the conquest of West Florida. Captain Willing,
with a party of resolute men, had made a successful incursion into the country
called Natches, and greatly alarmed the whole colony of West Florida; and,
although the people were totally in his power, granted them every condition
which they required for their present and future security. His views, however,
were thought at this time not to have been entirely confined to the reduction
of these settlements, but to have extended to the opening of a correspondence
with the Spaniards at New Orleans, as it was known that the court of Spain was
about to make a declaration in favor of the Americans. This drew the attention
of the British commander so much to the southward, that he resolved upon an
immediate conquest of Georgia; which was also desirable on account of the
quantity of rice it produced. It was likewise known that the continental credit
in Europe was chiefly upheld by the southern colonies, from whom France took
off such quantities of their most valuable productions, that their trade seemed
little affected by the war, farther than what it suffered from the British
cruizers.

The motives just mentioned, and perhaps some others, now induced the British
commanders to take the resolution, which afterward proved fatal to their
prospects, of dividing their force, by sending a detachment to the southward.
The conduct of the expedition was committed to lieutenant colonel Archibald
Campbell, a brave and able officer, whose severe and tedious imprisonment in
Concord gaol has been already related. He embarked at New York for Savannah,
with a force of about 2000 men, Nov. 27.
escorted by a small squadron of ships of war, commanded by commodore Hyde
Parker; whilst general Prevost, who commanded in East Florida, was directed to
set out with all the force he could spare. The armament arrived at the island
Tybee the 23d of December, Dec. 23.
and lieutenant colonel Campbell being informed by two men whom he seized, that
the batteries for the defense of the town were neglected and out of repair, and
at the same time received such exact accounts of the situation of two armed
galleys, as effectually to cut off their retreat. The troops effected a
landing, under the conduct of captain Stanhope, who acted as a volunteer on the
occasion, at a place which seemed capable of defense against a superior force.
The loss upon the occasion was only 7 men, one of which was a very brave
officer, captain Cameron, of the light infantry. The subsequent conduct of the
Americans, under major general Robert How, displayed equal want of resolution
in the men, and of military skill in the commander. Having taken what he
supposed to be a very strong post, he continued to amuse himself with an idle
cannonade, to which the British never answered a single gun, until part of the
light infantry, privately conducted by a negro through a woody swamp, were
ready to fall upon their rear, at the same time that they found themselves
attacked in front and in flank by the remainder of the army, with a well
directed artillery. The Americans retreated with such rapidity, that only about
80 were killed and 30 more drowned in an attempt to cross a swamp. Thirty eight
commissioned officers, 415 non commissioned officers and privates, 48 pieces of
cannon, 23 mortars, the fort with its ammunition and stores, a large quantity
of provisions, with the town of Savannah itself, and all the shipping,
instantly fell into the hands of the victors. The broken remains of the
American army retreated up the river Savannah for several miles, and then took
refuge in South Carolina.

In ten days the whole province of Georgia was reduced, 1779.
Sunbury alone excepted; and this was also brought under subjection by general
Prevost in his march northward. Every proper method was taken to secure the
tranquillity of the country; and rewards were offered for apprehending committee
and assembly men, or such as they judged inimical to the British cause. Such
was the moderation, prudence and policy of lieutenant colonel Campbell, that he
effected what had never happened in America after the declaration of
independence. He not only secured the submission of the inhabitants, but, for a
time, subverted every trace of republican government, and saw a legislative
body convened under the authority of Great Britain. On the arrival of general
Prevost, the command devolved on him as senior officer; and the conquest of
Carolina was next projected.

The affairs of the United States were at this period in the most distressed,
deplorable, and ruinous condition. Idleness, dissipation, and extravagance,
seemed to have engrossed the attention of the generality of the American sons
of liberty; and self interest, speculation, and an insatiable thirst for riches
appeared to have got the better of every other consideration, and almost of
every order of men. Party disputes and personal quarrels were too much the
general object, whilst the momentous concerns of the empire, a vast
accumulation of debt, ruined finances, depreciated money, and want of credit,
which naturally brings on the want of every thing, were but secondary
considerations, and postponed by congress from time to time, as if their
affairs had been in the most flourishing condition. The paper currency in
Philadelphia was daily sinking, and at length fell so low as fifty per cent;
yet an assembly, a concert, a dinner, or supper, which cost two or three
hundred pounds, did not only take men off from acting, but even from thinking
of what ought to have been nearest their hearts. Some of the most disinterested
and patriotic Americans felt more distress from this review of things, than
they had done at any other time, from the disappointments and losses in the
course of the war.

In the mean time mons. Gerard, the French ambassador, manifested a desire,
that the war might not be prolonged by too high and unreasonable demands, and
that the United States would reduce their ultimatum as low as possible. He
strongly recommended moderation, as the fate of the war was uncertain; and he
hinted, that a decisive naval engagement in favor of the British, might give a
great turn to their affairs.

The South Carolina delegates had, toward the end of the former year,
requested the congress to appoint general Lincoln, on whose character they
justly repeled great confidence, to the command of all the forces to the
southward. Accordingly they made the appointment, and he repaired to Charleston.

In the attempt of the British upon Carolina that was no small probability of
success. The country contained a great number of friends to government, who now
eagerly embraced the opportunity of declaring themselves; most of the
inhabitants of Georgia had joined the royal standard; and there was not in the
province any considerable body of provincial forces capable of opposing the
efforts of regular and well disciplined troops. On the first news of general
Prevost's approach, the loyalists assembled in a body, imagining themselves
able to stand then ground until their allies should arrive; but in this they
were disappointed. The Americans attacked and defeated them with the loss of
half their number. The remainder retreated into Georgia; and after undergoing
many difficulties, at last effected a junction with the British forces.

In the mean time, general Lincoln, with a considerable body of American
troops, had encamped within 20 miles of the town of Savannah; and another
strong party had posted themselves at a place called Briar's Creek, farther up
the river of the same name. Thus the extent of the British government was
likely to be circumscribed within very narrow bounds. General Prevost therefore
determined to dislodge a party under general Ash, consisting of about 2000
men; and the latter, trusting to their strong situation, and being remiss in
their guard, May 3.
suffered themselves to be surprised; when they were utterly routed with the
loss of more than 300 killed and taken, besides a great number drowned in the
river or the swamps. The whole artillery, stores, baggage, and almost all the
arms of this unfortunate party (...) taken, so that they could no more make any
stand; and thus the province of Georgia was once more freed from the
provincials, and a communication opened with those places in Carolina where the
royalists chiefly resided.

The victory at Briar's Creek proved of considerable service to the British
cause. Great numbers of the loyalists joined the army, and considerably
increased its force. Hence general Prevost was enabled to stretch his posts
farther up the river, and to guard all the principal passes: so that general
Lincoln was reduced to a state of inaction; and at last moved off toward
Augusta, in order to protect the provincial assembly, which was obliged to sit
in that place, the capital being now in the hands of the British.

Lincoln had no sooner quitted his post, than it was judged a proper time by
the British general to put in execution the grand scheme which had been
meditated against Carolina. Many difficulties indeed lay in his way. The river
Savannah was so swelled by the excessive rains of the season, that it seemed
impassable; the opposite shore, for a great way, was so full of swamps and
marshes, that no army could march over it without the greatest difficulty; and,
to render the passage still more difficult, general Moultrie was left with a
considerable body of troops in order to oppose the enemy's attempts. But in
spite of every opposition, the perseverance of the British troops at last
prevailed. General Moultrie was obliged to retire toward Charleston; and the
pursuing army, after having waded through the marshes for some time, at last
arrived in an open country, through which they marched with great rapidity
toward the capital; whilst general Lincoln made preparations to march to its
relief.

Certain intelligence of the danger to which Charleston was exposed animated
the American general. A chosen body of infantry, mounted on horseback for the
greater expedition, was dispatched before him; whilst Lincoln himself followed
with all the forces he could collect. General Moultrie too, with the troops he
had brought from the Savannah, and some others he had collected since his
retreat from thence, had taken possession of all the avenues leading to
Charleston, and prepared for a vigorous defense. But all opposition proved
ineffectual; May 12.
and the British army was allowed to come within cannon shot of Charleston.

The town was now summoned to surrender, and the inhabitants would gladly have
agreed to observe a neutrality during the rest of the war, and would have
engaged also for the rest of the province. But these terms not being accepted,
they made preparations for a vigorous defense. It was not, however, in the
power of the British commander at this time to make an attack with any prospect
of success. His artillery was not of sufficient weight; there were no ships to
support the attack by land: and general Lincoln advancing rapidly with a
superior army, threatened to enclose him between his own force and the town; so
that should he fail in his first attempt, certain destruction would be the
consequence. For these reasons he withdrew his forces from before the town, and
took possession of two islands, called St. James's and St. John's, lying to the
southward; where having waited some time, his force was augmented by the
arrival of two frigates. With these he determined to make himself master of
Port Royal, another island possessed of an excellent harbor and many other
natural advantages, from its situation also commanding all the sea coast from
Charleston to Savannah River. The American general, however, did not allow this
to be accomplished without opposition. Perceiving that his opponent had
occupied an advantageous post on St. John's island, preparatory to his
enterprise against Port Royal, he attempted to dislodge them from it; June 20.
but, after an obstinate attack, the provincials were obliged to retire with
considerable loss. On this occasion the success of the British arms was in a
great measure owing to an armed float; which galled the right flank of the
provincials so effectually, that they could direct their efforts only against
the strongest parts of the lines, which proved impregnable to their attacks.
This disappointment was instantly followed by the loss of Port Royal, which
general Prevost took possession of, and put his troops into proper stations,
waiting for the arrival of such reinforcements as were necessary for the
intended attack on Charleston.

The profligate conduct of the refugees, and the officers and soldiers of the
British, in plundering the houses of individuals, during this incursion, is
incredible. Negroes were seduced or forced from their masters; furniture and
plate were seized without decency or authority; and the most infamous
violations of every law of honor and honesty were openly perpetrated.

Whilst general Prevost was employed in the expeditions already related, sir
Henry Clinton sent a naval and land force to make an inroad into Virginia, May
10.
under the command of sir George Collier and general Mathews. The fleet having
safely passed the capes of Virginia, a man of war with some armed tenders were
left to block up James's River, whilst sir George Collier, shifting his pendant
to a frigate, proceeded with the smaller ships of war and transports up
Elizabeth River. The town of Portsmouth, and the remains of Norfolk on the
opposite side of the river, fell of course into their hands. The Americans
burned some of their own vessels, but others fell into the hands of the
invaders. The British guards marched 18 miles in the night, and, arriving at
Suffolk by morning, proceeded to the destruction of vessels, naval stores, and
magazines of provisions. Every house in the town was consigned to the flames,
except the church and one dwelling house. Similar destruction took place at
Kemp's Landing, Shepherd's Gosport, Tanner's Creek, and other places in the
vicinity. The frigates and armed vessels at the same time carried ruin along
the margin of the rivers. Three thousand hogsheads of tobacco were taken at
Portsmouth. Above 130 vessels in all were either destroyed or taken, exclusive
of those which were on the stocks; and several thousand barrels of pork, with
other provisions in proportion, which had been prepared for general
Washington's army, were destroyed; as were likewise all kind of stores which
could not be carried off. The fleet and army, after demolishing Fort Nelson,
and setting fire to the store houses and other public buildings in the dock
yard at Gosport, returned with their prizes and booty safe to New York, in the
same month in which they had left it.

The success with which this expedition was attended, induced sir Henry Clinton
to attempt another. The provincials had been for some time engaged in erecting
two strong forts on the North River; the one at Verplank's Neck on the east,
and the other at Stoney Point on the west side. These, when completed, would
have been of the utmost service to the Americans, as commanding the principal
pass called King's Ferry, between the northern and southern colonies. As these
were nearly completed, but not yet defensible, sir Henry thought it a proper
time to avail himself of their industry, and to reap the fruits of their toil;
general Washington being at too great a distance, and otherwise incapable of
giving any interruption.

The troops embarked for this service, were commanded by major general Vaughan,
May 30.
and before they set sail were joined by the force from Chesapeak, with whom
they proceeded up the North River. Next day general Vaughan, with the greater
part of the army landed on the east side of the river about eight miles from
Verplanks; whilst the remainder, under the conduct of general Pattison, and
accompanied by the commander in chief, advancing farther up, landed within
three miles of Stoney Point. On the appearrance of the ships, the Americans
abandoned the place, after setting fire to a large block house; and though some
show of resistance was made on the approach of the troops to take possession of
Stoney Point, they did not venture to stand an engagement.

On the opposite side of the river, the Americans had completed a small but
strong fort called La Fayette, which was defended by four pieces of artillery,
and a garrison of between 70 and 80 men. But the little redoubt was effectually
commanded by Stoney Point, which is situated at about 1000 yards distance on
the opposite shore; and being exceedingly difficult of approach on its own
side, at least for the conveyance of artillery, the attack was accordingly
intended from the other. For this purpose, a party under general Pattison, with
infinite fatigue and labor, during the night, overcame the difficulties of
dragging the heavy artillery from a very bad landing place, up a steep
precipice to the top of the hill, and by five in the morning had opened a
battery of cannon, and another of mortars, on the summit of the difficult rocks
of Stoney Point, which poured a dreadful fire on Fort la Fayette; whilst
Vaughan with his division, making a long circuit round the hills, arrived and
closely invested it by land. In the mean time sir George Collier advanced with
the galleys and gunboats within reach of the sort; and as soon as it was dark
anchored two of his galleys above it, so as to prevent the escape of the
garrison by water. The garrison, finding their sire overpowered, and their
escape cut off, surrendered themselves prisoners of war next morning, without
any other stipulation than humane treatment. Sir Henry Clinton, moving his main
body up the North River, occasioned the American army to move from their
encampment at Middlebrook toward West Point, for which they were in fear, the
garrison being few, and the fort not completed. Sir Henry Clinton gave
directions for completing the works of both the captured posts. For their
better support, and with a view to farther operations, he encamped his army at
Phillipsburgh, about half way down the river toward New York Island. By the
loss of these posts, the provincials in the Jerseys were under a necessity of
making a circuit of above ninety miles through the mountains, to communicate
with the countries east of Hudson's River.

The state of the hostile armies on both sides, with respect to actual force,
together with the want of money and deficiency of military provisions on the
one side, necessarily limited the views of the opposite commanders, and
prevented their undertaking any decisive or extensive operations. They were
each in a strong state of defense, and neither had such a superiority (...)
force as could compel the other to relinquish the advantages of his situation.
General Washington was, besides, in expectation of foreign aid; and it would
have been inconsistent with his usual caution and judgment, to have run the
hazard, by any previous attempt, of weakening his strength to such a degree as
might render him incapable of profiting by the assistance of his ally, and the
American arms and force of course contemptible in his eyes. The campaign was
accordingly languid, and its operations confined to the surprise of posts and
to desultory excursions; to the last of which, the Americans were now, as well
as at all times exceedingly exposed, and upon no footing of equality with their
enemy.

The numberless small cruisers, whale boats, and other small craft from the
Connecticut coasts, which infested the Sound, lying between that state and Long
Island, were so watchful in their depredations, and their situation afforded
them such opportunities, that they had nearly destroyed the trade to and from
New York on that side, to the great distress of the city, as well as of the
fleet and army. Upon this account, sir Henry Clinton and sir George Collier,
determined on a course of desultory invasions on that coast, with a view of
curing the evil, by cutting off the means of depredation in the destruction of
their privateers, and, as far as it could be done, of their other vessels and
materials for building,

Governor Tryon was appointed to conduct the land forces, July 5.
consisting of about 2,600 men, and he was seconded by brigadier general Garth,
an officer of distinguished merit and ability. The forces were landed at the
town of New Heaven, which they instantly took possession of, as well as of a
battery which covered it, without any great loss, though considerable
resistance was made by the inhabitants and militia. The fort with all the naval
and military stores were destroyed; but the town, though at first doomed to
destruction, was spared, as the militia had not attempted to molest the troops
in their retreat. From New Haven the sleet sailed to Fairfield, where the
troops were again landed and again opposed. Here the town was set on fire, and
consumed, with every thing of value; and the same desolation took place at
Norwalk, where the militia were more numerous, and made a greater resistance
than in other places. Here the loss of the Americans was great; both Norwalk
and Greenfield, a small town in the neighborhood, were totally destroyed, with
a considerable number of ships either finished or on the stocks, and a still
greater number of whale boats and small craft, with stores and merchandise to a
large amount. The places taken were generally plundered: whigs and tories,
indiscriminately, though not universally, had their money, plate, rings and
other articles taken from them; and much of their furniture was wa^^^^ly
destroyed.

The fires and destruction which accompanied this expedition, were severely
censured by the Americans, and apologized for by the British in a very
unsatisfactory manner. The latter, in their vindication, alleged that the
houses which they had burned gave shelter to the Americans, whilst they fired
from them, and on other occasions concealed their retreat. Governor Tryon
undertook to justify these measures on principles of policy. "I should be very
sorry," said he, "if the destruction of these villages would be thought less
reconcilable to humanity, than the love of my country, my duty to the king,
and the laws of arms. The usurpers have professedly placed their hopes of
severing the empire in avoiding decisive actions -- upon the waste of the
British treasures, and upon the escape of their own property during the
protracting of the war. Their power is supported by the general dread of their
tyranny and threats, practiced to inspire a credulous multitude with a
presumptuous confidence in our forbearance; I wish to detect this delusion."

Among other views of the British commander in the Connecticut expedition, it
was supposed to be a probable method of drawing general Washington from his
strong posts in the high lands into the low country, where he might be forced
to a battle on disadvantageous terms; but this cautious general, in every
instance, avoided the snare. And although general Parsons was closely connected
with Connecticut, and, from his small force, unable to make successful
opposition to the invaders, instead of pressing general Washington for a large
detachment of continental troops, he wrote to him as follows; "The British may
probably distress the country exceedingly, by the ravages they will commit, but
I would rather see all the towns on the coast of my country in flames, than
that the enemy should possess West Point."

These devastations, however, were suddenly stopped by a peremptory order from
general Clinton for the return of the troops, July 13.
on the 13th of July, only eight days after they began. The loss sustained by
the British troops was very trifling; not exceeding 150 in killed, wounded and
missing. The expedition, however, seems not to have been attended with any
great effect as to its immediate purpose, for so bold and numerous did the
American troops continue, that in a few days two of the royal sloops of war
were taken by them.

On the surprise of Stoney Point and Verplank, general Washington had taken
post among the high grounds farther up the North River, only with a design of
watching the motions of the British army. No sooner did he observe how sir
Henry Clinton had strengthened these posts, than he entertained the design of
surprising them. Having received notice from a deserter, that there was a sandy
beach on the south side o^ Stoney Point, running along the flank of the works,
and only obstructed by a single abbatis, which might afford an easy and safe
approach to a body of troops; he formed the plan of attacking both posts at the
same instant; the execution of which was entrusted to general Wayne and general
How. The garrison at Stoney Point consisted of a regiment of foot, British and
loyalists, commanded by lieutenant colonel Johnson. That in the opposite post,
at Verplank's Neck, of nearly equal force, was under the command of lieutenant
colonel Webster. All the Massachusett light infantry marched from West Point
under lieutenant colonel Hull, in the morning of the 15th of July, July 15.
and joined general Wayne, at Sandy Beach, 14 miles from Stoney Point. The
roads were exceedingly bad and narrow, and the troops having to pass over high
mountains, through difficult defiles and morasses, were obliged to move in
single files the greatest part of the way. By eight in the evening, the van
arrived within a mile and a half of the enemy, where the men, being formed in
two columns, remained till general Wayne and several of the principal officers
returned from reconnoitring the works. General Wayne issued the most positive
orders to both columns, which they seem to have exactly obeyed, not to fire a
single shot on any account, but to place their whole reliance on the bayonet.
At half past eleven at night the whole moved forward to the attack. Two attacks
were, therefore, made on the opposite sides of the fortification, to which the
soldiers marched with unloaded muskets and screwed bayonets, whilst a
detachment in front amused the garrison with a feint. They found the approaches
more difficult than, from their knowledge of the place, they had been led to
expect, the works being covered by a deep morass, which at this time was
overflowed by the tide.

But neither the deep morass, the formidable and double rows of abattis on the
strong works in front and flank, could damp the ardour of the Americans, who,
in the face of an incessant and tremendous fire of musketry, and cannon loaded
with grape shot, forced their way through every obstacle, until the van of each
column met in the center of the works, and the garrison were obliged to
surrender at discretion. General Wayne was wounded in the head by a musket ball
as he passed the last abbatis, but was gallantly supported and helped through
the works by his two brave aids, Fishbourn and Archer. The killed and wounded
of the Americans amounted to 98. Lieutenants Gibbons and Knox, who led the
forlorn hope, escaped unhurt, although the first lost 17 men out of 20, and the
last nearly as many. The killed of the garrison were 63, and the number of the
prisoners 543. Two flags, two standards, 15 pieces of ordnance, and a
considerable quantity of military stores, fell into the hands of the conquerors.

For this heroic action, congress gave thanks to general Wayne, and passed
resolutions honorable to the officers and men concerned in it. They ordered a
gold medal, emblematical of the action, to be presented to the general, and
silver ones to lieutenant colonel Fleury and major Stewart; the former having
struck the standard with his own hand.

The attack upon Verplank, entrusted with general How, miscarried, through
delay occasioned by high winds which prevented the transportation of the
artillery. The enemy, likewise, broke down the bridges, and thereby cut off the
communication by land.

The Americans evacuated Stoney Point, after having removed the cannon and
stores, and demolished the works: and the third day after the capture, sir
Henry Clinton regained possession of it, and left a strong garrison for its
defense.

The success of the late enterprise emboldened the Americans to make a similar
attempt on Paulus Hook, a fortified post on the Jersey side, opposite to New
York; but, although the heroism of the enterprise and the spirit with which it
was executed deserves applause, July 19.
after having completely surprised the posts, the American commander, major
Lee, finding it impossible to retain them, made an orderly retreat, with about
161 prisoners, among whom were seven officers.

Another expedition of greater importance was now projected on the part of the
Americans. This was against a post on the river Penobscot, on the borders of
Nova Scotia, of which the British had lately taken possession, June 16.
and where they had began to erect a fort which threatened to be a very great
inconvenience to the colonists. A fleet of 18 armed vessels, besides
transports, were fitted out, and put under the conduct of commodore Saltonstal.
The land forces were commanded by general Lovel. The armament destined against
it was so soon got in readiness, that colonel Macleane, the commanding officer
at Penobscot, found himself obliged to drop the execution of part of his
scheme; and instead of a regular sort, to content himself with putting the
works already constructed in as good a posture of defense as possible. The
Americans could not effect a landing without a great deal of difficulty, and
bringing the guns of their largest vessels to bear upon the shore. July 28.
As soon as this was ^^ne, however, they erected several batteries, and kept up
a brisk sire for the space of a fortnight; after which they proposed to give a
general assault: but before this could be effected, they perceived sir George
Collier with a British fleet failing up the river to attack them. On this they
instantly embarked their artillery and military stores, Aug. 3.
sailing up the river as far as possible in order to avoid him. They were so
closely pursued, however, that not a single vessel could escape so that the
whole fleet, consisting of 18 armed vene^ and 24 transports, was destroyed;
most of them indeed being blown up by themselves. The soldiers and sa^ors were
obliged to wander through immense deserts, where they suffered much for want of
provisions; and to add to their calamities, a quarrel broke out between the
soldiers and seamen concerning the cause of their disaster, which ended in a
violent fray, wherein a great number were killed.

CHAP. XXV.
The French and British fleets sail from America to the West Indies --
D'Estaing appears before Savannah -- Besieges it in conjunction with General
Lincoln -- The Allies are defeated, and retreat -- Rhode Island evacuated --
Remarkable enterprise of Colonel White -- Spain decl^^es in favor of America
-- Conquers part of Florida -- The British take Fort Omoah, in which are
immense spoils -- D'Estaing returns to the West Indies without effecting any
thing in America -- The Randolph frigate blown up -- The Alfred and Virginia
frigates taken by the British -- Major Talbot's gallant enterprise -- Paul
Jones, his exploits on the British coasts -- Takes the Serapis and Countess of
Scarborough and carries them into the Texel -- The British House of Commons set
on foot an inquiry into the conduct of Lord and General How -- Result of the
inquiry, particularly as to General Burgoyne -- His Character cleared up --
Extraordinary evidence given by General Robertson and Mr. Galloway, regarding
the American War.

COUNT D'Estaing, as has been already observed, had put into Boston harbor to
refit. Zealous in the cause of his master, he had published a proclamation to
be dispersed through Canada, inviting the people to return to their original
friendship with France, and declaring that all who renounced their allegiance
to Great Britain, should certainly find a protector in the king of France. All
his endeavors, however, proved insufficient to produce any revolution, or even
to form a party of any consequence among the Canadians.

As soon as the French admiral had repaired and victualled his fleet, he took
the opportunity, while that of admiral Biron had been shattered by a storm,
Nov. 3.
of sailing to the West Indies. On the same day, commodore Hotham with five men
of war, a bomb vessel and some frigates, set out from New York, to convoy a
number of transports with general Grant and 5000 men to the same theater of war.

The British took St. Lucia, and count D'Estaing took St. Vincent and Grenada.
Dec. 13.
Soon after the reduction of the latter, the count retired to Cape Francois.
During his operations there, the Americans having represented his conduct as
totally unserviceable to them, July, 1779.
he received orders from Europe to assist the United States with all possible
speed.

In compliance with these orders, he directed his course toward Georgia, with
a design, in conjunction with general Lincoln, to recover that province out of
the hands of the enemy, and to put it as well as South Carolina, in such a
posture of defense as would effectually secure them from any future attack.
This seemed to be no difficult matter, from the little force with which he knew
he should be opposed; and the next object in contemplation was no less than the
destruction of the British fleet and army at New York, and their total
expulsion from the continent of America. Full of these hopes the French
commander arrived off the coast of Georgia, with a fleet consisting of twenty
sail of the line, Sept. 1.
two of fifty guns and eleven frigates, and a large body of land forces on
board. His arrival was so little expected, that several vessels, laden with
provisions and military stores, fell into his hands. The Experiment also, a
vessel of 50 guns, commanded by sir James Wallace, and three frigates, were
also taken. On the 9th the fleet anchored off Tybee, at the mouth of the river
Savannah. On the continent the British troops were divided. General Prevost,
with an inconsiderable part, remained at Savannah; but the main force was under
colonel Maitland at Port Royal. On the first appearance of the French fleet, an
express was sent to colonel Maitland: but it was intercepted by the Americans;
so that before he could set out to join the commander in chief, the Americans
had secured most of the passes by land, whilst the French fleet effectually
blocked up the passage by sea. On the 15th, the French, with count Polaski's
light horse, appeared so near the British lines as to skirmish with the
piquets; and as the force under general Prevose did not admit of his having any
other object in view than the mere defense of the town, he contracted his posts
within the cover of the artillery on the works.

D'Estaing sent a summons to Prevost, commanding him, in the name of his most
Christian majesty, to yield to a force he was utterly incapable of resisting.
Though general Prevost, with the officers about him, were determined, even with
the small force they had, to defend the place to the last extremity, yet they
thought it prudent to gain as much time as possible. By sending different
messages, therefore, he found means to protract the time considerably, and at
last was allowed a truce of 24 hours for deliberation. During this interval
colonel Maitland, taking advantage of creeks and inlets, and marching over
land, arrived with the troops from Port Royal.

The face of affairs was now entirely changed, and instead of an easy conquest
which presented itself on the arrival of D'Estaing, a most obstinate defense
was resolved on. The general returned a positive answer to the summons, that he
was determined to defend the place to the last extremity; and the sailors who
had been all drawn from the ships to construct and man the batteries, expressed
their approbation by three checes, when the gun was fired as a signal for the
recommencement of hostilities.

On the day after delivering the summons D'Estaing was joined by general
Lincoln, as he had been before by count Polaski. The allies took separate but
adjoining camps, and each began immediately to make approaches as in a regular
siege. Their joint force h^^ been computed at about 9000 men, whilst that of
the garrison did not exceed 3000. The utmost exertions, however, were made on
the part of the British. Every man, without distinction, was employed in the
hardest labor, and cheerfully underwent his share of the common toil. At the
time that the French summons was received, the lines were not only weak and
imperfect but were not protected by above eight or ten pieces of cannon, while
at the conclusion of the siege or blockade, the works, by the assistance of the
ship guns, were corcred with a numerous artillery amounting to near 100 pieces.
Nor was the skill and dexterity with which they were used and directed by
captain Moncrief, the engineer, at all inferior to the labor used in bringing
them forward, as was owned both by friends and fo^^.

The allies were indefatigable in their efforts to interrupt the works, though
without effect; nor did they spare any pains in carrying on their own, so that
in a week they had pushed a sap within 300 yards of the abbatis. Few skirmishes
took place, as the British commander wished to spare his men; but in the few
that were fought the allies were worsted.

About midnight, between the 3d and 4th of October, the allies began a heavy
bombardment, and at day light a violent cannonade from 37 pieces of heavy
artillery, nine mortars from their land batteries, and 16 cannon from the
water. Though this cannonade continued for five days, its destructive effects
were felt only by the women, children and negroes, and by the houses of the
town; the works, so far from being demolished, continually acquired additional
strength, through the industry of the besieged. -- In this distress of the
women and children, which was farther increased by the carcasses, in order to
set the town on fire, general Prevost sent a letter to D'Estaing requiring
permission for the women and children to leave the place; but after three
hours, during which the discharge of cannon and shells continued, the allied
commanders, from motives of policy, refused compliance, and they resulved to
give a general assault.

This attack was made in the morning of the 9th of October, Oct. 9.
a little before day light, after a heavy discharge of cannon and mortars for
several hours. The firing began on the left of the British lines, but soon
after became general.

The nature of the ground on both flanks of the lines was so favorable to the
approach of the assailants, that the defect could not be remedied by all the
skill of the engineer: And as it was still too dark for the British to discern
the movements of the allies, and uncertain where the storm would fall, each
division waited cooly in its post; expecting what should happen. The grand
attack was made however, to the right, whither D'Estaing in person led the
flower of both armies, and was accompanied by all the principal officers of
each. They advanced in three columns, under cover of a swampy hollow, which
reached within a very little distance of some of the principal works. By reason
of the darkness of the night, they took a greater circuit, and went deeper into
the bog than they needed to have done; a circumstance, which, besides a
critical loss of time, could not fail of producing some disorder. The attack
was made with great spirit, and supported with obstinate perseverance. One
redoubt, particularly, was the scene of much gallantry. It was obstinately
desended by captain Tawse. The assailants planted two stand of colors upon it;
and at length the brave captain fell, gallantly fighting in his redoubt, his
sword being plunged, at the instant of death, in the body of the third man he
had killed with his own hand. -- But whilst the combat was still dubious and
bloody, particularly at that redoubt, three batteries, which were occupied by
the seamen, opened upon the allies in almost every direction, and made such
havoc in their ranks as caused some little disorder, or at least a pause in
the violence of their attack. At that instant, a body of grenadiers and marines
advanced suddenly from the lines, and charged the allies with such rapidity and
fury, throwing themselves into the ditches and works among them, that in an
instant the redoubt and a battery to the right of it, were totally cleared of
them. The advantage was pursued with the greatest vigor; the allies were
instantly routed, and driven into the swamp with such celerity, that three
companies of the most active troops of the besieged, could not, with all their
exertion, come in for any share of the honor. The pursuit was prevented by a
thick fog and darkness, which hindered the British general from perceiving how
far it was proper to venture his troops out of the town. As the day cleared,
the works and ditches near the redoubt presented a most shocking spectacle of
killed and wounded, said by some soldiers and officers to have been only
equalled at Bunker's Hill. At 10 o'clock, the allies requested leave to carry
off their wounded and bury their dead; which, with some restrictions as to the
former, was granted.

In this fatal attack, which lasted fifty five minutes, the loss of the allies
was computed at between 1000 and 1200 men in killed and wounded. The French
owned 44 officers, and about 700 private men in killed and wounded. -- The loss
of the Americans, by the return made to general Lincoln, was 234 continentals
killed and wounded. Count Polaski, the celebrated conspirator against the
reigning king of Poland, was mortally wounded. Count D'Estaing was likewise
wounded, but slightly.

The loss on the British side was inconceivably small; and no other officer was
lost except captain Tawse, who had so bravely defended the redoubt where the
standards were placed.

General Prevost, lieutenant colonel Maitland, and major Moncrief deservedly
acquired great reputation by this successful defense. The allies now thought of
nothing but to get away with safety, and it was necessary to mask this with the
appearance of continuing the blockade. Great civilities now passed between the
French and the British; and numberless apologies were made for the refusal with
respect to the women and children. They were now pressed to place themselves in
the situation they had formerly requested; and a particular ship of war and
commander were named for the reception of Mrs. Prevost, her children and
company. But the answer was, that what had been refused and that in terms of
insult, could not in any circumstance be deemed worth accepting. On the 18th of
the month, Oct. 18.
upon the clearing up of the fog, it was discovered that the French and
Americans had abandoned their camps in the preceding night. Some pursuit was
made, but without effect; the Americans having broken down the bridges behind
them, and pursued their route with great dispatch. Count D'Estaing had
reembarked his troops, artillery and baggage, and left the continent; and
general Lincoln returned to South Carolina.

This expedition of D'Estaing on the American coast, though unsuccessful as to
its main object, was eventually of benefit to the United States. It entirely
disconcerted the measures already digested by the British commanders, and
caused a considerable waste of time, before they could determine on a new plan
of operations. It also occasioned the evacuation of Rhode Island; but this was
rather a loss than advantage to America. For the British had stationed near
6000 men, for two years and eight months, on that island, where they were lost
to every purpose of cooperation, and where they could render very little more
service to the royal cause, than could have been obtained by a couple of
frigates cruising in the vicinity.

During the siege of Savarmah, a remarkable enterprise was effected by colonel
John White of the Georgia line. Captain French had taken post with about 100
men near the river Ogechee, some time before the fiege began. There were also
at the same place forty sailors on board of five British vessels, four of which
were armed. All these men, together with the vessels and 130 stand of arms,
were surrendered to colonel White, captain Elholm, and four others, one of
which was the colonel's servant. On the preceding night this small party
kindled a number of fires in different places, and adopted the parade of a
large encampment. By these and a variety of deceptive stratagems, captain
French was fully impressed with the opinion, that nothing but an instant
surrender, in conformity to a peremptory summons, could save his men from being
cut to pieces by a superior force. He therefore gave up, without making any
resistance.

The arms of France and America being almost every where unsuccessful, the
independency of the latter seemed yet to be in danger, notwithstanding the
assistance of so powerful an ally, when further encouragement was given by the
accession of Spain to the confederacy against Britain, in the month of June
1779.

The first effect of this appeared in the invasion of the infant colony on the
Mississippi; which being yet too weak for a particular government, was annexed
to that of West Florida; which was, however, too distant to afford any
effectual protection. We have also taken notice of an expedition by the
Americans, under captain Willing, into that country, though they did not stay
to enforce their dominion. The few troops which were in the colony were
suddenly attacked by Don Bernardo de Gulves, August.
governor of Louismia, with the whole force he could collect; who, having
first publicly declared the independency of British America by beat of drum, at
New Orleans, set out on his expedition. His measures were so well concerted,
that major general Campbell, who commanded at Pensacola, did not receive the
smallest intelligence of his proceedings, until the affair was almost over. The
troops did not amount to 500 men; however, they stood a siege of nine days in a
field redoubt at Batton Rouge, and capitulated on honorable terms, to which
the Spanish governor strictly adhered.

Their next enterprise, was against the Bay of Honduras, where the British
logwood cutters were settled. These, finding themselves too weak to resist,
applied to the governor of Jamaica for relief; who sent them a supply of men,
ammunition, and military stores, under captain Dalrymple. Before the arrival of
this detachment, the principal settlement in those parts, called St. George's
Key, had been taken by the Spaniards and retaken by the British. In his way
captain Dalrymple fell in with a squadron from Admiral Parker in search of some
register ships richly laden; but which, retreating into the harbor of Omoa,
were too strongly protected by the fort to be attacked with safety. A project
was then formed, in conjunction with the people of Honduras, to reduce this
fort. The design was to surprise it; but the Spaniards having discovered them,
Oct. 16.
they were obliged to fight. Victory quickly declared for the British; but the
fortifications were so strong, that the artillery, they had brought along with
them were found too light to make any impression. It was then determined to try
the success of an escalade; and this was executed with so much spirit, that the
Spaniards stood astonished without making any resistance, and, in spite of all
the efforts of the officers, threw down their arms and surrendered. The spoil
was immense, being valued at three millions of dollars. The Spaniards chiefly
lamented the loss of 250 quintals of quicksilver; a commodity indispensably
necessary in the working of their gold and silver mines, so that they offered
to ransom it at any price; but this was refused, as well as the ransom of the
fort, though the governor offered 300,000 dollars for it. A small garrison was
left for the defense of the place: but it was quickly attacked by a superior
force, and obliged to evacuate it, though not without destroying every thing
that could be of use to the enemy; spiking the guns, and even locking the gates
of the fort and carrying off the keys. All this was done in sight of the
besiegers; after which the garrison embarked without the loss of a man.

The successful defense of Savannah, together with the subsequent departure of
count D'Estaing from the coast of the United States, freed the British from all
apprehensions for the safety of New York, and sir Henry Clinton set sail from
that place in the end of the year, with a considerable body of troops, intended
for the attack of Charleston in South Carolina.

Several detached events, which could not be introduced without interrupting
the narrative of the preceding campaigns, shall close this chapter.

The Randolph, an American frigate of 36 guns and 305 men, 1778, March 7.
commanded by captain Biddle, sailed on a cruise from Charleston. The Yarmouth
of 64 guns, discovered her and five other vessels, and came up with her in the
evening. Captain Vincent hailed the Randolph, to hoist colors, or he would
fire into her; on which she hoisted American colors and immediately gave the
Yarmouth her broadside, which was returned, and in about a quarter of an hour
she blew up. Four men saved themselves upon a piece of her wreck, and subfisted
for five days upon nothing but rain water, which they sucked from a piece of
blanket. On the fifth day, captain Vincent of the Yarmouth, being in chase of a
ship, happily discovered them, and humanely suspending the chase, took them on
board. Three days before this, the Alfred frigate, of 20 nine pounders, was
taken by the Ariadne and Ceres. The Americans also lost the Virginia frigate.

Major Talbot took the British schooner Pigot, Oct. 8.
of 8 twelve pounders, as she lay on the eastern side of Rhode Island. The
major, with a number of troops, on board a small vessel, made directly for the
Pigot in the night, and sustaining the fire of her marines, reserved his own
till he had run his jib-boom through her fore shrouds. He then fired some
cannon, and threw in a volley of musketry, loaded with bullets and buck shot,
and immediately boarded her. The captain made a gallant resistance, but was not
seconded by his crew. Major Talbot having gained undisturbed possession,
carried off his (...) in safety. Congress, as a reward of his merit, presented
him with the commission of lieutenant colonel.

Although little was performed in the year 1779 by the contending fleets either
in Europ^ or in America, 1779.
a great number of well fought and desperate actions took place between single
ships both of the old and new world. Of these the battle between Paul Jones and
sir Richard Pearson is as remarkable as any. Jones had for some time infested
the coast of Scotland. In April 1778, he sailed from Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
as commander of the Ranger privateer, and landed in the night at White haven,
in Cumberland, with a party of 30 men; and set fire to one of the ships in the
harbor; but the inhabitants extinguished the fire before it reached (...)
rigging. He then landed some men in the west^^ coast of Scotland, and plundered
the house of lord Selkirk, near Kircubright, of plate, jewels, and other
valuable articles. He was a Scotchman by birth, and is said to have lived
formerly with his lordship. In the lat^^ end of July 1779, he sailed from Port
l'Orient, as contmander of a squadron, consisting of the Bon Homme Richard, of
40 guns and 375 men, the Alliance of (...) guns, the Pallas, a French frigate
of 32, the Vengeance an armed brig of 12, together with a cutter. Having
alarmed the Scotch and Irish coasts, and made capture nearly to the value of L.
40,000, he at length fell i^ with the Baltic fleet, off Flamborough Head under
the protection of the Serapis, Sept. 23.
captain Pearson, and the Countess of Scarborough captain Piercy. Captain
Pearson, by four o'clock, plainly discerning from the deck, that the squadron
consisted of three large ships, and a brig, (the cutter was not now with them)
made the Countess of Scarborough a signal to join him, which was done about
half past five. A little after seven, the Bon Homme Richard brought no within
musket shot of the Serapis, when the fight legan, and was maintained with equal
fury on both (...), each vessel using every possible means to gain an
advantageous situation to rake the other. Captain person had infinitely the
superiority over the Bon Homme Richard in working the Serapis, and obtained
advantages in spite of every effort of Jones to prevent it. Jones, to render
such superiority useless, aimed at lying his ship athwart the hawse of the
other. Though he did not succeed to his wish, yet as the bowsprit of the
Serapis ran between his poop and mizen mast, he seized the opportunity of
lashing the vessels together, when the wind driving the head of the Serapis
against the bow of the Bon Homme Richard, they became so close fore and aft,
that the muzzles of their guns muched each others sides. In this position they
engaged from half past eight till half past ten. But before it commenced, the
Bon Homme Richard had received many 18lb. shot between wind and water, and was
become very leaky. Her tier of 12 pounders was entirely silenced and abandoned.
Her six 18 pounders, which were old, were of no service, and were fired but
eight times in all. During the succeeding action, Jones made use only of three
nine pounders, whose fire was seconded by that of his men in the round tops. At
the same time others threw such a quantity and variety of combustible matters
into the decks, chains, and every part of the Serapis, that she was on fire not
less than 10 or 12 times in different parts, and it was with the greatest
difficulty that the same could be extinguished. At half past nine, by some
accident, the Serapis had a cartridge of powder set on fire, the flames of
which communicating from one to another all the way aft, blew up all the people
and officers abaft the main mast, and rendered all those guns useless for the
remainder of the action. When both ships were on fire together, as it happened
at times, the spectacle was dreadful beyc^d expression. The Alliance repeatedly
sailed round both while engaged, raking the Serapis fore and aft, and thereby
killing or wounding many of her men on the quarter and main decks. -- After ten
she came up afre^^ and renewed the fire; but through the darkness of (...)
night, and both ships being so close along side each other, it was not poured
into the Serapis alone, but also i^ to the Bon Homme Richard, eleven of whose
men were killed, beside an officer mortally wounded, by one (...) her
broadsides. Captain Pearson however, perceiv^^ that it was impracticable to
stand out any longer with the least prospect of success, struck, after having
((...) his conduct and persevering bravery) secured to (...) convoy the
opportunity of saving themselves. The Serapis was a much superior ship to the
Bon Homme Richard, being built on an excellent model, and carrying 44 guns in
two tiers, the lower 18 pounders. The number of men killed and wounded on each
side was necessarily great. Both ships suffered much: but the Bon Homme Richard
was reduced to a wreck; she had near seven feet water in her hold, which kept
increasing. The wounded were removed, and only the first lieutenant of the
Pallas, with some men, left (...) board to keep the pumps going, while the
boats w^^ disposed within call to take them in when occasion ^quired. On the
25th the water rose to her lower deck and she went down; but nobody was lost
with her. It still remains to be mentioned, that the Countess of Scarborough
engaged the Pallas for near two hours, when captain Piercy was obliged to
strike. Comm^^dore Jones, with the remains of his flying squadron and prizes,
made for Holland, and on the 3d of October anchored off the Texel.

Sir Joseph York soon applied to their High Mightinesses for the delivering up
the Serapis and Countess of ^^^^though, "which the pirate, Paul Jones of
Scot(...) is a rebel subject, and criminal of the state, (...). The answer was
brief. -- They declared, (...) they will, in no respect whatever, pretend to
(...) of the le^lity or illegality of the actions of those (...), on the open
sea, taken any vessels which do (...) to this country, and bring them into any
of (...) ports of this republic: that they only open their (...) to them to
give them shelter from storms or other (...), and oblige them to put to sea
again with their (...), with out unloading or dispoling of their car^^s, but
letting the ^^^emain exactly as they arrived; (...) that they rare, not
a^^^orized to pass judgment (...) on these prizes, or the person of Paul Jones."

In this and in the following year, 1780, there were (...) a number of combats
of a similar nature, between the British and French, in which such instances
(...) professional skill, courage and dexterity, were con^^ually displayed by
the latter, as had never before apyeared in the marine of that nation.

In the beginning of this summer the British house of commons formed itself
into a committee of inquiry into the American war. Lord How and general How,
^^ung by the charges made against their characters in the public papers,
insisted on an inquiry into the condect of the war, as far as they themselves
were conceived. The ministry strongly opposed this, for a variety of reasons;
one of which was, that government had laid no charge against the noble
brothers; on the contrary, several parts of their conduct had met with its
approbation. The only part of this inquiry, necessity to be taken notice of
here, relates to the northern expedition, and the strange evidence given by
general Robertson and Mr. Galloway, against lord and sir William How.

The situation of general Burgoyne, by the convention of Saratoga, had been
laid down as an insuperable obstacle against any investigation of his conduct.
His continual importunity had given offense, as well as his joining the
opposition in condemning the conduct of ministry; so that it was probable he
would have remained in the most humiliating circumstances of disgrace, had it
not been that the northern expedition w^^ so connected in its consequences with
the operations of the grand army, that they could not be separated in the
course of the inquiry concerning general Howe's conduct. The 20th of May being
fixed upon for entering upon the inquiry, the following officers attended,
(...) Sir Guy Carleton, earl Balcarras, captain Money, acting quarter master
general; earl of Harrington; major Forbes; captain Bloomfield of the artillery;
and lieutenant colonel Kingston, adjutant general; all of whom governor
Carleton excepted, were present during the whole campaign, and eminently
partook of the distreses and disasters attending the northern expedition.

From the unanimous testimony of these very respectable witnesses, it appeared,
that general Burgoyne possessed the confidence and affection of his army, in so
extraordinary a degree, that no loss or misfortune could shake the one, nor
distress or affliction weaken the other. It established an instance, as far as
it could be conclusive, and a close cross-examination was unable (...) weaken
it, perhaps unequalled in military history, that during so long and continued a
scene of unceasing fatigue, hardship, danger, and distress, finally ending is
general ruin and captivity, not a single voice was heart through the whole
army, to upbraid, censure, or blame the general; and that, even at last, when
every effort was found ineffectual, they were still willing to perish along
with him. By this evidence also, every censure or charge which had been laid
against the commander, was totally overthrown or removed; leaving, however, the
question open, whether the general's orders for proceeding to Albany were
peremptory or conditional; and leaving likewise some doubts behind, both with
respect to the design and mode of conducting the expedition, under the command
of colonel Baume, to Bennington. However, it particularly detected two
falsehoods, which till that time had been in full credit; the one that general
Phillips, with a specified part of the army, had offered at the time of the
convention, to ^^ce his way through the enemy from Saratoga back (...)
Ticonderoga, and the other that the late general Fraser had highly disapproved
of the measure of passing Hudson's River. The witnesses, on the contrary, were
of opinion, that nothing less than the passing of that river and advancing to
fight the enemy, could have satified the army, or preserved the general's
character with it; and after all the misfortunes that had happened, it was
still universally considered as a matter of absolute necessity, and to have
done otherwise would have been accounted an unpardonable failure. Their
testimony went likewise to the total subversion of that injurious report,
relative to the supposed natural deficiency of spirit which by some was
attributed to the Americans. On the contrary, they declared freely, that the
Americans showed a resolution, perseverance, and even obstinacy in action,
which rendered them by no means unworthy of a contest with the brave troops who
opposed them. Written evidence was also produced and supported, that the number
of the American army, at the time of the surrender, amounted to 19,000 men, of
which 13,000 or 14,000 were men actually carrying muskets.

The examination of general Burgoyne's witnesses was followed by the counter
evidence of the American minister, against that brought by lord and sir William
How. General Robertson and Mr. Galloway were the only witnesses examined. The
latter had been an American lawyer, and a member of the first congress; and one
of those that had come over to sir William How when the American cause seemed
nearly ruined. The general had immediately afforded him a liberal provision, in
expectation of his future services, (...) which, however, he had been
disappointed. He (...) besides, advanced him to several lucrative as well (...)
honorable civil employments.

The tendency of this new evidence was, in gentry to overthrow that which had
been already given in (...) vour of the two commanders. General Robertson rated
the number of those who were well affected (...) the British government at
three fourths, and Mr. Galloway at four fifths of the whole inhabitants of the
continent. They said that if a proper use had been made of this favorable
disposition of the multitude, a might have been directed to such essential
purposes (...) would have brought the war to a speedy and happy conclusion --
That the force sent out from Britain (...) fully sufficient to have reduced the
colonies -- That the country of America was not in its nature particularly
strong, much less impracticable, with respect to military operations -- That
the face of a country being covered with wood, afforded no impediment to the
march (...) an army in as many columns as they pleased -- That the British
troops possessed a greater superiority over the Americans in their own
favorite mode of bush-fighting, and the detached service in woods, than in any
other whatever -- That armies might carry 19 days provisions on their backs,
and consequently need not be deterred from the undertaking of expeditions,
through the want of those means which have been hitherto reckoned
indispensable, etc.

On this, the opposition from time to time remarked, that the greater part of
those gentlemen's testimony was founded upon hearsay intelligence, and violent
assertions of facts, not only unsupported by collateral evidence, but what
scarce any body could believe. It was also remarked, that the only officer
produced had been very little, if at all, out of the British garrisons, since
the commencement of the war, and was therefore little qualified, either to give
satisfactory information relative to the disposition of the people with whom he
was so little conversant, or to give a critical opinion of military measures he
had never seen. With regard to Mr. Galloway, they said, that it was very
singular, that, though bred a lawyer, and habituated to business, he could
scarcely be brought to recollect any part of his own conduct in the most
trying, signal, and possibly dangerous situation of his life, and the most
conspicuous sphere of action to which he had ever been exalted, namely, when he
was a member of the congress; and yet, that the same person, a total stranger
to the profession, and only flying for refuge to the British army, should all
at once acquire an accuracy in military details, and the complicated business
of a camp, which could scarcely be expected from a quarter master general; and
as suddenly become possessed, along with the minut^e, of that nice discernment
and critical judgment in the general conduct and all the great operations of
war, which the oldest and most experienced commanders do not often pretend to.

The foregoing evidence, given in at the bar of the House of Commons of Great
Britain, may serve as a sample of the information sent to the British ministry,
by their adherents on this side the Atlantic; upon which they were weak enough
to form all their plans for the subjugation of America.

CHAP. XXVI.
Alarming Situation of Britain -- Discontents in Ireland -- Armed neutrality --
Charleston besieged and taken by General Clinton -- New York in Danger -- The
Citi^^^^ armed -- The Americans make an attempt on States (...) and -- The
Academy of Arts and Sciences instituted in Massachusetts -- Clinton's rapid
success in Carolina -- Tarleton defeats Buford -- The action variously related
-- Clinton's Proclamations -- He returns to New York -- Acquaints the British
Minister that South Carolina (...) reduced to Allegiance -- His Delusion in
this respective. The Anniversary of American Independence celebrated at
Philadelphia -- General Sumpter defeats several Royal Datachments -- Lord
Rawdon fixes his Head Quart^^^ at Camden -- Baron Ka^^ arrives in North (...)
with 2000 Continentals -- The South Carolina (...) desert from the British, and
carry off their Offic^^^^ General Gates defeated at Camden -- Tarleton desiring
Sumpter -- Predatory excursions from New York -- Connecticut Farms and
Springfield burnt -- M. Ternay arrives at Rhode Island from France -- The
French (...) blocked up, and the designs of the Allies frustrated -- Arnold's
Treason discovered -- Major Andre suffers as (...) Spy -- The Captors of Andre
rewarded by Congression Arnold's promotion in the British service -- His (...)
to the Inhabitants of America -- Reasons for his dissection -- Colonel Ferguson
defeated and killed -- Decline of the British affairs in South Carolina --
Sumpter defeats Wymes -- Tarleton's unsuccessful attack on Sumpter -- Lishic
joins Cornwallis -- General Green succeeds General Gates in the command.

THE beginning of the year 1780 presented a most alarming appearance to
Britain. Advantage was taken of her peculiar circumstances, by the most
sagacious among the Irish, for the obtaining of those privileges which might
otherwise never have been secured. The doctrines of taxation without
representation, and of unconditional submission, which ministry applied to
America, were urged as matter of apprehension to Ireland; and it was openly
said that the chains (...) for the former, in case of success, would afford a
mode for the setters which would soon be fitted for the latter. Being alarmed
with the danger of a French i^iusion, it was urged, that the defense of the
kingdom ought to he placed in those who had the best interest in it. Military
associations were proposed and universally adopted. In every part of the
kingdom (...) seen to arise, as if by magic, vast bodies of citizen, serving at
their own charges, choosing their own ^^^ers, trained to great expertness, and
obeying with ^^^^able regularity. All this business was accomplished without
any sort of confusion or disorder; (...) the peace of the country, and
obedience to the (...), were never more prevalent. All ranks sell in with the
prevailing disposition. The volunteers were admirably appointed, and amounted
to above 50,000 in number. Government saw these proceedings with astonishment.
They wished to regulate this new and unexpected force, and to bring it to act
under the authority of the crown; but after a few feeble attempts, it was
thought best to concur in a measure that could not be prevented. In a word,
within the two following years, Ireland obtained a free trade, and was
acknowledged to be inseparably annexed to the crown of Great Britain, but
independent of its legislature.

Whilst Great Britain was endeavoring to allay the discontents of Ireland, and
engaged in a war, not only with her revolted colonies, but with the powerful
kingdoms of France and Spain, such a combination was entered into by the
neutral powers, under the title of an Armed Neutrality, as indicated a general
disposition to take up arms in favor of America, should the establishment of
her independence vet remain doubtful. This extraordinary association originated
with the court of Petersburgh, whom the British ministry looked upon as one of
their best allies in the present crisis.

The principles she had adopted for her conduct were, "That neutral ships
should enjoy a free navigation, even from port to port, and on the coasts of
the belligerent powers. That all effects belonging to the belligerent powers,
should be looked on as free (...) such neutral ships, with an exception of
places actually blocked up or besieged, and with a promise that they do not
carry to the enemy contraband articles." These were limited by an explanation,
so as to "comprehend only warlike stores and ammunition." Her imperial majesty
declared that "she was fully resolved to maintain these principles, and that
with the view of protecting the commerce and navigation of her subjects, she
had given orders to fit out a considerable part of her naval force."

The declaration of the empress on this occasion would, in other circumstances,
have been considered as a declaration of war. At present, however, the court of
London, standing alone and unsupported, was obliged to submit. The proposals of
the empress were acceded to not only without the least hesitation, but with the
utmost applause of her justice and wisdom, by all the other powers of Europe to
whom they were presented, Portugal alone excepted.

Though the powerful combination in favor of the Americans, of which this
armed neutrality might be considered as a principal part, rendered the contest
with them ultimately hopeless on the part of Great Britain, the war was
nevertheless kept up with equal spirit by her commanders, and the same delusive
hopes of success were held out by her ministry.

Accordingly the conquest of the southern colonies was now looked upon as an
object within reach, and for this purpose an expedition was undertaken by sir
Henry Canton and admiral Arbuthnot, for which the ^ate of general Washington's
army was peculiarly favorable. His auxiliaries had already left him; the term
of inlistment of a great number of continental soldiers was expired; and the
filling up of the regiments, by waiting for recruits from their respective
states, must necessarily be a work of considerable time. The expedition,
however, was not undertake^ till the 26th of December, 1779. They had a very
tedious voyage; the weather was uncommonly bad; several of the transports were
lost, as were also the greater part of the horses which they carried with them,
intended for cavalry or other public uses; and an ordnance ship likewise
foundered at sea. Having arrived at Savannah, in the end of January 1780, they
endeavored to repair the damages sustained on their voyage, Feb. 10.
and proceeded from thence on the 10th of February, to North Edisto, the place
of debarkation which had been previously appointed. They had a favorable and
speedy passage thither: and though it required time to have the bar explored
and the channel marked, the transports all entered the harbor the next day;
and the army took possession of St. John's island, about 30 miles from
Charleston, without opposition. Preparations were then made for passing the
squadron over Charleston bar, where the high water spring tides were only 19
feet deep: but no opportunity offered of going into the harbor till the 20th
of March, March 20.
when it was effected without any accident, though the American galleys
continually attempted to prevent the boats from sounding the channel. The
British troops had previously removed from John's to James's island; and on the
29th of the same month they effected their landing on Charleston neck. April 1.
On the 1st of April they broke ground within 800 yards of the American works;
and by the 8th the besiegers' guns were mounted in battery.

As soon as the army began to erect their batteries against the town, admiral
Arbuthnot embraced the first favorable opportunity of passing Sullivan's
island, upon which there was a strong fort of batteries, the chief defense of
the harbor. He weighed on the 9th, with the Roebuck, Richmond, and Romulus,
blonde, Virginia, Raleigh, and Sandwich armed ship, the Renown bringing up the
rear; and, passing through a severe fire, anchored in about two hours under
James's island, with the loss of 27 seamen killed and wounded. The Richmond's
fore topmast was shot away, and the ships in general sustained damage in their
masts and rigging, though not materially in their hulls. But the Acetus
transport, having on board some naval stores, grounded within gun shot of
Sullivan's island and received so much damage that she was obliged to be
abandoned and burnt.

On the 10th, sir Henry Clinton and admiral Arbuthnot summoned the town to
surrender to his majesty's arms; April 10.
but major general Lincoln, who commanded in Charleston, returned them an
answer, declaring it to be his intention to defend the place. The batteries
were now opened against the town; and from their effect the fire of the
American advanced works considerably abated. It appears that the number of
troops under the command of Lincoln were by far too few for defending works of
such extent as those of Charleston; and that many of these were men little
accustomed to military service, and very ill provided with clothes and other
necessaries. Lincoln had been for some time expecting reinforcements and
supplies from Virginia and other places: but they came in very slowly. Earl
Cornwallis, and lieutenant colonel Tarleton under him, were also extremely
active in intercepting such reinforcements and supplies as were sent to the
American general. They totally defeated a considerable body of cavalry and
militia which was proceeding to the relief of the town; and also made
themselves masters of some posts which gave them in a great degree the command
of the country, by which means great supplies of provisions fell into their
hands.

Such was the state of things, and Fort Sullivan had also been taken by the
king's troops, when on the 11th of May general Clinton again summoned the town
to surrender; May 11.
an offer being made, as had been done before, that if they surrendered, the
lives and property of the inhabitants should be preserved to them. Articles of
capitulation were then proposed by general Lincoln; but the terms were not
agreed to by general Clinton. At length, however, the town being closely
invested on all sides, and the preparations to storm it in every part being in
great forwardness, and the ships ready to move to the assault, general Lincoln,
who had been applied to for that purpose by the inhabitants, surrendered it on
such articles of capitulation as general Clinton had before agreed to. This was
on the 12th of May, which was one month and two days after the town had been
first summoned to surrender.

By the articles of capitulation, the garrison was to march out of town, and to
deposit their arms in front of the works, but the drums were not to beat a
British march, nor the colors to be uncased. The continental troops and seamen
were to keep their baggage, and remain prisoners of war till exchanged. The
militia and inhabitants of all conditions were to be considered as prisoners on
parole, and while they adhered to their parole, were not to be molested in
person or property. The militia were permitted to return to their respective
homes. The officers of the army and navy were to retain their servants, swords,
pistols, and baggage unsearched. They were permitted to sell their horses, but
not to remove them: and a vessel was allowed to proceed to Philadelphia with
general Lincoln's dispatches unopened.

According to sir Henry Clinton's account, the number of prisoners taken in
Charleston amounted to 5600 men, besides nearly a thousand sailors in arms; but
according to general Lincoln's account transmitted to the congress, the whole
number of continental troops taken prisoners amounted to no more than 2487. The
remainder, therefore, included in general Clinton's account, must have
consisted of militia and inhabitants of the town. The captive officers were
much more in proportion than the privates, and consisted of 1 major general, 6
brigadiers, 9 colonels, 14 lieutenant colonels, 15 majors, 84 captains, 84
lieutenants, 32 second lieutenants and ensigns. Upwards of 400 pieces of
artillery, together with arms and ammunition, were found in Charleston. Several
American frigates were also taken or destroyed in the harbor.

The loss of Charleston evidently excited a considerable alarm in America: and
several popular writers, particularly the author of the celebrated performance
entitled Common Sense, in some other pieces made use of it as a powerful
argument to lead them to more vigorous exertions against Great Britain, that
they might the more effectually and certainly secure their independence.

Whilst sir Henry Clinton was employed in his voyage to Charleston, and in the
siege of that place, the garrison at New York seem not to have been wholly free
from apprehensions for their own safety. An intense frost, accompanied with
great falls of snow, began about the middle of December 1779, and shut up the
navigation of the port of New York from the sea, within a few days after the
departure of admiral Arbuthnot and general Clinton. The severity of the weather
increased to so great a degree, that toward the middle of January all
communications with New York by water were entirely cut off, and as many new
ones opened by the ice. The inhabitants could scarcely be said to be in an
insular state. Horses with heavy carriages could go over the ice into the
Jersies from one island to another. The passage on the North River, even in the
widest part from New York to Paulus Hook, which was 2000 yards, was about the
19th of January practicable for the heaviest cannon: an event which had been
unknown in the memory of man. Provisions were soon after transported upon
sledges, and a detachment of cavalry marched upon the ice from New York to
Staten Island, which was a distance of 11 miles.

The city of New York being thus circumstanced, was considered as much exposed
to the attacks from the continental troops: and it was strongly reported that
general Washington was meditating a great stroke upon New York with his whole
force, by different attacks. Some time before this, major general Pattison,
commandant at New York, having received an address from many of the
inhabitants, offering to put themselves in military array, he thought the
present a favorable opportunity of trying the sincerity of their professions.
Accordingly he issued a proclamation, calling upon all the male inhabitants
from 16 to 60 to take up arms. The requisition was so readily complied with,
that in a few days 40 companies from the six wards of the city were enrolled,
officered, and under arms, to the number of 2600, many substantial citizens
serving in the ranks of each company. Other volunteer companies were formed;
and the city was put into a very strong posture of defense.

No attack, however, was made upon New York, whatever design might originally
have been meditated; but an attempt was made upon Staten Island, where there
were about 1800 men, under the command of brigadier general Sterling, who were
well entrenched. General Washington, whose army was hutted at Morris Town, sent
a detachment of 2700 men, with six pieces of cannon, two mortars, and some
horses, commanded by lord Sterling, who arrived at Staten Island early in the
morning of the 15th of January. The advanced posts of the British troops
retired upon the approach of the Americans, who formed the line, and made some
movements in the course of the day; but they withdrew in the night, after
having burnt one house, pillaged some others, and carried off with them about
200 head of cattle. Immediately on the arrival of the Americans on Staten
Island, lieutenant general Knyphausen had embarked 600 men to attempt a
passage, and to support general Sterling; but the floating ice compelled them
to return. It is, however, imagined, that the appearance of these transports,
with the British troops on board, which the Americans could see toward the
close of the day, induced the latter to make so precipitate a retreat.

In the mean time the ravages of war did not prevent the Americans from paying
some attention to the arts of peace. On the 4th of May an act was passed by the
council and house of representatives of Massachusetts Bay for incorporating and
establishing a society for promoting the knowledge of the antiquities of
America, and of the national history of the country; for determining the uses
to which its various natural productions might be applied, for encouraging
medicinal discoveries; mathematical disquisitions; philosophical inquiries and
xperiments; astronomical, meteorological, and geographical observations;
improvements in agriculture, manufactures, and commerce; and in short, for
cultivating every art and science which may tend to advance the interest,
honor, dignity, and happiness of a free, independent, and virtuous people.

Some doubts having arisen in the congress, toward ^he close of the preceding
year, about the propriety of their assembling in the city of Philadelphia, it
was now resolved that they should continue to meet there: and a committee of
three members was appointed, to report a proper place where buildings might be
provided for the reception of the congress, together with an estimate of the
expense of providing such buildings, and the necessary offices for the several
boards. It was also resolved by the congress, that a monument should be erected
to the memory of their late general Richard Montgom^ry, who fell at Quebeck, in
testimony of his signal and important services to the United States of America,
with an inscription expressive of his amiable character and heroic
achievements; and that the continental treasmers should be directed to advance
a sum not exceeding L.300 to Dr. Franklin to defray the expense; that gentleman
being desired to cause the monument to be executed at Paris, or in some other
part of France. It was likewise resolved by the congress, that a court should
be established for the trial of all appeals from the court of admiralty of the
United States of America, in cases of capture; to consist of three judges,
appointed and commissioned by congress, and who were to take an oath of office;
and that the trials in this court should be determined by the usage of nations.

The difficulties of the congress and of the people of America had been greatly
increased by the depreciation of their paper currency. At the time when (...)
colonies engaged in a war with Great Britain, the^ had no regular civil
governments established am^^^ them of sufficient energy to enforce the
collection (...) taxes, or to provide funds for the redemption of such bills of
credit as their necessities obliged them to (...). In consequence of this state
of things, their bills (...) creased in quantity far beyond the sum necessary
for the purpose of a criculating medium: and as (...) wanted at the same time
specific funds to rest on (...) their redemption, they saw their paper currency
(...) sink in value. The depreciation continued, by a (...) of gradual
progression, from the year 1777 to 17^^ so that, at the latter period, the
continental dollar were passed, by common consent, in most parts (...) America,
at the rate of at least 39/40ths below their (...) inal value. The
impossibility of keeping up the (...) of the currency to any fixed standard,
occasioned (...) and almost insurmountable embarrassments in acertaining the
value of property, or carrying on (...) with any sufficient certainty. Those
who sold, (...) those who bought, were left without a rule where^ to form a
judgment of their profit or their loss; and every species of commerce or
exchange, whether foreign or domestic, was exposed to numberless and increasing
difficulties. The consequences of the depreciation of the paper currency were
also felt with peculiar severity by such of the Americans as were engaged in
their military services, and greatly augmented their other hardships. The
requisitions made by the congress to the several colonies for supplies, were
(...) far from being always regularly complied with: and their troops were not
unfrequently in want of the most ^^^mon necessaries; which naturally occasioned
complaints and discontent among them. Some of these ^^^culties, resulting from
their circumstances and sit^^tion, perhaps no wisdom could have prevented: but
they seem to have arisen in part from the congress not being sufficiently
acquainted with the principles of finance, and from a defect of system in the
departments of their government. The cause of the Americans appears also to
have suffered somewhat by their ^^ending too much on temporary enlistments. But
(...) congress endeavored, toward the close of the year 1780, to put their
army upon a more permanent ^^^^ing, and to give all the satisfaction to their
officers (...) soldiers which their circumstances would per^^it. They appointed
a committee for arranging their ^^ances, and made some new regulations
respecting the war-office and treasury-board, and other public departments.

Sir Henry Clinton met with the most rapid success every where in Carolina,
after the reduction of Charles^^^. Lord Cornwallis, whilst he marched up the
north side of the river Santee, received intelligence that there were some
Virginian troops, under the command of colonel Buford, near the borders of
South Carolina. He therefore detached colonel Tarleton with 700 light cavalry,
and a new corpse of infantry called the Legion, mounted on horseback, in order
to rout and disperse that body, before it could receive any reinforcement from
the neighboring colonies. The Americans, confiding in their distance from the
enemy, had been at no pains to choose a proper situation. Colonel Tarleton,
having marched 105 miles in 54 hours, presented himself suddenly and
unexpectedly before them at a place called Waxsau. May 29.
But although they were surprised and dispirited, they positively refused the
offer of the British commander to surrender on the same terms with the garrison
of Charleston. An engagement therefore ensued, in which the provincials, though
superior in number, made but a faint defense; above 100 (...) killed on the
spot, and 150 so badly wounded (...) they were unable to travel, and about 50
were brought away prisoners. Their colors, baggage, with the remains of the
artillery of the southern army, fell (...) the hands of the conquerors. This
action is vatio^^^^ related. Doctor Gordon observes, in his history, that,
whilst the flags were passing and repassing concerning a surrender, "Tarleton
kept his men in motion, and when the truce was ended, had nearly surrounded his
adversaries." The continental party made but a stable resistance, "and soon
begged quarter. A few, however, continued to fire. The British cavalry
advanced, but were not opposed by the main body of the continentais, who
conceived themselves precluded by their submission. The accidental firing of a
few was an argument, however, for directing the British legion to charge those
who had laid down their arms. In consequence of this order, the unresisting
Americans, praying for quarters, were chopped in pieces."

Whatever may have been the attending circumstances of this action, sir Henry
Clinton conceived it as entirely decisive of the fate of South Carolina.

Accordingly he issued two proclamations, and also circulated a hand-bill
amongst the inhabitants of South Carolina, in order to induce them to return to
their allegiance, and to be ready to join the king's troops. It was said, that
the helping hand of every man was wanted to re-establish peace and good
government: and that as the commander in chief wished not to draw the king's
friends into danger, whilst any doubt could remain of their success; so, now,
that this was certain, he trusted that one and all would heartily join, and by
a general concurrence give effect to such necessary measures for that purpose
as from time to time might be pointed out. Those who had families were to form
a militia to remain at home, and occasionally to assemble in their own
districts, when required, under officers of their own choosing, for the
maintenance of peace and good order. Those who had no families, and who could
conveniently be spared for a time, it was presumed, would cheerfully assist his
majesty's ^oops in driving their oppressors, acting under the authority of
congress, and all the miseries of war, far from that colony. For this purpose
it was said to be necessary that the young men should be ready to assemble when
required, and to serve with the king's troops for any six months of the ensuing
twelve that might be found requisite, under proper regulations. They ^^ight
choose officers to each company to command them; and were to be allowed, when
on service, pay, ^^munition, and provisions, in the same manner as the king's
troops. When they joined the army, each man was to be furnished with a
certificate, declaring that he was only engaged to serve as a militia-man for
the time specified; that he was not to be marched beyond North Carolina and
Georgia; and that, when the time was out, he was freed from all claims whatever
of military service, excepting the common and usual militia-duty where he
lived. He would then, it was said, have paid his debt to his country, and be
entitled to enjoy undisturbed that peace, liberty, and property, at home, which
he had contributed to secure. The proclamations and publications of general
Clinton appear to have produced some effect in South Carolina; though they
probably operated chiefly upon those who were before not much inclined to the
cause of American independence. Two hundred and ten of the inhabitants of
Charleston signed an address to general Clinton and admiral Arbuthnot,
soliciting to be readmitted to the character and condition of British
subjects, the inhabitants of that city having been hitherto considered as
prisoners on parole; declaring their disapprobation of the doctrine of American
independence; and expressing their regret, that after the repeal of those
statutes which gave rise to the troubles in America, the overtures made by his
majesty's commissioners had not been regarded by the congress. Sir Henry
Clinton, in one of the proclamations issued at this time, declared, that if any
persons should thenceforward appear in arms in order to prevent the
establishment of his majesty's government in that country, or should, under any
pre^^^ce or authority whatsoever, attempt to compel any other person or persons
to do so, or who should hinder or intimidate the king's faithful and loyal
subjects from joining his forces, or otherwise performing those duties their
allegiance required, such persons should be treated with the utmost severity,
and their estates be immediately seized in order to be confiscated.

The British commander, amusing himself with these flattering prospects,
thought of returning to New York, to which he was likewise induced by
intelligence he had received that a French fleet commanded by M. de Fernay,
with a number of land forces, might soon be expectation the American coast. He
embarked early in June, leaving lord Cornwallis with about four thousand troops
for the southern service. On his return to New York, he acquainted the American
minister that there were very few in the province who were not either prisoners
to, or in arms with the British forces; and he exulted in the number of those
who came in from every quarter to testify their allegiance, to offer their
services in support of his majesty's government, and who in many instances had
brought as prisoners their former oppressors or leaders.

Notwithstanding these positive assertions, and the flattering appearances of
loyalty in South Carolina, at the time of Sir Henry's departure from thence, it
soon became obvious, that many of the inhabitants were so little satisfied with
their present government, that they endeavored to dispose of their property on
the best terms they could obtain, and totally to abandon the country. This
conduct became so frequent and glaring, that lord Cor^^allis thought proper to
issue a proclamation, strictly forbidding all sales and transfers of property,
including even negroes, without a license first obtained from the commandant of
Charleston; and likewise forbidding all masters of vessels from carrying any
persons whatever, whether black or white, out of the colony, without a written
passport from the same officer.

Notwithstanding the disadvantages under which they labored, the Americans
seemed to entertain no doubts but that they should be able to maintain their
independency. The 4th of July was celebrated this year at Philadelphia with
some pomp, as the anniversary of American independence. A commencement for
conferring degrees in the arts was held the same day, in the hall of the
university there; at which the president and members of the congress attended,
and other persons in public offices. The chevalier de la Luzerne, minister
plenipotentiary from the French king to the United States, was also present on
the occasion. A charge was publicly addressed by the provost of the university
to the students; in which he said, that he could not but congratulate them "on
that auspicious day, which, amidst the confusions and desolations of war,
beheld learning beginning to revive; and animated them with the pleasing
prospect of seeing the sacred lamp of science burning with a still brighter
flame, and scattering its invigorating rays over the unexplored deserts of this
extensive continent; until the whole world should be involved in the united
blaze of knowledge, liberty, and religion. When he stretched his views forward,
(he said) and surveyed the rising glories of America, the enriching
consequences of their determined struggle for liberty, the extensive fields of
intellectual improvement and useful invention, in science and arts, in
agriculture and commerce, in religion and government, through which the
unfettered mind would range, with increasing delight, in quest of the
undiscovered treasure which yet lay concealed in the animal, vegetable, and
mineral kingdoms of the new world; or in the other fertile sources of knowledge
with which it abounded, -- his heart swelled with the pleasing prospect, that
the sons of that institution would distinguish themselves, in the different
walks of life, by their literary contributions to the embellishments and
increase of human happiness."

The first effort the Americans made in South Carolina, after the fall of
Charleston, was in the middle of July, when 133 of colonel Sumpter's corpse
attacked and routed a detachment of the royal forces and militia, July 12.
which were posted in a lane at Williamson's plantation. This was the first
advantage gained over the British since their landing in the province, in the
beginning of the year. In a few days after, troops joining colonel Sumpter with
great al^^rity, from the northernmost frontier, and being now at the head of
600 men, he made a spirited attack on a party of the British at Rocky Mount,
but, having no artillery, he was forced to retreat. This active partizan,
sensible that he could not keep the militia together without employing them,
attacked another royal detachment, consisting of the prince of Wales' regiment,
and a large body of tories under colonel Byran, posted at Hanging Rock, whom he
almost totally destroyed; the above regiment being reduced from 278 men to 9;
and the remainder of the loyalists in that quarter were dispersed.

In the mean time the part of the British army destined to active service was
advanced toward the frontiers under the command of lord Rawdon, who fixed his
headquarters at the town of Camden. The advantageous situation of that place
on the great river Santee, which afforded an easy communication with several
remote parts of the country, induced lord Cornwallis not only to make it a
place of arms, but a general store house or repository for the army in its
intended operations. He likewise spared no pains in arming and embodying the
militia of the province, and in raising new military corpse, under well affected
leaders.

But, during these transactions, a great change in the aspect of affairs took
place in North Carolina. Besides the suppression of the loyalists, who were
treated with little mercy, baron de Kalb, a German, long an officer in the
French service, and now a major general in the American army, arrived in that
province with 2000 continental troops, and was followed by some bodies of
militia from Virginia. The governors of the state were likewise indefatigable
in their exertions and preparations, at least for defense if not for conquest.
Troops were raised, and the militia every where drawn out; and besides colonel
Sumpter, Rutherford, Caswell and other leaders, advanced to the frontiers, at
the head of different bodies. Skirmishes took place on all sides with various
fortune; and the provincials became so strong that lord Rawdon was obliged to
contract his posts.

It soon appeared that sir Henry Clinton's idea of the loyalty of South
Carolina was a delusion; and that nothing could deter the inhabitants from
adhering to the cause of congress, whenever an opportunity offered. The people,
tired of the war, had submitted to the British government with the expectation
of bettering their condition, but they soon found their mistake; the officers,
privates, and followers of the royal army being more intent upon raising their
fortunes by plunder, than in acquiring the affections of the people whom they
had conquered. Accordingly, as the provincials increased in strength, and
approached nearer, numbers of those who had submitted to the British
government, and others who were on parole, abandoned and hazarded all things,
in order to join them. Colonel Lisle, who had exchanged his parcle for a
certificate of being a good subject, carried off a whole battalion of militia,
which had been raised (...) another gentleman for lord Cornwallis, to join
colonel Sumpter. Another battalion, who were appointed (...) conduct about 100
sick down the Pedee to George town, seized their own officers, and carried them
with the sick, all prisoners to the provincial camp.

General Gates was now in North Carolina to take the command of the southern
army. I^ the second week of August, August.
earl Cornwallis having received intelligence at Charleston, that Gates was
advancing with his army, and that Sumpter was endeavoring to cut off the
communication between that city and the army; that the whole country between
the Pedee and the Black River had revolted; and that lord Rawdon was collecting
his whole force at Camden -- he immediately set off set that place. On his
arrival he had no small difficulties to encounter. Gates was at hand with a
great superiority of force; and the position of Camden, convenient in other
respects, was a bad situation for an attack. He could indeed have made good his
retreat to Charleston, but he must have left 800 sick men and a vast quantity
of valuable stores to fall into the hands of the provincials. He likewise
foresaw, that excepting Charleston and Savannah, a retreat would occasion the
lose of the two provinces of Carolina and Georgia. In his own words, there was
"little to lose by a defeat, and much to gain by a victory." The intelligence
which he had received that general Gates was encamped in a bad situation at
Clermont about 13 miles from Camden, no doubt con^irmed his determination. He
accordingly marched from Camden about 10 o'clock at night with an intention to
surprise general Gates; August 15.
and making his dispositions in such a manner, as that his best troops and
greatest force should be directed against the continental regiments, laying
little stress on the militia, if these were sufficiently provided against.

It was very singular that the very same hour at which lord Cornwallis set out
from Camden to surprise general Gates, that general, ignorant of Cornwallis'
arrival at Camden, should set out from Clermont to surprise him. About half an
hour after two in the morning, August 16.
the advanced parties of both armies met in the woods, and a siring commenced.
Some of the cavalry of Armand's legion wounded by the first fire of the enemy,
threw others into disorder, and the whole recoiled so suddenly, that the first
Maryland regiment, in the front of the column, was broken, and the whole line
of the army thrown into a general consternation. This first impression struck
deep. The light infantry, however, executed their orders; particularly those
under colonel Pottersfield, who behaved with such spirit, that the enemy was no
less surprised at this unexpected meeting. A few prisoners were taken on both
sides, by whose information the respective commanders derived a knowledge of
circumstances, of which both till then were ignorant. Colonel Pottersfield, in
whose abilities and activity Gates had placed great dependence, received a
musket-ball which shattered the bones of his leg, in this first encounter. The
American army soon recovered its order. Cornwallis also kept his ground; and
frequent skirmishes ensued, with scarcely any other effect than to discover the
situation of the armies, to evince the intention of the generals, and to serve
as a prelude to what was to occur in the morning.

The action began at break of day, in a situation very advantageous for the
British troops, but very unfavourable to the Americans. The latter were much
more numerous; but the ground on which both armies stood was narrowed by swamps
on the right and left, so that the Americans could not properly avail
themselves of their superio^ numbers. There seems to have been some want of
generalship in Gates, in suffering himself to be surprised in so
disadvantageous a position; but this circumstance was the effect of accident,
as has been already related.

The attack was made by the British troops with great vigor, and in a few
minutes the action was general along the whole line. It was at this time a dead
calm, with a little haziness in the air, which, preventing the smoke from
rising, occasioned so thick a darkness, that it was difficult to see the effect
of a very heavy and well-supported fire on both sides. The British troops
either kept up a constant fire, or made use of bayonets, as opportunities
offered; and after an obstinate resistance during three quarters of an hour,
threw the Americans into total confusion, and forced them to give way in all
quarters. The continental troops behaved remarkably well, but the militia were
soon broken, and left the former to oppose the whole force of the British
troops. General Gates did all in his power to rally the militia, but without
effect: the continentals retreated in some order; but the rout of the militia
was so great, that the British cavalry are said to have continued the pursuit
of them to the distance of 22 miles from the place where the action happened.
The loss of the Americans was very considerable; about 1,000 prisoners were
taken, and more are said to have been killed and wounded, but the number is not
very accurately ascertained. Eight pieces of brass cannon, 2,000 stand of arms,
a number of colors, and all the ammunition wagons of the Americans, were also
taken. Of the British troops, the killed and wounded amounted to 324. Among the
prisoners taken was major general baron de Kalb, who was mortally wounded,
having exhibited great gallantry in the course of the action, and received 11
wounds. Besides baron de Kalb, the Americans lost several other officers, among
whom were brigadier general Gregory killed, and general Rutherford taken. The
British troops by which this victory was achieved, did not much exceed 2,000,
while the American army is said to have amounted to 6,000; of which, however,
the greatest part was militia.

Lieutenant colonel Tarleton, who had greatly distinguished himself in this
action, was detached the following day, Aug. 17.
with some cavalry and light infantry, amounting to about 350 men, to attack a
corpse of Americans under general Sumpter. He executed this service with great
activity and military address. He procured good information of Sumpter's
movements; and by forced and concealed marches came up with and surprised him
in the middle of the day on the 18th, near the Catawba fords. He totally
destroyed or dispersed his detachment, which consisted of 700 men, killing 150
on the spot, and taking two pieces of brass cannon, 300 prisoners, and 44
wagons.

Whilst the military operations already related were going on in the southern
colonies, the hostile armies on the side of New York were so nearly poised that
no great exploits could be performed on either side.

Meanwhile the refugees were grown so numerous, that, through some mistaken
p^^^^y, they were permi^ted to set up a distinct government in New York under
the name of "The Honorable Board of Associated Loyalists;" and this board was
said to be authorized by the British legislature: But, be it as it will, as
these refugees had a common stock and their infant excursions at sea proved
extremely successful, they became every day more powerful, and possessed
something like a fleet of small privateers and cruisers. Their knowledge of the
adjoining coasts afforded them such advantages, that they generally proved
successful in their enterprises; but their want of any kind of discipline or
government, along with their peculiar, and frequently personal animosity,
leading them to excess, produced retaliation on the other side, so that the war
was carried on with unrelenting cruelty on both sides, without the least
tendency to conquest or reconciliation.

A few days before the arrival of sir Henry Clinton from Charleston, the
generals Knyphausen, Robertson, and Tryon, passed over by night with 5,000 men
from Staten Island in New Jersey, June 6.
with a view of attacking some of general Washington's out posts. On the
following morning, though severely harassed in their march by the militia, they
proceeded to Connecticut Farms. This new and thriving settlement was burnt,
together with the Presbyterian meeting house in that place. Whilst the royal
forces were on their way into the country, a soldier went to the house of Mr.
C^^^^ell, a clergyman, and, in his absence, shot his wife instantly dead, by
levelling his piece directly at her through the window of the room, in which
she was sitting with her children. This individual act of cr^^lty, justly
excited the loudest complaint. The detachment next proceeded to Springfield. On
approaching the bridge in front of the town, they were farther opposed by
general Maxwell, who, with a few continental troops, disputed their passage.
They halted till midnight, and then retreated to Elizabeth Town. Before they
had retreated, the whole American army at Morris Town marched to oppose them.
Whilst this royal detachment was in Jersey, sir Henry Clinton had returned to
New York, and having sent a reinforcement to Knyphausen, the whole advanced a
second time to Springfield. They were now opposed by general Green, with a
considerable body of continental troops. Colonel Angel, with 170 men and a
piece of artillery, defended the bridge with great gallantry, against a vast
superiority of force, and though obliged at last to give way, found means to
carry off his wounded, though nearly one fourth of the whole corpse were by this
time killed or disabled: the British troops having suffered more in this
trifling affair than can be imagined.

At this time general Green lay about a mile above Springfield; but his troops
were so divided that he could not make any detachment sufficient for the relief
of colonel Angel, without hazarding the security of the post he himself
occupied, and which was of much greater importance. The British troops,
therefore, having met with so unexpected a check from the handful of men at the
bridge, did not venture to attack Green, but closed their expedition with
burning the town of Springfield. The royal forces then retreated, but were
pursued by the enraged militia till they entered Elizabeth Town, and next day
they set out on their return to New York.

The event of this short campaign in the Jersies showed, more than any thing
that had yet happened, the utter impossibility of reducing the Americans by
force of arms. It was now evident that the British forces, had an enemy in the
field little less respectable than themselves; and that all the superiority in
arms, which had produced such effects in the beginning of the co^test, was, in
a great measure at an end; nor did general Washington fail to show the greatest
exultation i^ the public orders given by him afterward, on the effects of the
improvements in discipline he had already made, and the greater which he still
hoped.

During the course of the summer, the Americans were farther encouraged by the
return of the marqui^ de la Fayette from France, whither he had gone sometime
before. His early engagement, his great and unremitting zeal in the American
service, in which he held a high rank, and his successful application to the
court of France, caused him to be received with great distinction by general
Washington, who gave him a letter to Congress full of the most flattering
en^^miums.

The arrival of M. de Ternay at Rhode Island, seemed likely to decide matters
at once in favor of America. July 10.
He had along with him a squadron of seven sail of the line, five frigates, and
five smaller armed vessels. His own ship ^e due de Bugogne carried 84 guns and
1,200 men. He likewise brought with him a fleet of transports with five old
French regiments, and a battalion of artillery, amounting in all to 6,000 men,
under the conduct of lieutenant general the count de Rochambeau. They were
received by major general Heath, who, for the security of the troops and
squadron against (...) attempt from New York, put them in possession if the
numerous forts and batteries of the island, which, with the industry peculiar
to the Americans, they soon put in a strong state of defense.

The American commander, in order to prevent any ^^ousies or contests from
arising between the two nation, which had formerly arisen to an alarming height
(...) at Boston and Charlestown, issued a requisition in (...) orders, to the
American officers, soliciting and ^^^gly recommending to them to wear black and
white cockades, the ground of the former and the relief of the latter color;
as a compliment and sym^^l of affection to their generous and magnanimous
(...). There were now indeed the greatest hopes (...) matters would be speedily
decided; for as ad^^^al Arbuthnot had only four fail of the line at New York,
he was by no means able to cope with the French squadron; but, on the contrary,
in expectation of being himself attacked by them. This inseriority, however,
was reversed in three days, by the arrival of admiral Greaves with six sail of
the line. July 13.


Sir Henry Clinton and admiral Arbuthnot now formed the design of a joint
attack on the French sleet and troops at Rhode Island. Accordingly, a
considerable part of the troops at New York were embarked for that purpose.
General Washington having received information of this, passed the North River,
by a very rapid movement, and with an army increased to 12,000 men, proceeded
with celerity toward King's Bridge, in order to attack New York; whilst 10,000
militia and six month's men were suddenly in arms, upon the first report of the
design, and marched toward Providence; but learning that the British general
had changed his intentions, and disembarked his troops on the 31st of the
month, general Washington re-crossed the river and returned to his former
station. Sir Henry Clinton and the admiral had agreed to relinquish their
design of attacking the allies at Rh^de Island as impracticable for the present.

The French fleet and army, blocked up at Rhode I^. and, were incapacitated
from cooperating with (...) Americans. Hopes were nevertheless entertained
(...) another fleet of his most Christian majesty, under (...) command of count
de Guichen, then in the West Indies, would, on its arrival enable the allies to
prosec^^^ their original design on New York. In consequence of these grand
ideas, a number of preparations (...) made for a winter expedition to Canada,
under the marquis de la Fayette. That officer according published a prefatory
memorial, calling upon (...) French Canadians by all the ancient ties of blood,
(...) ion and country, as well as by the natural and ferv^^^ desire of
recovering their own freedom, to be ready (...) assist him upon his arrival
among them. The univer^^ expectation of such grand objects being accomplished,
raised the military ardour of the people to such a pit^^ that general
Washington's army was suddenly ^^^mented to 20,000 men, and all ranks were
ready (...) share with their French allies, the honor and profit of finally
overthrowing the British power by the capture of New York. These vast
expectations however we^^ suddenly disappointed by the departure of the French
fleet under M. de Guichen. This step was rendered absolutely necessary by the
sickness which raged (...) board the fleet, and the great loss of men sustained
is various, though indecisive, engagements they had with the British fleet; at
the same time, it was not by any means proper that their real situation should
be known. The French admiral, therefore, taking the opportunity of convoying a
large fleet from the West Indies, sailed (...), leaving his allies in eager
expectation of his ^^turn to accomplish their grand design on New York.

Nothing ever proved more galling to the Americans (...) this disappointment.
Even general Washington, (...) remarkable for his prudence and equanimity, is
said (...) have lost his temper on this occasion. All the views (...) France
and America, with respect to the campaign, (...) now finally given up, whilst
the force sent to (...) Island was reduced to act on the defensive as a (...)
garrison, being kept closely blocked up by the ad^^als Arbuthnot and Greaves.
On the departure of (...) Guichen, sir George Rodney, who had been sta^^ed at
St. Lucia, sailed from thence with a view to save the naval force at New York
and Rhode Island; (...). 14.
but, though he found his care in this respect useless, his removal from (...)
station was the means of preserving his fleet from (...) dreadful hurricane
which soon after desolated (...) of the West India islands. No attempt being
^^ade, after the arrival of admiral Rodney, to profit by (...) present naval
superiority, gave occasion to much ^^icism on the conduct of the present
commanders as (...) those who had preceded them.

During the apparent calm and a sort of tacit cessa^^^ of hostilities in
America, general Washington set (...) with his suite, general Knox and the
marquis de la Payette, to meet count de Rochambeau and admiral Ternay at
Hartford, to concert the future operations of the war. General Washington in
his conference with the count stated the army, Sept. 21.
in the quarter he commanded, for the next campaign at 15,000 operative
continental troops. On the idea of this number, a memorial, with a plan of the
next campaign, was transmitted to the court of France. During the general's
absence, a discovery of the utmost importance had been made, viz. a scheme for
delivering up West Point into the hands of sir Henry Cli^^ton. Means had been
found to detach major general Arnold, who had engaged so ardently in the cause
(...) America, and who had exhibited so much bravery i^ the support of it, from
the interests of Congress.

The departure of M. de Guichen with the French fleet having overthrown all
schemes of carrying on (...) offensive war for the present season, general
Washington stationed his army, for the winter, in some str^^ holds in the high
lands on both sides of the North ^^^er, where its situation afforded an
opportunity (...) watching the motions of the British forces, and of repressing
the incursions from New York. In this ^^rangement of the American forces, the
strong post of West Point, called the Gibralter of America, was (...) trusted
to the care of general Arnold, at his own ^^quest. It was built after the loss
of Fort Montgom^^ for the defense of the North River, and to preserve (...)
communication between the southern and eastern state.

It was likewise the repository of their most valu^^ stores. And by reason of
rocky ridges rising one ^^hind another, it was incapable of being invested
(...) less than twenty thousand men. Though some eve^ then entertained doubts
of Arnold's fidelity, yet general Washington, in the unsuspecting spirit of a
sold^^ believing it to be impossible that honor could be wa^^ing in a breast
which he knew was the seat of va^^^, readily entrusted him with the important
post.

The agent employed in this negotiation on the p^^t of sir Henry Clinton, was
major Andre, adjutant general of the British army, a young officer of great
hopes and of uncommon merit. Nature had bestowed (...) him an elegant taste for
literature and the fine (...) which by industrious cultivation he had greatly
improved. He possessed many amiable qualities, and very (...) accomplishments.
His fidelity together with (...) place and character eminently fitted him for
this ^^ness; but his high ideas of candor, and his ab^rrence of duplicity,
made him inexpert in practis^^ those arts of deception which it required.

For the speedy completion of the negotiation that (...) carrying on between
sir Henry and general Ar^^d, the Vulture sloop of war was stationed in the
^^^th River, at such a distance from the American (...), as, without exciting
suspicion, would serve for (...) necessary communication. A written
correspond^nce, through other channels, had been maintained, (...) the year
1779, between Arnold and Andre at New York, under the names of Gustavus and
Ander^^^.

On the 21st of September, the necessary arrangements being made, a boat was
sent at night from the (...) to the Vulture, to fetch major Andre, which ^ught
him to the beach, without the posts of either ^ay, where he met Arnold. The
major continued with him during the day following, and at night, the ^^^tman
refusing to conduct him back to the Vulture, which had shifted her position, as
she lay exposed to the fire of a cannon sent to annoy her) he was obliged to
concert his escape by land. He quitted his uni^rm, which he had hitherto worn
under his surtout, for a common coat. He was furnished with a horse, and, under
the name of John Anderson, received a passport from Arnold "to go to the lines
of White Plains or lower if he thought proper, he being on public business."

He pursued his journey alone toward New York, passed all the guards and posts
on the road without suspicion, and was much elated. The next day he traveled
without any alarm, and began to consider himself out of danger; but unhappily
for him, though providentially for America, three of the New York militia were
with others on a scouting party between the out posts of the two armies. One of
them spru^^ from his covert, and seized Andre's horse by the b^^dle. The major,
instead of instantly producing (...) pass, asked the man where he belonged to,
who answered, "To below." Andre suspecting no deceit, (...) "So do I." Then
declaring himself a British office he pressed that he might not be detained,
being on ^^gent business. Upon the other two coming up, (...) joining their
comrade, he discovered his mista^^. The confusion that followed was apparent,
and th^^ proceeded to search him till they found his pap^^ He offered the
captors a considerable purse of g^^^ and a very valuable watch, to let him
pass; but (...) nobly disdained the temptation, besides the fascinat^^ offers
of permanent provision, and even of future (...) motion, on condition of their
conveying and accom^^nying him to New York. They conducted him (...) colonel
Jameson, the continental officer who had (...) command of the scouting parties,
amounting to (...) men, chiefly militia. Arnold's conduct with regard (...)
this body of men, and in other respects, had exci^^ such suspicions in the
breast of the lieutenant colo^^ and the rest of the officers, that they had
determin^^ upon seizing the general at all events had he (...) down, and
ordered them nearer the enemy. James^^ notwithstanding his strong jealousy of
Arnold, was (...) the issue the means of his escape.

Major Andre, in order to give Arnold time to (...) cape, requested that a line
might be sent to acqua^^ him of the detention of Anderson, the name And^^ had
assumed; which Jameson, through an ill-judg^ delicacy, granted. The papers
which were found (...) the major's boots were in Arnold's hand writing, a^^
contained exact returns of the state of the forces, o^^nance and works at West
Point and its dependencies, with the artillery orders, critical remarks on the
works, (...) estimate of the number of men that were ordinarily on duty to man
them, and the copy of a state of matters that had been laid before a council of
war by the commander in chief. These papers were enclosed in a packet to
general Washington, accompanied with a letter from the prisoner. The letter was
expressed in terms of dignity without insolence, and of apology without
meanness. He avowed himself to be major Andre, adjutant general of the British
army, related the manner of his capture, and endeavored to show, that he did
not come under ^e description of a spy. These papers were forwarded by Jameson.

No sooner had Arnold received the major's letter, that he hastened on board
the Vulture, which lay some miles below Stoney and Verplank's Points; and
Arnold had not been long gone, when Washington artived at his quarters. Had the
plot succeeded, the consequences must have been ruinous to the Americans. The
forces under Arnold's command must have either laid down their arms, or have
been cut to pieces. Their loss, and the immediate possession of West Point and
its dependencies, must have exposed the remainder of Washington's army in such
a manner, to the joint exertion of the British forces, by land and water, that
nothing but ruin could have been the result with respect to the Americans.

On the 29th of September, general Washington appointed a board of fourteen
general officers, with the assistance of the judge advocate general, to examine
major Andre's case, and to determine in what light it ought to be considered.
Andre, disdaining all subterfuge and evasion, and studying only to place his
character in so fair a light, as might prevent its being shaded by present
circumstances, voluntarily confessed more than he was asked, and sought not to
palliate any thing relating to himself, whilst he concealed, with the most
guarded and scrupulous nicety, whatever might involve others. The board showed
him every possible mark of indulgence, and sufficiently witnessed how much they
felt for his situation. However, public justice obliged them to declare, "that
major Andre ought to be considered as a spy from the enemy; and that agreeable
to the law and usage of nations, it is their opinion he ought to suffer death."

Several letters passed between the generals Clinton and Washington relative to
this unhappy affair; but nothing was capable of saving the unfortunate Andre.
The major was superior to the terrors of death; but the disgraceful mode of
dying, which the usage of war had annexed to his unhappy situation, was
infinitely dreadful to him. He was desirous of being indulged with a
professional death, and had accordingly written the day before, a pathetic
letter, fraught with all the feelings of a man of sentiment and honor, in
which he requested of general Washington, that he might not die on a gibbet.
The general consulted his officers on the subject. Pity and esteem wrought so
powerfully, that they were all for shooting him, till Green insisted on it,
that his crime was that of a common spy; that the public good required his
being hanged, and that, were he shot, the generality would think there were
favorable circumstances entitling him to notice and lenity. His observations
convinced them that it was improper to grant the major's request, whilst a
similar motive prevented its being divulged.

When major Andre was led out to the place of execution at Tappan in the state
of New York, as he went along he bowed himself familiarly to all those with
whom he had been acquainted in his confinement. A smile of complacency
expressed the scr^ne fortitude of his mind. Upon seeing the preparations at the
fatal spot, no^ asked with some emotion, "Must I die in this manner?" He was
told it was unavoidable. He replied, "I am reconciled to my fate, but not to
the mode." Soon after, recollecting himself, he added, "it will be but a
momentary pang;" and, springing upon the cart, he performed the last offices to
himself with a composure that excited the admiration, and melted the hearts of
all the spectators. Being told that the fatal moment was at hand, and asked if
he had any thing to say, he answered, "Nothing but to request you will witness
to the world, that I die like a brave man." The succeeding moments closed the
affecting scene. "Though a regard for the public safety imposed a necessity for
inflicting the rigours of martial law, yet the rare worth of this unfortunate
officer made his unhappy case the subject of universal regret. Not only among
the partisans of royal government, but among the firmest American republicans,
the friendly tear of sympathy freely flowed, for the early fall of this amiable
young man. Some condemned, others justified, but all regretted the fatal
sentence which put a period to his valuable life."

Congress, in testimony of the high sense entertained of the virtuous and
patriotic conduct of John Paulding, David Williams, and Isaac Van Verb, the
captors of Andre, resolved, "That each of them receive annually two hundred
dollars in specie during life and that the board of war be directed to procure
for each of them a silver medal, on one side of which should be a shield with
this inscription, Fidelity, and on the other, the following motto, Vincit Amor
Patriae; and that the commander in chief be requested to present the same, with
the thanks of Congress, for their fidelity and the eminent service they had
rendered their country."

Arnold was made a brigadier general in the king's service, and published an
address to the inhabitants of America, dated from New York, October 7, in which
he endeavored to justify his desertion of their cause He said, that when he
first engaged in it, he conceived the rights of his country to be in danger,
and that duty and honor called him to her defense. A redress of grievances was
his only aim and object; and therefore he acquiesced unwillingly in the
declaration of independence, because he thought it precipitate. But the reasons
that then were offered to justify that measure, no longer could exist, when
Great Britain, with the open arms of a parent, offered to embrace them as
children, and to grant the wished for redress. From the refusal of these
proposals, and the ratification of the French alliance, all his ideas of the
justice and policy of the war were totally changed, and from that time, he had
become a professed loyalist. He acknowledged that "in these principles he had
only retained his arms and command, for an opportunity to surrender them to
Great Britain."

This address was soon followed by another, inscribed to the officers and
soldiers of the continental army. This was intended to induce them to follow
his example, and engage in the royal service. He informed them, that he was
authorized to raise a corpse of cavalry and infantry, who were to be on the same
footing with the other troops in the British service. To allure the private
men, three guineas were offered to each, besides payment for their horses, arms
and accoutrements. Rank in the British army was also held out to the American
officers, who would recruit and bring in a certain number of men, proportioned
to the different grades in military service. These offers were proposed to
unpaid soldiers, who were suffering from the want of both food and clothing,
and to officers who were in a great degree obliged to support themselves from
their own resources, while they were spending the prime of their days, and
risking their lives in the unproductive service of congress.

Though they were urged at a time when the paper currency was at its lowest ebb
of depreciation, and the wants and distresses of the American army were at
their highest pitch, yet they did not produce the intended effect on a single
sentinel or officer. Whether the circumstances of Arnold's case added new
shades to the crime of desertion, or whether their providential escape from the
deep laid scheme against West Point gave a higher tone to the firmness of the
American soldiery, cannot be unfolded: But either from these or some other
causes, desertion wholly ceased at this remarkable period of the war.

The Americans, however, accounted for the conduct of Arnold in a different and
in a more probable and satisfactory manner. They alleged that he had so
involved himself in debts and difficulties by his extravagant manner of living
in America, that he had rendered it very inconvenient for him to continue
there: That after the evacuation of Philadelphia by the British troops, Arnold,
being invested with the command in that city, had made the house of Mr. Penn,
which was the best in the city, his headquarters. This he had furnished in an
elegant and expensive manner, and lived in a style far beyond his income. It
was manifest, they said, that he could at first have no great aversion to the
French alliance, because that when M. Gerard, minister plenipotentiary from the
court of France, arrived at Philadelphia in July 1778, general Arnold early and
earnestly solicited that minister, with his whole suite, to take apartments and
bed and board at his house, until a proper house could be provided by the order
of the congress. This offer M. Gerard accepted, and continued with him some
weeks. The French minister resided upwards of 14 months in Philadelphia; during
which time general Arnold kept up the most friendly and intimate acquaintance
with him, and there was a continued interchange of dinners, balls, routs and
concerts: So that M. Gerard must have believed, that in general Arnold he had
found and left one of the warmest friends the court of France had in America.
He was also one of the first in congratulating the chevalier de la Luzerne, the
second French minister. About this time complaints and accusations were
exhibited against him by the government of Philadelphia for diverse
mal-practices; among which charges were, the appropriation of goods and
merchandise to his own use, which he had seized as British property in
Philadelphia in July, 1778. It was determined by a court martial that his
conduct was highly reprehensible; but he was indulgently treated, and was
therefore only reprimanded by the commander in chief, general Washington. It
was in these circumstances, the Americans said, bankrupted in reputation and
fortune, loaded with debts, and having a growing and expensive family, that
general Arnold first turned his thoughts toward joining the royal arms.

Major Talmage, of the light dragoons, planned and executed a gallant
enterprise toward the end of November. Nov. 28.
He crossed the sound to Long Island with 80 men, made a circuitous march of 20
miles to Fort George, and reduced it without any other loss than that of one
private man wounded. He killed and wounded eight of the British, captured one
lieutenant colonel, one captain, and 55 privates.

During the foregoing transactions on the side of New York, lord Cornwallis had
been prevented from making any farther progress in Carolina for a considerable
time, by the excessive heats and unhealthy season which followed his victory at
Camden. As opposition to the British government was still far from being
subdued, his lordship, about the middle of September, Sept. 16.
issued a proclamation "for sequestrating the estates of those persons within
the province, who were either actually in arms, who had abandoned their
plantations with a view of joining or supporting the enemy, or who, by an
avowal of rebellious principles and other criminal acts should manifest a
desperate perseverance in opposing the re-establishment of his majesty's
government." For this purpose, he appointed a commissioner to take possession
of such estates and property, the annual product of which, excepting the part
allotted for the maintenance of the families of the parties, was to be applied
to the public service, in contributing toward the expenses of the war.

In the mean time colonel Ferguson had taken great pains to discipline some of
the tory militia; and with a party of these, and some British troops, amounting
in the whole to about 1,400 men, unencumbered with baggage or artillery, made
incursions into the northern parts of South Carolina. He designed to join lord
Cornwallis at Charlotte. Ferguson was tempted to stay near to the western
mountains longer than was necessary, under the hope of cutting off Clark in his
retreat from Georgia. This delay gave an opportunity for the junction of
several corpse of militia, which proved his ruin. Colonel Williams of Ninety Six
pursued him with 450 horse. The inhabitants about the western waters, north of
North Carolina, and west of the Alleghany and Virginia, though not called upon
to embody under any common authority, voluntarily mustered under their
respective colonels, and being all mounted, and unencumbered with baggage,
their motions were rapid. When they all joined at Gilbert Town, under the
command of colonels Campbell, Cleveland, Shelby, and Sevier, they amounted to
near 3,000. They soon found out Ferguson's encampment, which was on an eminence
of a circular base, called King's Mountain, situated near the confines of North
and South Carolina. About 1,000 of their best men, mounted on their fleetest
horses, came up with Ferguson on the 7th of October, under the conduct of
colonel Campbell. As they approached the royal encampment, they divided their
force. Some ascended the mountain, whilst others went round its base in
opposite directions. The firing began about four o'clock in the afternoon. The
picket gave way, and were pursued as they retired up the mountain to the main
body. Ferguson, with the greatest bravery, ordered his men to the charge. The
Americans retired from the approaching bayonet. Soon after these had retreated,
Shelby with the other detachment, having completed the designed circuit,
opportunely arrived, and from an unexpected quarter poured in a well directed
fire. Ferguson desisted from the pursuit, and engaged his new adversaries. The
British bayonet was again successful, and caused them also to fall back. By
this time the party commanded by Campbell ascended the mountain, and renewed
the attack from that eminence. Ferguson presented a new front, and was again
successful; but all his exertions were unavailing. The assailants retired only
a little way, and, getting behind trees and rocks, renewed their sire. And as
often as one of the American parties was driven back, another returned to its
station. Major Ferguson displayed as much bravery as was possible in his
situation, but his unconquerable spirit disdained either to flee or surrender.
However, after having repulsed a succession of adversaries, pouring in their
sire from new directions, this officer received a mortal wound. No chance of
escape being left, and all prospect of successful resistance being at an end,
the survivors were forced to submit. The bloody conflict lasted forty-seven
minutes. The major, with 150 of his men, fell in the action; 810, including
regulars, were made prisoners, 150 of whom were wounded, the remainder, about
440, escaped. The whole number of the British regulars was short of one
hundred. The Americans took 1,500 stand of arms. Very few of the assailants
fell; but in their number was colonel Williams in Ninety Six district, who had
been very active in opposing the re-establishment of the British government.

Ten of the royal militia who had surrendered were hanged by their conquerors.
They were provoked to this cruel measure, by the severity of the British, who
had lately hanged several of the captured Americans, in South Carolina and
Georgia. They also alleged that the men who suffered were guilty of previous
felonies, for which their lives were forfeited by the laws of the land. The
remainder of the prisoners, except about 130, were soon after enlarged upon
different conditions.

Lord Cornwallis was so confident of the success of his schemes, that he did
not wait for the arrival of colonel Ferguson at Charlotte; but advanced toward
Salisbury, and obliged the militia for security to cross the Yadkin and take
post on its north bank. He halted short of Salisbury, and, hearing of colonel
Ferguson's fate, faced about and returned to Charlotte. This was the first
misfortune which Cornwallis had experienced, and he soon found that major
Ferguson's defeat operated as a check on the future exertion of the loyalists.
Their timidity restrained them from risking any more in support of the royal
cause; reserving themselves till the British army, by its own unassisted
efforts, should gain a decided superiority.

Cornwallis retreated about the 14th of October to Wynsborough; which was the
more needful, as major Davie's corpse, being greatly increased, frequently
intercepted his lordship's foraging parties and convoys. Riflemen also often
penetrated near his camp, and from behind trees took care to make sure of their
object. Thus the late conquerors found their situation very uneasy. As the
British retreated, the militia took several wagons, loaded with stores and the
knapsacks of the light-infantry and legion; and single men repeatedly rode up
within gunshot of his army, discharged their pieces, and made their escape.

Sumpter, soon after the dispersion of his corpse on the 18th of August,
collected a band of volunteers, partly from new adventurers, and partly from
those who had escaped on that day. With these, though for three months there
was no continental army in the state, he constantly kept the field in support
of American independence. He varied his position from time to time about
Evoree, Broad and Tiger rivers, and had frequent skirmishes with his
adversaries. His spirit of enterprise was so particularly injurious to the
British, that they laid sundry plans for destroying his force, Nov. 12.
without success. He was attacked at Broad River by major Wemys, commanding a
corpse of infantry and dragoons. In this action the British were defeated and
their commander taken prisoner. Eight days after, he was attacked at Black
Stocks near Tiger River, by lieutenant colonel Tarleton. The attack was begun
with 170 dragoons and 80 men of the 63d regiment. A considerable part of
Sumpter's force was stationed in a large log barn, Nov. 20.
from the apertures of which they fired with security. Many of the 63d regiment
were killed. Tarleton then charged with his cavalry, but being unable to
dislodge the Americans, retreated; and Sumpter was left in quiet possession of
the field. The loss of the British in this action was considerable. Among their
killed were three officers, major Money, lieutenants Gibson and Cope. The
Americans lost very few; but general Sumpter received a wound, which for some
months interrupted his gallant enterprises in behalf of his country. The
Americans kept their position for several hours; but, knowing that the British
would be reinforced next morning, they crossed the Tiger, carrying their
wounded men with them. Lord Conwallis, in his account of this action, estimates
the number of Americans at 1,000, and their killed, wounded and taken at about
120; and 50 killed and wounded of the British. Nor does he mention that the
Americans remained in the post any time after the action, but that they were
driven with loss over the river. Letter to fir Henry Clinton, December 3, 1780.


The victory at Camden was looked upon to be so decisive with regard to the
southern colonies, that no farther obstruction was thought to lie in the way of
Lord Cornwallis from South Carolina to the Chesapeak; Oct. 15.
and under this mistaken notion, sir Henry Clinton dispatched general Lesslie
from New York to the Chesapeak with 3,000 men, in order to cooperate with, and
act under his lordship, and to prevent any succors from passing to the
assistance of the southern colonies. Cornwallis, however, being at too great a
distance either to profit by a diversion, or to form a junction with Lesslie,
orders were instantly sent to that commander, to proceed to Charleston. He
arrived at Charleston on the 13th of December, where he left one half of his
troops, and soon after marched up the country and joined Cornwallis with the
remainder.

Whilst Cornwallis was making preparations for a powerful invasion of North
Carolina, general Gates had been industriously preparing to take the field. He
had done every thing in his power to repair the injuries of his defeat, and
was, by the month of November, in a condition to face the enemy, when general
Green was sent to supersede him in the command of the southern army. General
Green upon all occasions was the vindicator of Gates' reputation. In his
letters and conversation, he uniformly maintained that his predecessor had
failed in no part of his military duty, and that he had deserved success,
though he could not command it.

The other events of the southern campaign of 1780 consisted of a few
unimportant skirmishes not worthy of being particularly mentioned. The whole
campaign afforded ample evidence of the folly of prosecuting the American war.
Though the British conquests had rapidly succeeded each other, yet no
advantages accrued to the victors. The minds of the people were not only
unsubdued, but were more alienated than ever from every idea of returning to
their allegiance to Britain.

CHAP. XXVII.
Foreign Affairs. -- Gibralter blockaded -- Rodney captures a Spanish convoy --
Defeats Don Langara -- Relieves Gibralter -- The combined fleets intercept the
British East and West India convoys -- The Quebec fleet taken by American
privateers -- The Spaniards make an unsuccessful attempt on the squadron at
Gibralter -- The garrison in distress for provisions -- Admiral Darby-relieves
Gibralter -- Dreadful bombardment of Gibralter -- Spain conquers West Florida
-- The Spanish works at Gibralter entirely destroyed by General Elliot -- Plans
of the combined powers frustrated -- Origin of the Dutch war -- Admiral Rodney
and General Vaughan take the island of St. Eustatius -- Their proceedings -- M.
Piquet intercepts the Eustatius convoy.

IT now becomes necessary to give a brief recapitulation of such foreign events
as had a direct influence on the American Revolution during the years 1780 and
1781. France, Spain and Holland successively shared in the miseries of this war
in the years 1778, 1779 and 1780.

The hostilities which took place between the Spaniards and the British in the
year 1779 have been already related. The blockade of the strong fortress of
Gibralter commenced in July, 1779.
and it was soon after invested as closely by sea as the nature of the straits,
and variety of wind and weather, would permit. Toward the end of the year the
besieged were in the greatest scarcity of all kind of provisions, bread
especially. Governor Elliot, who commanded the garrison, made an experiment to
ascertain what quantity of rice would suffice a single person, and lived for
eight successive days on thirty-two ounces of that nutritious grain.

During this critical situation, fir George Rodney sailed with a strong
squadron for the reli^^ of the garrison. 1780. January.
He had been only a seven days at sea when he fell in with a Spani^^^ convoy
bound from St. Sebastian to C^^diz, consisting of 15 sail of merchantmen
guarded by a fine new 64 gun ship, four frigates fr^^^ 32 to 26 guns, and two
smaller armed vessels. The whole fleet was taken, ships of war as well as the
reft (...) and as the greater part of the vessels were loaded with wheat,
flour, and other species of provisions, and (...) remainder with naval stores,
the admiral sent the former to the famished garrison, and the latter (...)
Britain. This timely success served only as a pre^^^ to another still greater
and more brilliant. About (...) week after, the admiral fell in with a Spanish
squad^^ of 11 ships of the line, under the command of (...) Juan de Langara,
off Cape St. Vincent, and, on (...) 16th of January, engaged them, in a dark,
rainy, (...) tempestuous night; and the situation of the fleets (...) rendered
more terrible by their being almost involv^^ in the shoals of St. Lucar. The
engagement beg^^ about four o'clock in the afternoon; and the Spaniards though
inferior both in strength and skill to the British, defended themselves with
great resolution. Rodney had the address and good fortune to obtain the
lee-gage, which prevented their return into their own port. Early in the
action, the San Domingo, mounting 70 guns, and carrying 600 men, blew up and
(...) on board perished. The action continued with great vigor on both sides
for ten hours, when the headmost of the Spanish line struck her colors. Don
Juan (...) Langara behaved with the greatest gallantry; but his ship, the
Phoenix of 80 guns, reduced to a wreck, was obliged to strike. Three other
ships of 70 guns were taken, and safely carried into port. The San Julian of 70
guns was taken, the officers shifted, and a lieutenant with 70 British seaman
put on board; but, by (...) afterward running ashore, the victors in their
(...) became vanquished. Another of the same force (...) likewise taken, but by
running upon the breakers (...) totally lost.

Captain M'Bride of the Bienfaiscent, to whom the ^^nish admiral struck,
disdaining to convey infection (...) to an enemy, informed him that a malignant
^^ll pox prevailed on board his ship; and offered to ^^^mit the Spanish
prisoners to stay on board the Phoe^^^, rather than by a removal to expose them
to the ^^^ection, trusting to the admiral's honor, that no ad^^^tage would be
taken of the circumstance. The ^posal was cheerfully embraced, and the
conditions ^^^ourably observed. The consequence of this im^^^tant victory was
the complete relief of Gibralter. (...) being done, Rodney proceeded to the
West In^^^^s.

The combined fleets in the European seas although (...) effected nothing equal
to their force, consisting of between 60 and 70 ships of the line besides a
number (...) frigates and fire ships, were successful in capturing (...)
convoy. The East and West India fleets sailed (...) Portsmouth in the latter
end of July, under the conduct of captain Moutray of the Ramilies, and two
frigates, and the whole were intercepted by the combined fleets under Don Louis
de Cordova. August 8.
The convoy included besides merchantmen 18 victuallers, and transports
destined for the service in the West Indies. The five East Indiamen, likewise,
besides arms, ammunition, and a train of artillery, had on board a large
quantity of naval stores for the British squadron in that part of the world.
These five India ships, with above 50 merchantmen, were all taken, with 1,25^
seaman, 1,255 soldiers, 74 land officers, 149 women and 137 other passengers:
In all 2,865 persons. T^^ Ramilies, with the frigates and a few West In^^^ships
had the good fortune to escape. Such a (...) never before entered the harbor
of Cadiz. The appearance of the numerous prisoners rendered the triumph more
complete, and made the sight still (...) singular. The prisoners, however,
experienced (...) only the utmost urbanity, but even generosity at (...) hands
of the Spaniards; and it was now evident (...) the humanity shown by the
British to the captives (...) board Don Langara's fleet was not forgotten.

Soon after this disaster, the British received (...) that a great part of
their outward bound fleet to (...) be^ had been intercepted by some American
^^teers off the banks of Newfoundland, in the beginning of July. Some of these
were afterward re-taken, (...) 14 rich ships were entirely carried off. These
disas^^^^ by far overbalanced admiral Geary's success in the beginning of his
cruize with the grand fleet, when he took 12 rich merchantmen, being part of a
convoy (...) Port au Prince.

The Spaniards persevered steadily in their original design of reducing
Gibralter. They had, however, frequently the mortification of seeing, when they
were nearly completed, the fruits of much time and labor destroyed in a few
hours by the weight of fire from the enemies' batteries. It seemed indeed to be
a manim with general Elliot to let them proceed almost to the completion of
their works, and then to destroy them instantaneously. Some judicious and
successful sallies were likewise occasionally, though sparingly, made by the
garrison.

About midsummer, seven fire ships, two ships of war, and a number of row-boats
and galleys, filled (...) men, and with every kind of offensive arms, made
^^ight attack upon the small squadron in the bay, con^^ing of the Panther and
Experiment ships of war and ^^^yol sloop. At a distance, the Spanish squadron
(...) admiral Don Barcelo stood off and on, to cover (...) attack and to
intercept any vessels which might (...) to escape. The approaching flames of
the ^^^ing fire ships gave the first alarm to the British (...) one o'clock in
the morning. The boats were ^^^ntly manned, and the officers and seamen met
(...) grappled the fire ships; and then, amidst the burst^^ of shells, and all
the horrors of a scene which ^^^ed with instant destruction, towed them off,
and (...) them on different parts of the shore. The fire (...) the garrison,
and from the Panther, dispersed (...) two ships of war and the galleys: And by
day^^^ the garrison had the pleasure to see Don Bar^^'s baffled squadron going
back to Algesiras, whilst (...) a man was lost on the British side during the
whole (...) which carried so dreadful an appearance. Some time after this, the
garrison made a sally with some ^^ghter of the enemy, and carried three pieces
of ^^anon into the fortress from a work which they had ^^ken.

The garrison, after some time, began to suffer the inconveniences that flow
from deficient and unwhole^^^e food. The only occasional supplies they received
were by small vessels from Minorca. When a market was opened on the arrival of
one of these ves^^s, turkies sold for L.3 12 s. each. A guinea has been known
to be refused for a calf's pluck, and 27 s. demanded for an ox's head. Even the
sweepings of ^^ups and storehouses, though half full of dirt, sold for eight
pence per pound.

In April 1781, complete relief was obtained by the arrival of the British
fleet under admiral Darby. April 12.
The fleet, consisting of about 28 sail of the line, sailed from etc. Helens on
the 13th of March, 1781; but, by reason of a delay in waiting for the
victuallers from Cork, missed de Grasse's fleet of 25 sail of the line, whick
sailed from Breast on the 22d of March for the West Indies.

As the hopes of reducing this stubborn garrison by famine were found
fruitless, it remained only to (...) the effects of bombardment. The
unfortunate town of Gibralter was now exposed to the discharge of 170 pieces of
the heaviest cannon, and 80 very large m^^tars. These continued to discharge
every day, for three weeks, from four to five thousand shot and she^^, and to
expend at least 100,000 pounds of gunpowder. It then slackened, but was not
intermitted for (...) whole day for upwards of a year. The fatigues of the
garrison were extreme, but the loss of men was less than might have been
expected. For the first t^^ weeks of this unexampled bombardment, the whole
number of killed and wounded was only about 300. The damage done to the works
was trifling. The weight of this cruel cannonade fell chiefly upon the
inoffensive inhabitants, many of whom were killed, and their houses, about 500
in number, destroyed. The number of the inhabitants, of various nations and
religions, exceeded 3,000 at the beginning of the siege. Such of them as were
not buried in the ruins of their houses, or torn to pieces by the shells, fled
to the remote parts of the rocks, but destruction followed them to places which
had always been deemed secure. No scene could be more deplorable. It is said
mothers and children, clasped in each other's (...), were, at the same instant,
so completely blown to pieces, that it seemed rather an annihilation, than a
dispersion of their shattered fragments. The casemates, which would alone
afford security, were filled by the garrison; and happy did ladies of the
greatest sensibility and most delicate habits deem it, to be admitted to a few
hours ^^pose in them, amidst the noise of a crowded soldiery, ^^d the groans of
the wounded who were brought in from the works. The rock when viewed at a
distance to the night time, seemed in a manner to be changed (...) a volcano,
and to be totally immersed in fire and ^moke, vomited forth from its own
bowels. At last, however, this dreadful firing began to slacken. Even the
treasures of Spain could not support such an immense expenditure. After siring
75,000 shot, and 25,000 shells, the number was reduced to about 600 of each
every twenty-four hours, at which rate it cont^^^ed for some weeks longer. The
prudence and experience of general Elliot directed him, likewise, to save his
ammunition, and he allowed the Spaniards to waste themselves and their
treasures as they pleased, seeming to behold their rage and violence with the
utmost indifference.

The Spanish arms met with more success on this continent than in Europe. Don
Bernardo de Galves, in addition to his success in the year 1779, reduced the
town and fort of Mobile in 1780. This considerably diminished general
Campbell's small force in West Florida; so that Don Galves was induced to
attempt the reduction of the whole colony, which would be insured by the taking
of Pensacola, the capital; and to this he was encouraged by the involved state
of the British affairs, which every day become more embarrassed in all quarters
of the globe. After some unsuccessful attempts, in the year 1780, which had
failed in the outset, Don Galves went to the Havannah, to take the command of a
great expedition from thence, which was intended for the beginning of the year
1781. A violent hurricane had nearly ruined the Spanish fleet, which besides
retarding the enterprise^ occasioned the loss of four capital ships, and many
others of different denominations, with every soul (...) board. Five sail of
the line were, however, quickly refitted, and with some other smaller vessels
of wa^ convoyed Don Galves with near 8,000 troops on the expedition. With this
force be arrived before Pensacola, March 9.
on the 9th of March 1781, being quickly followed by Don Solano with the
remainder of the fleet, amounting in all to 15 (...) of the line.

The principal strength of the settlement seems (...) have been in the defense
of the harbor, the land ^^^^tories of which had only two small vessels of was
to assist in opposing this formidable fleet. The passage was therefore soon
forced, and the siege commenced by sea and land. The siege had continued two
months, when the reduction of the place was facilitated by a shell from the
besiegers which set fire to the magazine of an advanced redoubt, and in an
instant the body of the redoubt became a heap of rubbish. A^ hundred men
suffered by this explosion, three fourth^ of whom lost their lives, and the
remainder were miserably maimed or wounded. Even after this accident, the
garrison under general Campbell continued to defend the place with great
gallantry, but were soon obliged to submit to superior force. They obtained an
honorable capitulation, and were treated by the Spanish general with great
humanity and generosity.

The siege of Gibralter still continued, but the Spaniards, perceiving that the
utmost violence of their fire produced no effect, confined themselves to
annoying the garrison in the night time, and enlarging and perfecting the
fortifications and batteries with which the place was surrounded. The best
engineers of France and ^^pain had lavished all their ingenuity and ability in
constructing these extraordinary works; and (...) the end of November all
Europe were in suspense concerning the fate of the garrison, and many ^^lieved
that they could not hold out much longer, (...) viewing the prodigious efforts
made for its re^^ction.

General Elliot seeing that the stupendous works of (...) Spaniards were now,
after immense labor and ex^^se, arrived at their highest state of perfection,
he considered this as the proper season of attempting at (...) to frustrate all
their views, by attacking, storming (...) destroying them.

The time being fixed, and all the arrangements (...), a body of 2,000 chosen
men, under the com^^^d of brigadier general Ross, issued out upon the setting
of the moon, at three o'clock in the morning of the 27th of November, Nov. 27.
1781. Nothing ever exceeded the silence and order of the march, the vigor and
spirit of the attack, or the nice and exact combination of all the parts. The
whole exterior (...) of the lines of the besiegers were attacked at the same
instant. The Spaniards gave way on every side, and abandoned those prodigious
works, which had cost so much labor, time, and expense in the construction,
and in whose expected effect the hopes of all Spain were centered. The pioniers
and artillery men spread their fire with such rapidity, that in half an hour,
two mortar batteries of 10 thirteen inch mortars, and three batteries of heavy
cannon, with all the lines of approach, communication, and traverse, were in
flames, and every thing subject to the action of fire was finally reduced to
ashes. The mortars and cannon were spiked, and their beds, carriages and
platforms destroyed. The magazines blew up one after another in the course of
the conflagration. The detachment returned to the garrison before daybreak,
having accomplished all this destruction within the space of two hours, (...)
very inconsiderable loss.

The besiegers, although disconcerted in their des^^^ by this unexpected event,
soon recovered from (...) alarm, and, with a perseverance almost peculiar to
(...) nation, determined to go on with the siege. Their subsequent exertions
and reiterated defeats will be related in the order of time in which they
happen^^^.

Whilst the Spaniards were busied in vain (...) tempts to reduce Gibralter,
they had ^^^certed with the French to effect the conquest of Jamaica. 1780.
The French and Americans had likewise planned a joint attack on New York.
Fortunately for the British, both these (...) proved abortive. The combined
fleets in the West Indies in the year 1780 were far superior to the Bri^^^^.
They consisted of thirty-six sail of the line, with land forces in proportion;
but a mortal and contagious distemper damped the spirit of enterprise, so that
(...) neither effected nor attempted any thing of consequence. Count de
Guichen, the French admiral, ^^^ing returned directly to France, as has been
related in the account of the American campaign in 17^^.

The abortive plans of the allies of the United States were severely felt by
the latter; but this was in a great measure overbalanced by the embarrassments
occasioned to Great Britain, by the armed neutrality of the northern powers in
Europe, and by a rupture with Holland.

The states of Holland had kept an appearance of friendship with Britain for
more than a century. Like other European nations, they endeavored to promote
their own interest by trading with her revolted colonies, and at the same time
wished to preserve the friendship of their ancient ally.

Britain had many causes of displeasure with the ^^^duct of the Dutch, and this
year the hidden seeds (...) discord burst into a violent flame. The Dutch had
(...) in the beginning of the year a number of ships (...) timber and naval
stores for the French service scorted by a small squadron of men of war under
the command of captain Byland. The British sent captain Fielding with a proper
force to examine the convoy and to seize any vessels which contained contraband
(...). Captain Fielding having met with resistance (...) the search, the most
of the convoy escaped. The (...) that remained with naval stores on board he
de^^^ed, and told captain Byland that he was at liberty (...) hoist his colors
and depart. But the Dutch commodore chose only to hoist his colors, and
accompa^ied the British commander to Spithead, where he retained until he had
farther orders from his masters. The merchant ships were afterward condemned
by the (...) of admiralty.

The states, at that time, were divided into two factions. The one supported by
the Stadtholder, fa^^^red the cause of Great Britain; the other, headed by Van
Berkel, that of France. The British knew that the northern confederacy was too
powerful to be meddled with; but the weak and divided state of Hol^^d rendered
that nation no object of terror. It was therefore resolved to endeavor by an
appearance of vigorous determination to detach them from the confederacy, and
thereby induce that state to afford the succors stipulated by treaty, which
all negotiation had hitherto failed of obtaining.

For these and other reasons, after previous but ineffectual warning given by
the British ministers at London and at the Hague, a royal proclamation was
issued at London on the 17th of April, in which the nonperformance of the
states general with respect to the succors stipulated by treaty, was
considered as a relinquishment of the alliance concluded at London on the 11th
of December, 1674; and that they had thereby placed themselves in the condition
of a neutral power, bound by no treaty or connection with Britain: And all the
particular stipulations respecting the subjects of the states general contained
in the treaties then subsisting were suspended provisionally.

The event which occasioned a formal declaration of war, was the capture of
Henry Laurens, Esquire In the deranged state of the American finances, that
gentleman had been deputed by congress to solicit a loan for their service in
the United Netherlands; and also to negociate a treaty between them and the
United States. Sept. 3.
On his way thither, he was taken by the Vestal frigate, commanded by captain
Keppel. He had thrown his papers overboard, but great part of them were
recovered without having received much damage. These the ministry carefully
examined. Among them was found one purporting to be the plan of a treaty of
amity and commerce, between the states of Holland and the United States of
America. This had been originally drawn up in consequence of some conversation
between William Lee, commissioner from the United States to the courts of
Vienna and Berlin, and John de Neufville, merchant of Amsterdam, as a plan of a
treaty destined to be concluded hereafter: But it had never been proposed
either by congress or by the states of Holland, though it had received the
approbation of the pensionary Van Berkel and of the city of Amsterdam. Mr.
Laurens himself was committed prisoner to the Tower on the 6th of October, on a
charge of high treason.

This was followed by a very angry memorial to the states general, which they
received with great coolness, and replied, that a full answer should be given
as soon as their constitution would admit. The consequence of this was a
declaration of war. Dec. 20.
General reprisals were likewise granted against the ships, goods and subjects
of the states general. "Whatever may be thought of the policy of the measure,
its boldness must be admired. Great Britain, already at war with the United
States of America, the monarchies of France and Spain, deliberately resolves on
a war with Holland, and at a time when she might have avoided open hossilities.
Her spirit was still farther evinced by the consideration that she was deserted
by her friends, and without a single ally. Great must have been her resources
to support so extensive a war against so many hostile sovereigns; but this very
ability, by proving that her overgrown power was dangerous to the peace of
Europe, furnished an apology for their combination against her."

The capture of the island of St. Eustatius was the first and greatest blow
which the Dutch received in the war. 1781.
The island is in itself barren and contemptible, but was long the seat of a
most lucrative commerce, and had become the grand free port of the West Indies
and America, and a general market and magazine for all nations. The island is a
natural fortification, and very capable of being made strong; but its
inhabitants were more solicitous to cultivate commerce, than to improve the
natural advantages of the island for their security. Its most favorable
seasons were during the times of warfare among its neighbors, owing to its
neutrality, situation, and its unbounded freedom of trade. So strong was the
spirit of commerce in this place, that even when Holland was engaged in war,
the same freedom of trade continued, and the enemy were not only supplied with
all kinds of common necessaries, but even with naval and military stores, as if
no rupture with the parent state had taken place. It was in particular a most
convenient channel of supply to the Americans.

Sir George Rodney and general Vaughan with a large fleet and army surrounded
this island, Feb. 3.
and sent a peremptory summons to the governor to surrender the island and its
dependencies within an hour, accompanied with a threat, that if any resistance
was made, he must abide the consequences. M. de Graaf, utterly ignorant of the
rupture between Great Britain and Holland, could scarcely believe the officer
who delivered the summons to be serious. He returned for answer, that, being
utterly incapable of making any defense, he must of necessity surrender, only
recommending the town and inhabitants to the clemency of the British
commanders. The wealth of the place excited the astonishment of the conquerors,
who found the store houses filled with valuable commodities, and the very beach
was covered with hogsheads of sugar and tobacco. The value was estimated
considerably above three millions sterling. But this was only a part; for above
150 vessels of all denominations, most of which were richly laden, were
captured in the bay. A Dutch frigate of 38 guns and five small armed vessels
shared the same fate. The neighboring islands of St. Martin and Saba were in
like manner reduced.

Admiral Rodney being informed that a fleet of about 30 large ships all richly
laden with West India commodities, had sailed from Eustatia for Holland just
before his arrival, under convoy of a flag ship of 60 guns, he dispatched the
Monarch and Panther, with the Sybil frigate in pursuit of them. These soon
overtook the convoy, when the Dutch admiral refusing to strike his colors, and
all remonstrances proving ineffectual, a short engagement took place between
his ship the Mars, and the Monarch. He died bravely in defense of his ship,
when she instantly struck, and the whole convoy was taken.

The keeping the Dutch colors flying at Eustatia, served for some time as a
decoy to French, Dutch, and American vessels, a considerable number of which
fell accordingly into the hands of the conquerors without ^ouble.

The Dutch West India company, many of the citizens of Amsterdam, and several
Americans were great sufferers by the capture of this island, and the
confiscation of all property found therein, which immediately followed. But the
British merchants suffered much (...), who, confiding in the neutrality of the
place, (...) some acts of parliament made to encourage the ^^inging their
property from the islands lately taken by the French, had collected a vast
quantity of West India and European goods in this place. They stated their hard
case to admiral Rodney and general Vaughan, who returned for answer, "That the
island was Dutch, every thing in it was Dutch, was under the protection of the
Dutch flag, and as Dutch it should be treated."

The severity with which the victors proceeded, drew on them pointed censures
not only from the immediate sufferers, but from all Europe. The merchants and
traders were ordered to give up their books, their letters, and inventories of
all their effects, inclusive of an exact account of all money and plate in
their possession. The Jews were treated as objects of particular resentment.
They were ordered to give up the keys of their stores, to leave their wealth
and merchandise behind them, and to depart the island without knowing the place
of their destination. Nor did the policy of the unfortunate Hebrews now avail
them. They were stripped, searched, and despoiled of such money and jewels as
they had secreted. Several Americans and native Dutch, as well as Jews, were
ordered off the island. Many opulent persons, in consequence of these
proceedings, were instantly reduced to extreme indigence. In this distress, the
assembly of the island of St. Christophers gave refuge and assistance to many
of the unhappy exiles.

To complete the work, nothing now remained but to dispose of the goods which
had been seized. For this purpose, public sales were advertised; purchasers
from every nation were promiscuously invited; assurances of protection given
them without exception, and the island became the scene of the greatest auction
that perhaps was ever opened in the world. The goods were sold for a mere
trifle in proportion to their value; and the French were said to have made the
larger and most lucrative purchases. The greatest part of the goods were
conveyed to French and Danish island, and by the inhabitants of them disposed
of to the enemies of Great Britain, for supplying whom in the ordinary way of
commerce, St. Eustatius had suffered to severely.

Thus was the attention of the British commander directed to an object
undoubtedly below his dignity, and highly derogatory, not only to the honor
but to the interest of Britain; as, at this critical period, de Grass was
sailing for the West Indies with that fleet and army which assisted general
Washington to decide the fate of America. A small part of the French force was
destined for the East Indies, but M. de Grass with the greater part sailed for
Martinico. The British fleet, then in the West Indies, had been previously
weakened by the departure of a squadron for the protection of the ships, which
were employed in carrying to England the booty which had been taken (...) St.
Eustatius. The British admirals Hood and (...) take were detached to intercept
the outward bound ^^^nch fleet commanded by M. de Grass, but a juncture
between his force and eight ships of the line and (...) of 50 guns, which were
previously at Martinico (...) St. Domingo, was nevertheless effected. By this
embination of fresh ships from Europe, with the ^^ench fleet stationed in the
West Indies, they had a ^^ided superiority. M. de Grass having finished his
business in the West Indies, sailed in the beginning of August with a
prodigious convoy. After seeing this (...) of danger, he directed his course
for the Chesapeak, leving previously announced to the Americans his
destination, and the time when he might reasonably be expected. His successful
operations there will (...) related in the account of the campaign in Vir^^^ia.

The French fitted out a squadron of 7 or 8 ships of ^^e line, conducted by M.
de la Motte Piquet, who sailed from Breast soon after admiral Darby had sailed
with the grand fleet to the relief of Gibralter, with a design not only to
intercept the Eustatius convoy, laden with the spoils of that island, but a
rich fleet from Jamaica at the same time. Piquet succeeded, however, only in
the first part of his design, and not fully even in that. Four men of war,
under commodore Hotham, who escorted the merchantmen, with part of the convoy
itself, escaped to Ireland; but 14 or 15 rich vessels were taken May 2d, 1781,
by which it is said the under-writers in England lost L.600,000 or 700,000
sterling.

These were the chief foreign events which had a direct influence on the
American revolution during this period. The reader who wishes to find a minute
account of the foreign occurrences of this complicated war, may consult the
continuation of Hume's history of England, from which this abstract is chiefly
compiled.

CHAP. XXVII.
Revolt of the Pennsylvania Line -- Distresses of the American soldiery --
Continental paper money goes out of circulation -- The effects of depreciation
-- The finances regulated -- Virginia invaded by Arnold -- Engagement between
the British and French fleets -- Generals Philips and Arnold ravage Virginia.

AT the beginning of the year 1781, an affair happened, from which expectations
were formed by sir Henry Clinton, that some considerable advantage might be
derived to the royal cause, viz. the revolt of the Pennsylvania line. The long
continuance of the war, and the difficulties under which the congress labored,
had prevented their troops from being paid, or even properly supplied with
necessaries and conveniences. General Arnold's address to his countrymen had no
effect in detaching them from the unproductive service of congress; but their
complicated distresses at length broke out into deliberate mutiny. This event,
which had long been expected, made its first threatening appearance in the
Pennsylvania line. The privates enlisted in that state were for the most part
natives of Ireland, and were inferior to none in discipline, courage or
attachment to the cause of independence. A great part of them were enlisted for
three years or during the war; the three years were expired, and the men
insisted that the choice of staying or going remained with them, whilst the
officers contended that the choice was in the state. On the first of January,
1,300 of these troops turned out and declared they would serve no longer,
unless their grievances were redressed. A riot ensued, in which an officer was
killed and four wounded; five or six of the insurgents were also wounded. They
then collected the artillery, stores, provisions, and wagons, and marched out
of the camp. They passed by the quarters of general Wayne, who sent a message
to them, requesting them to desist, or the consequences would prove fatal. They
refused, and proceeded on their march till the evening, when they took post on
an advantageous piece of ground, elected officers from among themselves, and
appointed a sergeant major, who had formerly deserted from the British army, to
be their commander. On the second they marched to Middlebrook, and on the third
to Princetown, where they fixed their quarters. On that day a flag of truce was
sent to them from the officers of the American camp, with a message, desiring
to know what were their intentions. Some of them answered, that they had
already served longer than the time for which they were enlisted, and would
serve no longer; and others, that they would not return, unless their
grievances were redressed. But at the same time, they repeatedly and in the
strongest terms denied being influenced by the least disaffection to the
American cause, or having any intentions of deserting to the enemy.

Intelligence of this transaction was soon conveyed to New York. A large body
of British troops were immediately ordered to hold themselves in readiness to
move on the shortest notice, it being hoped that the American revolters might
be induced to join the royal army. Messengers were also sent to them from
general Clinton, acquainting them that they should directly be taken under the
protection of the British government; that they should have a free pardon for
all former offenses; and that the pay due to them from the congress should be
faithfully paid them without any expectation of military service, unless it
should be voluntary, upon condition of their laying down their arms and
returning to their allegiance. It was also recommended to them to move beyond
the South River; and they were assured, that a body of British troops should be
ready to protect them whenever they desired it. These propositions were
rejected with disdain; and they even delivered up two of sir Henry Clinton's
messengers to the congress, who being tried were condemned as British spies,
and instantly executed. Joseph Reid, Esquire president of the state of
Pennsylvania, and general Potter afterward repaired to them at Princeton, and
an accommodation took place: such of them as had served out their full terms
were permitted to return to their own homes, and others again joined the
American army, upon receiving satisfactory assurances that their grievancies
should be redressed.

About 160 of the Jersey troops mutinied in the same month, but by prudent and
resolute measures they were reduced to obedience. Two of the greatest offenders
were put to death on the spot, and the executioners were selected from among
the most active in the mutiny.

Notwithstanding the natural alarm such mutinies occasioned, and the perilous
situation of the republic, congress were for some time unable to give permanent
relief to the army. Provisions were partially supplied, and by expedients from
one short time to another. The most usual was ordering an officer to seize on
provisions wherever found. Recourse was so frequently had to coercion, both
legislative and military, that the people not only lost confidence in public
credit, but became so impatient under all exertions of authority, for forcing
their property from them, that it was apprehended they would proceed to
dangerous insurrections. Never was the patriotism of the American soldiery
exhibited in a more striking view than in this calamitous period. It appears,
indeed, wonderful how the army could have been kept together during a great
part of this year. The American general Clinton in a letter to general
Washington, dated at Albany, April 16th, 1781, wrote as follows; "There is not
now (independent of Fort Schuyler) three days provision in the whole department
for the troops in case of any alarm, for any prospect of procuring any. The
recruits of the new levies I cannot receive, because I have nothing to give
them. The Canadian families I have seen obliged to deprive of their scanty
pittance, contra^^ to every principle of humanity. The quarter master's
department is totally useless, the public armoury has been shut up for near
three weeks, and a total suspension of every military operation has ensued. At
this period of the war, there was little or no circulating medium, either in
the form of paper or specie; and in the neighborhood of the American army
there was a seal want of necessary provisions.

The progressive depreciation of the American paper money was a forerunner of
its dissolution. The continental bills continued passing and depreciating till
the spring of this year, when suddenly and by general consent they went out of
circulation, without realizing the hopes of the enemies, or the fears of the
friends, of independence.

Without paper currency the Americans could not have carried on the war to the
present period. Its public benefit, in this instance, compensated in the
estimation of patriotic politicians, for the immense evils which it otherwise
occasioned. The tender laws on the one hand, and depreciation on the other,
rendered it the bane of society. All classes were infected. The mechanic, the
farmer, the lawyer, the physician, the member of congress, and even a few of
the clergy, in some places, were contaminated, and commenced speculators. The
morals of the people were corrupted beyond any thing that could have been
believed prior to the event. All ties of honor, blood, gratitude, humanity,
and justice were dissolved. Old debts were paid in several states when the
paper money was more than 70 for one in hard cash; and in Virginia when 300 for
one. Brothers defrauded brothers, children parents, and parents children. It
has been observed by some that the Friends and Methodists in Pennsylvania were
faithful to their engagements, and were not corrupted by handling paper money.
Though these denominations excelled, there were many individuals, in all
religious societies throughout the United States, that preserved their
integrity. As a striking instance of the nature and defects of a depreciating
paper currency, the following is related out of many: A merchant of Boston sold
a hogshead of rum, for twenty pounds, cask included. The purchaser did not
settle for it, till after the seller applied to him for an empty hogshead, for
which he was charged thirty pounds. When they came to settle, the merchant
found upon examining, that he had to pay a balance of ten pounds on that very
cask, which, with the rum it contained, he had sold for twenty.

"By the scale of depreciation the war was carried on five years, for little
more than a million of pounds sterling; and 200 millions of paper dollars were
made redeemable by five millions of silver ones. In other countries, such
measures would probably have produced popular insurrections, but in the United
States they were submitted to without any tumults. Public faith was violated,
but in the opinion of most men public good was promoted." Gold and silver now
succeeded this fictitious currency, being introduced into the United States by
a beneficial trade with the French and Spanish West India Islands, and by means
of the French army in Rhode Island: And the quantity which had found its way
from the British troops was by no means contemptible. The king of France,
likewise, gave the United States a subsidy of six millions of livres, and
became their security for ten millions more, borrowed for their use in the
United Netherlands.

A new system of finance was adopted; and Mr. Robert Morris had the direction
of all matters relative to the treasury, the supplies of the army and the
accounts. The introduction of so much specie, together with these judicious
regulations, aided by the bank which had been erected in Philadelphia the
preceding year, enabled congress to feed and clothe their troops, and put them
in condition to take the field.

During the crisis of the American affairs, in the spring of 1781, the British
seem to have planned the campaign so as to attack the Americans in a variety of
places at once. Accordingly, in that year, the war raged not only in the
vicinity of New York, but in Georgia, South and North Carolina, and in Virginia.

It has been already noticed that major general Lesslie had been detached from
New York to Virginia, in the latter end of 1780, and soon after returned to
Charlestown, by orders from lord Cornwallis, in order to cooperate more
effectually with the army under his lordship. Virginia was soon after invaded
by another party from New York. On the 4th of January, Jan. 4.
some ships of war with a number of transports, on board which was a large body
of troops under the command of brigadier general Arnold, arrived at Westover,
about 140 miles from the capes of Virginia, where the troops immediately landed
and marched to Richmond; which they reached without opposition, the militia
that was collected having retreated on their approach. Lieutenant colonel
Simcoe marched from hence with a detachment of the British troops to Westham,
where they destroyed one of the finest founderies for cannon in America, and a
large quantity of stores and cannon. General Arnold, on his arrival at
Richmond, found there large quantities of salt, rum, sailcloth, and tobacco,
the last of which he destroyed to a very great amount. The British troops
afterward attacked and dispersed some small parties of the Americans, took
some stores and a few pieces of cannon, and on the 20th of the same month
marched into Portsmouth.

General Arnold having committed such ravages in Virginia, as threatened to
destroy the very sinews of the war, general Washington, notwithstanding his
weakness at present, was obliged to detach 1,200 men, under the conduct of the
marquis de la Fayette, to its relief; and the French at Rhode Island now
thought an opportunity offered of atoning for their past inactivity, by cutting
off Arnold's retreat from the Chesapeak. They were farther encouraged to make
this attempt, by having lately acquired some addition to their own naval force,
and the British fleet having suffered by a dreadful tempest, in which the
Culloden, a new 74 gun ship, was totally lost; the Bedford, of the same force,
was dismasted; and the America driven so far out to sea, that she was, for some
time, supposed to be lost.

The scheme seems to have failed only through the delay of putting it in
execution. D'Estouches, who, after the death of admiral de Ternay, commanded
the French fleet, instead of instantly blocking up the Chesapeak whilst it was
in his power, only sent thither a ship of the line with some frigates, Feb. 9.
to destroy the small marine force of Britain lying there at that time, as well
as to obtain intelligence of the state of the country; so that though this
small force had the good fortune to capture the Romulus, a 44 gun ship, and to
take or destroy ten small vessels, the British admirals Arbuthnot and Greaves
had time to repair their damages. March 8.
Accordingly D'Estouches sailed from Rhode Island with 1,500 additional men on
board the fleet, and being intercepted by admiral Arbuthnot, off the capes of
Virginia, March 16.
was obliged to stand an engagement. The British had the advantage of more guns
than the French, but the latter were much more strongly manned than the former.
The contest wa^ so nearly balanced, that it ended without the loss of a ship on
either side. The British, however, obtained the fruits of victory so far as to
oblige their adversaries to return to Rhode Island without effecting ^^y one of
the purposes of the expedition.

A few days after this engagement, a convoy arrived from New York, having on
board general Philips, with 2,000 chosen troops. March 26.
This officer, with his companions who were taken at Saratoga, had been, after
long confinement, at last released by a new cartel concluded some months
before; and he was now appointed commander in chief of the Virginia forces.

Generals Philips and Arnold having joined their forces, carried every thing
before them in Virginia. The best troops of the state had gone to the
southward, so that only the militia remained to defend their country, and these
were defeated in every encounter. The long navigation of James' River, and its
numerous dependant branches and creeks, laid the country open to them in every
direction, for a very great extent, and the mischief they did was in
proportion. At Petersburgh, on the southern branch of this river called
Appomatax, 4,000 hogsheads, of tobacco were destroyed. The damage done by the
destruction of shipping and vessels of every sort, as well as of barracks,
warehouses, and stores of every kind was almost incredible. About four miles
above a place called Osborne's, on the same branch of the river, a stale ship
of 20 guns, another of 26 guns, a brigantine of 14 guns, besides many other
armed vessels, were destroyed. Two ships and ten smaller vessels, loaded with
2,000 hogsheads of tobacco, cordage and floor fell into Arnold's hands. At
Manchester, which lies up the Fork, on the north branch of the river, near 230
miles from its mouth, they destroyed 1,200 hogsheads of tobacco; the marquis de
la Fayette, with his (...) who had arrived the day before at Richmond, on the
opposite side, being spectators of the conflagration, without being able to put
a stop to it. The (...), however, notwithstanding his inferior force, saved the
capital, which at that time contained almost the whole military stores of the
state, from imminent danger. A magazine of flour, with a large range of rope
walks, were destroyed at Warwick, together with the ships on the stocks and in
the river. Along with these a number of warehouses filled with tobacco and
other commodities; tanhouses full of hides and bark, together with several fine
mills, were all consumed. After which the troops, having re-embarked on board
their ships, fell down toward the mouth of the river.

During these destructive expeditions, which ended in the month of April, the
war raged chiefly in the two Carolinas; of which an account will be given in
the next chapter.

CHAP. XXIX.
General Green opposes lord Cornwallis in the Carolinas and Georgia -- Exploit
of colonel Washington -- General Morgan defeats lieutenant colonel Tarleton --
Lord Cornwallis pursues general Morgan -- General Green keeps alive the
courage of his party, when greatly reduced -- Major Craig takes post at
Wilmington -- General Green defeated at Guildford, yet reaps the fruits of
victory -- Distresses of the British army -- British interest ruined in North
Carolina -- Lord Cornwallis retreats to Wilmington -- General Green returns to
South Carolina -- He takes a number of British posts -- Lord Rawdon defeats
General Green at Camden -- Augusta taken -- Ninety Six besieged -- Relieved by
lord Rawdon -- General Green retreats -- He is pursued -- He returns when lord
Rawdon divides his force -- Lord Rawdon evacuates Ninety Six -- General
Greene's method of carrying on the war -- Battle at Eutaw Springs -- The
British driven down to Charleston.

IT has been already noticed, that, whilst lord Cornwallis was preparing for a
powerful invasion of ^orth Carolina, general Green succeeded general (...) in
the command of the southern army. He was ^^^ked upon to be the best officer in
the American service next to general Washington himself, with whom (...) was in
high favor; and he was accompanied by general Morgan, a brave and
distinguished partizan, who, like the late colonel Ferguson in the royal army,
excelled in the knowledge of rifle arms. He had commanded those rifle men who
opposed Burgoyne in the northern war, and who so much excelled the Indians in
their own way, that, to use the expression of that general, "they could not be
brought within the sound of a rifle shot."

Within a few hours after general Green took charge of the army at Charlotte
Town a report was made of a gallant enterprise of lieutenant colonel
Washington. Dec. 3.
Being out on a foraging party he had penetrated within 13 miles of Camden, to
Clermont the seat of lieutenant colonel Rugely of the British militia. This was
fortified by a block house, and encompassed by an abbatis, and was defended by
upwards of one hundred of the inhabitants, who had submitted to the British
government. Lieutenant colonel Washington advanced with his cavalry, and
planted the trunk of a pine tree, so as to resemble a field piece. The lucky
moment was seized on. A corporal of dragoons rode up, and made a peremptory
demand of an immediate surrender; when the garrison, impressed with the
expectation of an immediate cannonade in case of their refusal, surrendered at
discretion, without a shot being fired on either side. This favorable
incident, in the juncture of affairs then existing, through the superstition to
which most men are more or less subject, was viewed by the army as an omen of
success under the new commander.

Lord Cornwallis now began to make very vigorous exertions, in order to
penetrate into North Carolina. On the 11th of January his lordship's army was
in motion, 1781. Jan. 11.
and advancing toward that province; but was somewhat delayed by an attempt
made by the Americans, under general Morgan, to make themselves masters of the
valuable district of Ninety Six. In order to prevent this, lord Cornwallis
detached lieutenant colonel Tarleton, with 350 cavalty, part of the light
insentry, the 7th regiment, the first battalion of the 71st regiment, and two
three-pounders, to oppose the progress of Morgan, not doubting but that he
would be able to perform this service effectually. The British (...) came up
with the Americans under general Morgan (...) the 17th of January. The
Americans, two thirds (...) whom were militia, were drawn up in an open ^^od,
at a place called the Cowpens, near Pacolet (...). The British, besides their
fieldpieces, had the advantage of five to four in infantry, and of more than
(...) to one in cavalry. The attack was begun b^ (...) first line of infantry,
consisting of the 7th regiment, (...) a corpse of light infantry with a troop of
cavalry placed on each flank. The first battalion of the 71st (...) the
remainder of the cavalry formed the reserve. The American line soon gave way,
and their militia ^^^itted the field; upon which the royal troops, supposing
the victory already gained, engaged with ardour (...) the pursuit, and were
thereby thrown into some disorder. General Morgan's corpse, who were supposed
(...) have been routed, then immediately faced about, (...) threw in a heavy
fire upon the king's troops, which occasioned the utmost confusion among them;
and they were at length totally defeated by the Americans. The British had 10
commissioned officers, and upwards of 100 rank and file killed; 200 wounded; 29
commissioned officers, and above 500 privates taken prisoners. Two pieces of
artillery, two standards, 800 muskets, 35 baggage wagons, and upwards of 100
dragoon horses fell into the hands of the Americans; whilst the latter had only
12 men killed and 60 wounded. Lieutenant colonel Tarleton then retreated to
Hamilton's ford, near the mouth of Bullock's cree^^ carrying with him part of
his baggage, and destroying the remainder.

This defeat of the troops under Tarleton was a se^^re stroke to lord
Cornwallis, as the loss of his light infantry was a great disadvantage to him.
The day after the event he employed in collecting the remains of Tarleton's
corpse, and in endeavoring to form a junction with general Lesslie, who had
been ordered to march toward him with a body of British troops from
Wynnesborough. Considerable exertions were then made by part of the army,
without baggage, to retake the prisoners in the hands of the Americans, and to
intercept general Morgan's corpse on its retreat to the Catawba. But that
American officer, after his defeat of Tarleton, had made forced marches up into
the country, and crossed the Catawba the evening before a great rain, which
swelled the river to such a degree, as to prevent the royal army from crossing
for several days; during which time the British prisoners were got over the
Yadkin; whence they proceeded to Dan River, which they also passed, and on the
14th of February had reached Courthouse, in the province of Virginia.

The Americans met with very providential escapes in this hot pursuit. The
British reached the Catawba on the evening of the same day on which their
fleeing adversaries had crossed it: And it is certain that if the rising of the
river had taken place a few hours earlier, general Morgan with his whole
detachment and 500 prisoners would have scarcely had any chance of escape. The
same good fortune, attended with similar circumstances, protected them on
passing the Yadkins.

Lord Cornwallis employed a halt of two days in collecting some flour, and in
destroying superfluous baggage and all his wagons, excepting those laden with
hospital stores, salt, and ammunition, and four reserved empty in readiness for
sick or wounded. Being thus freed from all unnecessary encumbrances, he marched
through North Carolina with great rapidity, and penetrated to the remotest
extremities of that province on the banks of the Dan. His progress was
sometimes impeded by parties of the militia, and some skirmishes ensued, but he
met with no very considerable opposition. On the first of February the king's
scops crossed the Catawba at M'Cowan's Ford, where the river is upwards of 500
yards wide and about three (...) deep, sustaining a constant fire from the
militia (...) the opposite bank without returning it till they had made good
their passage. The light infantry and grenadier companies, as soon as they had
reached the (...), dispersed the Americans, whose brave leader, general
Davidson, was killed at the first onset.

When lord Cornwallis arrived at Hillsborough, he erected the king's standard,
and invited, by proclamation, all loyal subjects to repair to it, and to stand
forth and take an active part in assisting his lordship to restore order and
government. He had been taught to believe that the king's friends were numerous
in that part of the country: But the event did not conform the truth of the
representations that had been given. The royalists were but few in number, and
same of them too timid to join the king's standard. There were, indeed, about
350 who were proceeding to Hillsborough, under colonel Pyle, in order to avow
their attachment to the royal cause; but they were ^et accidentally, and
surrounded by a detachment from the American army, who had now re-crossed the
(...), by whom a number of them are said to have been killed when they were
begging for quarter, without making the least resistance. Meanwhile general
Green was marching with great expedition with the troops under his command, in
order to form a junction with other corpse of American troops, that he might
thereby be enabled to put some effectual stop to the progress of the British.
This enterprising and politic general, whilst unequal even to defensive
operations, contrived to keep alive the courage of his party, to depress that
of the loyalists, and to harass the foragers and detachments of the British,
till reinforcements should arrive. He lay seven days within ten miles of
Cornwallis' camp, but took a new position every night, and kept it a profound
secret where the next was to be. By these maneuvers, Cornwallis could never
gain information of his situation in time to profit by it. By various arts be
avoided an action for three weeks, during which time he was often obliged to
ask bread from the common soldiers, having none of his own. Soon after this
period, he was in condition to give battle to the enemy.

During these transactions, colonel Balfour, who commanded at Charleston,
equipped a small force for an expedition to Cape Fear River. Major Craig was
dispatched on this service with about 300 troops toward the end of January,
under the convoy of a frigate and two sloops of war, commanded by captain
Barclay. The troops landed about nine miles from Wilmington, and on the 28th of
January entered that town, which, having the command of the river, was made a
post of some strength, and continued to be of importance whilst Cornwallis
remained in that country.

General Green having effected a junction about the 10th of March with a
continental regiment of what were called eighteen months men, March. 10.
and two large bodies of militia belonging to Virginia and North Carolina,
formed a resolution to attack the British troops under the command of lord
Cornwallis. The American army marched from the High Rock Ford on the 12th of
the month, and on the 14th arrived at Guildford. Lord Cornwallis, from the
information he had received of the motions of the American general, concluded
what were his designs. As they approached more nearly to each other, a few
skirmishes ensued between some advanced parties, in which the advantage was
sometimes gained by the Americans, and sometimes by the British. March 15.
On the morning of the 15th, lord Cornwallis marched with his troops at
daybreak in order to meet the Americans or to attack them in their encampment.
About four miles from Guildford, the advanced guard of the British army,
commanded by lieutenant colonel Tarleton, fell in with a corpse of the
Americans, consisting of lieutenant colonel Lee's legion, some Back Mountain
men and Virginia militia, with whom he had a severe skirmish, and was, at
length, obliged to retreat.

The greater part of the country in which the action happened is a wilderness,
with a few cleared fields interspersed. The American army was posted on a
rising ground about a mile and a half from Guildford courthouse. It was drawn
up in three lines: the front line was composed of the North Carolina militia,
under the command of the generals Butler and Eaton; the second line, of
Virginia militia, commanded by the generals Stephens and Lawson, forming two
brigades; the third line, consisting of two brigades, one of Virginia and one
of Maryland continental troops, commanded by general Hugar and colonel
Williams. Lieutenant colonel Washington, with the dragoons of the first and
third regiments, a detachment of light infantry composed of continental troops,
and a regiment of riflemen under colonel Lynch, formed a corpse of observation
for the security of their right flank. Lieutenant colonel Lee, with his legion,
a detachment of light infantry, and a corpse of riflemen under colonel Campbell,
formed a corpse of observation for the security of their left flank. The attack
of the American army was directed to be made by lord Cornwallis in the
following order: On the right, the regiment of Bose and the 71st regiment, led
by major general Lesslie, and supported by the first battalion of guards; on
the left, the 23d and 33d regiments, led by lieutenant colonel Webster, and
supported by the grenadiers and second battalion of guards commanded by
brigadier general O'Har^^ the Yagers and lighs infantry of the guards remained
in a wood on the left of the guns, and the cavalry in the road, ready to act
(...) circumstances might require. The American army consisted of about 4,400
men, of which more th^^ one half we^^ militia; whilst the British amounted only
to about 2,400, but they were chiefly (...) troops.

About half an hour after one (...) the afternoon, the action commen^^^ by
(...) which (...) twenty (...); when the British troops (...) three columes and
attacked the (...) with great vigor, and soon obliged part of their troops to
quit the field* But the Virginia militia (...) them a warm acception, and kept
up a heavy fire face a long time, till, being bea^^ ba^k, the action (...)
general (...) every (...) under the (...) were also (...) execution. Lieunant
at (...) had direction to keep his cavalty comp^^^ and ^ot to charge without
positive orders, excepting to protect any of the corpse from the most evident
danger of being defeated. The excessive thickness of the woods rendered the
British bayonets of little use, and enabled the broken, corpse (...) Americans
to make frequent stands with an irregular fire. The second battalion of the
guards first gained the clear ground near Guildford bourt-house, and found a
corpse of continental infantry, superior in number, formed in an open field on
the left of the road Desirous of signalizing themselves, they immediately
attacked and soon defeated them, taking two six-poundeers: But as they pursued
the Americans into the wood (...) too much ardour, they were thrown into
confu^^^ by a heavy fire, and instantly charged and driven (...) into the field
by lieutenant colonel Washington's ^^^goons, with the loss of the two
six-pounders they (...) taken. But the American cavalry were afterward ^^^sed,
and the two six-pounders again fell into the (...) of the British troops. The
British troops having at length broken the second Maryland regiment, (...)
turned the left flank of the Americans, got into the rear of the Virginia
brigade, and appeared to be ^^ing their right, which would have encircled the
(...) of the continental troops, when general Green ^ought it prudent to order
a retreat. Many of the American militia dispersed in the woods; but the
continental troops retreated in good order to Reedy-Fork (...), and crossed at
the ford about three miles from (...) of ^ction, and there halted. When they
had ^^ected then stragglers, they retreated to the iron^^^s, ten miles distant
from Guildford, where they camped. They lost 4 brass six-pounders, and two
wagons laden with ammunition; 1,300 stand of arms, likewise, which were
distributed among the militia, were destroyed in the field. It was a hard
fought ac^^^, and lasted an hour and a half. Of the British troops, the loss,
as stated by lord Cornwallis, was 532 killed, wounded and missing. General
Green, in his account of the action transmitted to the congress, (...) the
loss of the continental troops to amount to ^^9 killed, wounded and missing;
but he made no (...) of the loss of the militia, which was somewhat more than
100. Lieutenant colonel Stuart was killed in the action; and lieutenant colonel
Webster, and the captains Schutz, Maynard, and Goodriche, died of the wounds
that they had received in it. Brigadier general O'Hara, brigadier general
Howard, and lieutenant colonel Tarleton, were also wounded. Of the Americans,
the principal officer killed was major Anderson of the Maryland line, and the
generals Stephen and Huger were wounded.

The British arm^ underwent great hardships in the course of this campaign; and
in a letter of lord Cornwallis's to lord George Gerr^ain, dated March 17th, he
observed that "the soldiers had been two (...) without bread;" they were
likewise destitute of other necessary supplies, whilst major Craig, now (...)
at W^^mington, was unable to open a war communication for their relief. His
force did not ex^^^^ 300 men; and the hostile sentiments of the inhabitants on
the banks of Cape Fear River forbed the attempt. For these reasons Cornwallis
was obliged to go to these supplies which could not be brought (...) him. From
this time the British interest in North Carolina was mined; and general Green,
although defeated and forced to retreat, reaped all the solid advantages of a
victory. Lord Cornwallis quitted Guildford three days after the battle which
was fought in that place, and was forced to leave his hospital and 75 wounded
men, together with me numerous loyalists in the vicinity, to the mercy of their
enemies; April 7.
and on the 7th of April, after a retreat marked with proofs of great alarm and
precipitation, arrived in the neighborhood of Wilmington. Soon after, general
Green, notwithstanding his late defeat, endeavored to make some vigorous
attempts against the king's forces in South Carolina. As he had no means of
providing for the wounded of his own, or the British forces, he wrote a letter
to the neighboring inhabitants of the Quaker persuasion; in which he mentioned
that be had been brought up a Quaker, and urged them to take care of the
wounded on both sides. His recommendations prevailed, and the Quakers humanely
applied the hospitals with every comfort in their ^^wer.

Whilst the two armies were in North Carolina, the ^^ig inhabitants of South
Carolina were animated by the gallant exertions of Sumpter and Marion, with
their adherents, who, though surrounded with enemies, still kept the field,
and, by intercepting convoys, and ^eating up the British quarters, kept them in
con^^^ alarm. These prepared the militia to cooperate (...) the returning
continentals. Before general Green set out for South Carolina, he sent orders
to general Pickens, to prevent supplies from going to the British garrisons at
Ninety Six and Augusta; he likewise detached lieutenant colonel Lee to
penetrate through the intermediate country to join general Marion upon the
Santee. This junction colonel Lee accomplished within eight days; and together
with general Marion invested Fort Watson, which lay between Camden and
Charleston. The besiegers having ^^ected a work which overlooked the fort,
fired into (...) with such execution, that the garrison, consisting of 114 men,
surrendered by capitulation. This happened whilst general Green was marching
with his main force against Camden.

Lord Rawdon had been appointed to defend the post of Camden, with about 300
British and provincials; April 19.
and on the 19th of April general Green appeared before that place with a
large body of continentals and militia. He sound it, however, impossible to
attempt to storm the town with any prospect of success; and therefore
endeavored to take such a position as should induce the British troops to
sally from their works. He posted the Americans about a mile from the town, on
an eminence which was covered with woods, and flanked on the left by an
impassable swamp. But (...) the morning of the 25th, April 25.
lord Ra^^^ marched out of Camden, and att^^^ general Green in his camp. The
Americans ma^^ (...) vigorous resistance, but were at length compelled (...)
give way; and the pursuit is said to have been con^^ued three miles. For some
time after the action commenced, general Green entertained great hopes (...)
defeating the British troops; in which, as the Americans were superior in point
of numbers, he would probably have succeeded, had not some capital military
errors been committed by one or two of the offic^^ who served under him. On the
American side, colnel Washington had behaved extremely well in this action,
having made upwards of 200 of the British prisoners, with 10 or 12 officers,
before he perceived that the Americans were abandoning the field of battle. The
loss of the British was about 100 killed and wounded. Upwards of 100 of the
Americans were taken prisoners; and, according to the account published by
general Green, they had 126 killed and wounded. After this action, Green
retreated to Rugeley's mills, 12 miles from Camden, in order to collect his
troops and wait for reinforcements.

Soon after this action, general Green took such a position as was most likely
to prevent supplies reaching Camden. Lord Rawdon, however, received a
reinforcement of 4 or 500 men by the arrival of colonel Watson from Pedee; May
7.
and next day he tried to compel Green to another battle, Failing in this
design, he evacuated Camden, after burning the gaol, mills, many private
houses, May 9.
and a great part of his own baggage, and retired to the southward of Santee.
In evacuating this post, his lordship showed as much prudence as he had
discovered bravery in its defense. (...) fall of Fort Watson had broken the
chain of communication with Charleston; and the American army accepted, in a
great measure, supplies from the adja^^^t country. The capital itself would
likewise have (...) in danger, had the British in South Carolina kept (...)
detachments in their distant out-posts, after their communication with
Cornwallis was cut off. They therefore resolved to contract their limits by
retiring ^^thin the Santee.

This measure animated the friends of Congress, and ^^ressed the royal party in
an equal degree. The ^^ole interior country at the back of the royal army
^^olted. And in little more than eight days after the British left Camden, five
other posts were either evacu^^ed or surrendered, viz. Orangeburg, Fort Motte,
Nelson's Ferry, Fort Granby, and Georgetown. Nelson's Ferry and Georgetown were
evacuated. The garrisons of the other posts which capitulated amounted to about
600 men, regulars and militia.

The garrison of Fort Granby, consisting of 352 men ^ostly royal militia, had
very advantageous terms granted them in consequence of information that lord
^awdon was marching to their relief. Their baggage, including an immense
quantity of plunder, was se^^ed to them. The American militia, disgusted at the
(...) allowed the garrison, discovered a disposition to ^^eak the capitulation
and kill the prisoners; but geneneral Green restrained them, by solemnly
declaring that he would instantly put to death any one who should offer them
violence. And they knew he would ^ut his threatening in execution; for they had
seen his regard to discipline recently manifest (...) when they lay near
Camden, by hanging eight deserters in one day.

Shortly after the evacuation of Georgetown, one Manson, an inhabitant of South
Carolina, who had joined the British, appeared in an armed vessel, and, being
refused permission to land, sent a few of his (...) ashore and set fire to the
town. Upwards of (...), houses were reduced to ashes.

The British had now abandoned all the north-eastern extremities of South
Carolina. They still retained Augusta and Ninety Six, in addition to their post
near the sea coast.

The British post at Silver Bluff with a field piece and considerable stores,
surrendered to a detachment of Lee's legion, May 21.
commanded by captain Rudolph.

Immediately after the surrender of Fort Granby, lieutenant colonel Lee had set
out for Augusta, which he reached in four days. Here he joined general Pickens,
May 19
who had for some time taken post in the vicinity with a body of militia. They
jointly carried on their appro^^^ against Fort Cornwallis at Augusta, in which
colnel Brown commanded. The garrison made a very (...) defense. At length, when
their situation rendered assistance totally ineffectual, the remainder, 300 in
number, surrendered the fort upon honor (...) terms of capitulation. June 5.
The Americans ha^ about forty men killed and wounded during the siege. After
the surrender, lieutenant colonel Gri^^son of the British militia was basely
shot by the Americans. A reward of 100 guineas was offered, but is vain, for
the discovery of the perfidious assassin. Lieutenant colonel Brown would
probably have shared the same fate, had not his conquerors furnished him with
an escort to the royal garrison in Savannah.

About this time, "such was the state of parties in the vicinity of Savannah
River, and such the exasperation of whigs against tories, and tories against
whigs, and so much had they suffered from and inflicted o^ (...) other, that
the laws of war and the precepts of ^^nanity afforded but a feeble security for
the observation of capitulations on either side. The American ^^^ers exerted
themselves to procure to their prisoners that safety which many of the
inhabitants, influenced by a remembrance of the sufferings of themselves and of
their friends, were unwilling to allow them." For a particular account of the
sufferings of prisoners and the distresses of the inhabitants, see Dr. Ramsay's
history, and Dr. Gordon's history of the American Revolution.


Whilst operations were carrying on against the small posts, general Green
proceeded with his main army and laid siege to Ninety Six, May 22.
in which lieutenant colonel Cruger with inwards of 500 men were advantageously
posted. The besiegers were more numerous than the besieged, but the disparity
was not great. The greatest exer^^^s were made by the Americans, and the
garrison ^^de as gallant defense.

General Greene's army had advanced their approaches ^^y near that critical
point, after which farther resist^^ce would have been temerity. At that
interesting moment, intelligence was conveyed into the garrison, by an American
lady lately married to an officer there, that lord Rawdon was near at hand with
about 2,000 men for their relief. These had arrived in Charleston from Ireland
after the siege began, and were marched for Ninety Six on the seventh day after
they landed. June 10.
In these circumstances, general Green had no alternative but to raise the
fiege or proceed to an assault. The latter was attempted, and although the
assailants displayed great resolution, June 18.
they were repulsed. On this, general Green raised the siege and retreated
over Saluda. The loss of the Americans in the siege and assault was about 150
men. Lieutenant colonel Cruger's successful defense was much admired. He was
well seconded by major Green, who had bravely and judiciously defended that
redoubt, for the reduction of which, the greatest exertions had been made.

The feelings of general Green and his brave army can be more easily conceived
than expressed, when they were thus compelled to seek safety by retreating to
the remotest excremity of the country when they were nearly masters of the
whole. In this gloomy situation, Green was advised to retire with his
remaining force to Virginia. To suggestions of this kind he nobly replied, "I
will recover South Carolina, or die in the attempt."

Lord Rawdon, who by rapid marches was near Ninety Six at the time of the
assault, urged the pursuit so close, that he reached the Fords of Ennoree, 40
miles from Ninety Six, only two hours after Greene's army had passed them.
Desisting from thi^ fruitless pursuit, he drew off a part of his force from
Ninety Six, and fixed a detachment at Congaree. General Green, on hearing that
the British force was divided, faced about to give them battle. Lord Rawdon, no
less surprised than alarmed at this unexpected movement of his lately
retreating foe, abandoned the Congaree in two days after he had reached it, and
marched to Orangeburg. General Green, in his turn, July 12.
pursued and offered him battle. His lordship would not venture out, and his
adversary was too weak to attack him in his encampment, with any prospect of
success.

The same reasons which indueed the British (...) abandon Camden, led them to
evacuate Ninety Six^ and the garrison formed a junction with the main army at
Orangeburg. General Green being unaable to prevent their junction, retived to
the high hills of Santee. The evacuation of Camden having been ef^^cted by
striking at the posts below it, the same ma^^uvre was now attempted to induce
the British to ^^ve Orangeburg. With this view, generals Sump^r and Marion,
with their brigades and the legion of cavalry, were detached to Monk's Corner
and Dor^^ster. They moved down different roads, and ^^de separate and
successful attacks on convoys and detachments in the vicinity of Charleston.
The Briti^^ lost in these different engagements 140 prisoners, besides several
killed and wounded, all the baggage of the 19th regiment, and above 100 horses
and several ^aggons, whilst the loss of the Americans was incon^^erable. In
this manner was the war carried on. Whilst the British kept their forces
compact, they could not cover the country, and the American general had the
prudence to avoid fighting. When they divided their army they were attacked and
defeated. Whilst they were in the upper country, light parties of Americans
annoyed their small posts in the lower settlements. Thus the people soon found
that the late conquerors were unable to afford them their promised protection.
The spirit of revolt became general, and the royal interest daily doclined.

The British once more resumed their operations near the junction of the
Waterce and Congaree. September.
General Green, having collected his whole force, marched from the high hills
of Santee, and crossed these rivers with an intention to force the enemy down
toward Charles^^^ On his approach, the British commander, ^^^tenant colonel
Stewart, retired about 40 miles nearer Charleston, and encamped at the Eutaw
Springs. Here a most obstinate battle ensued, from nine in the morning to one
in the afternoon. Sept. 8.
"General Green advanced with 2,000 men to attack them in their encampment at
this place. His force was drawn up in two lines: The first (...) composed of
militia, and the second of continental troops. As the Americans advanced, they
fell in with two parties of the British, three or four miles ahead of their
main army. These being briskly attacked, soon retired. The militia continued to
pursue and fire, till the action became general, and till they were obliged to
give way. They were well supported by the continental troops. In the hottest of
the action colonel O. Williams, and lieutenant colonel Campbell with the
Maryland and Virginia continentals charged with trailed arms. Nothing could
surpa^s the intrepidity of both officers and men on this occasion. They rushed
on in good order through a heavy cannonade and a shower of musketry with such
unshaken resolution, that they bore down all before them. Lieutenant colonel
Campbell, whilst bravely leading his men on (...) that successful charge,
received a mortal wound. After he had fallen he inquired who gave way, and
being informed that the British were fleeing in all quarters, replied, "I die
contented," and immediately expired. The British were vigorously pursued, and
upwards of 500 of them were taken prisoners. On their retreat they took post in
a strong brick house, and in a picqueted garden: from these advantageous
positions they renewed the action. Four six pounders were ordered up before the
house, from under cover of which the British were firing. The Americans were
compelled to leave these pieces and retire, but they left a strong picquet on
the field of battle, and only retreated to (...) nearest water in their rear.
In the evening of the next day, lieutenant colonel Stewart who commanded the
British on this occasion, left seventy of his wounded men and a thousand stand
of arms, and moved from the Eutaws toward Charleston. The loss of the British,
inclusive of prisoners, was upwards of 1,100 men; that of the Americans above
500, in which number were sixty officers," Ramsay.

The accounts given of this action by the American and British commanders, were
so totally different from each other, that it was impossible to reconcile them.
The British stated the American at my to be about 4,000 men. Their own loss was
allowed to be 812, viz. three commissioned officers and 85 privates killed; 16
officers and 351 privates wounded; and 257 missing. Contin. of Hume's Hist.


viz. one lieutenant colonel, one major, six captains, and eight other
commissioned offi^ers killed; five lieutenant colonels, thirteen captains, ^^d
twenty five lieutenants wounded. Lieutenant col^^el Washington was taken
prisoner.

Congress honored general Green, for his good ^onduct in this action, with a
British standard and a ^^ld medal. They also voted their thanks to the
different corpse and their commanders.

Soon after this engagement, the Americans retired to their former position on
the high hills of Santee, and the British took post in the vicinity of Monk's
corner. In the end of the year, general Green moved down to the lower country,
and about the same time the British abandoned their out posts, and aimed it
nothing more than to secure themselves in the vicinity of the capital. The
battle of Eutaw may be considered as closing the national war in South
Car^^ina. The excursions which the enemy afterward made had no other effect
than the loss of property and of individual lives. The crops which the British
had planted in the spring were reaped by the Americans. And the campaign which
general Green had opened with the most gloomy prospects, closed with glory.

CHAP. XXX.
Lord Cornwallis joins general Arnold at Petersburgh -- Lieutenant colouel
Tarleton and Simpcoe sent on different expeditions -- M. de la Fayette's able
movements -- General Wayne attacks the British army. Lord Cornwallis fortifies
York Town and Gloucester -- Plan for his capture -- Admiral Greaves engages the
French fleet off Chesapeak -- Arnold's expedition into Connecticut -- Lord
Cornwallis capitulates -- Joy of the Americans -- General Washington receives
congratulations from all quarters -- General Wayne defeats Colonel Brown in
Georgia -- Defeats a party of Creek Indians, after a furious (...) --
Conclusion of hostilities.

LORD Cornwallis, after his victory over general Green at Guildford,
proceeded, as has been related, to Wilmington, where he arrived on the 7th of
April. This march had the appearance of a retreat; and whilst he remained at
Wilmington his situation was not much mended. His force was not greatly above
1,000 effective men; so that it appeared equally difficult, if not impossible,
to return to the assistance of lord Rawdon, of whose misfortunes he had heard,
or to maintain his ground in the situation he then occupied. He therefore took
the bold and hazardous resolution of marching into Virginia, and effecting a
junction with general Philips. His lordship set out on the 25th of April, April
25.
after having sent instructions to colonel Balfour at Charleston to send
transports and provisions to Wilmington for the use of the troops, in case of
any misfortune. The marquis de la Fayette, who kept on the north side of James'
River, being informed of his design, made a rapid movement in order to get
before the British. The vigilance of lord Cornwallis, however, disappointed his
antagonist.

On the 20th of May, his lordship arrived at Petersburg in Virginia, where he
joined a body of British troops that had been under the command of major
general Philips; May 20.
but the command of which, in consequence of the death of that officer, who had
been cut off by a fever a few lays before, had devolved upon brigadier general
Ar^^ld. Before this junction he had encountered considerable inconveniences
from the difficulty of pro^^ring provisions and forage; so that in a letter to
six Henry Clinton he informed him, that notwithstanding ^is supplies at
Wilmington, his cavalry wanted every ^^ing, and his infantry every thing but
shoes. "Neither," says he, "are in any condition to move, and yet they must
march tomorrow." He added, that he had experienced the distresses of marching
hundreds of miles in a country chiefly hostile, without one active (...) useful
friend, without intelligence, and without communication with any part of the
country. Soon after his arrival, a reinforcement of 1,500 men joined his
lordship from New York. About the same time, (...) received information that
three British regiments ^ad sailed from Cork for Charleston. These
circumstances, together with lord Rawdon's report of the advantage he had
gained over general Green, eased his mind of all anxiety for South Carolina,
and inspired him with hopes of a glorious campaign.

Lord Cornwallis having taken upon himself the command of the army, found no
enemy capable of opposing him in the field. Having stationed a body of ^oops at
Portsmouth under general Lesslie, he advanced from Petersburgh to James' River,
which having crossed, he passed through Hanover county, and crossed the South
Anna or Pamunkey River. The marquis de la Fayette followed his motions, but at
a guarded distance. The superiority of the British army, especially of their
cavalry, which they easily supplied with good horses from the stables and
pastures of the Virginians, enabled them to scour the country in all
directions. Lieutenant colonel Tarleton and lieutenant colonel Simpcoe were
sent with separate bodies of troops upon two distant expeditions. The former to
Charlotteville to attempt capturing the governor and assembly of the State,
and the latter to destroy stores as Point of Fork. Tarleton succeeded so far as
to disperse the assembly, capture seven of its members, and to destroy a great
quantity of stores at and near Charlo^^^ville. Simpcoe was only in part
successful, for the Americans had removed the most of their stores from Point
of Fork. In the course of these marches and countermarches immense quantities
of property were destroyed, many unimportant skirmishes took place, and many
partial conquests were made by the British without any durable effect. The
marquis de la Fayette acted with so much caution, made so judicious a choice of
posts, and showed so much vigor and design in his movements, as to prevent any
advantage being taken of his weakness. He effected a junction at Racoon Ford
with general Wayne, who was at the head of 800 Pennsylvanians. Whilst this
junction was forming, the British got between the American army and its stores,
which had been removed from Richmond to Albemarle old court house. The marquis
had the address to extricate himself from this difficulty. By forced marches he
got within a few miles of the enemy when they were two days march from
Albemarle court house, and opened in the night a nearer road to the court
house, which had been long disused and was much embarrassed. To the surprise of
lord Cornwallis, the marquis fixed himself next day between the British army
and the American stores.

His lordship now commenced a retrograde movement, and, accompanied with his
detachments under Tarleton and Simpcoe, in two night's marches measured back
upwards of 50 miles. When he reached Richmond the marquis was pressing hard
after him. June 17.
On the 18th the British moved toward the Americans, seemingly with a design
of striking a detached corpse. But upon the ^arching of the light infantry and
Pennsylvanians, they returned into the town. About this time the marquis was
reinforced by baron de Steuben's troops, and by militia from the parts
adjacent. He followed lard Cornwallis, and had the address to impress him with
an idea that the American army was much greater than it really was. His
lordship therefore retreated to Williamsburg. The day after the main body of
the British army arrived there, June 26.
their rear was attacked by an American light corpse under colonel Butler, and
had 33 killed and wounded.

According to a private letter sent by Fayette to the president of Congress,
his own troops at this period consisted only of 1,500 regulars, 400 new levies,
and about 2,000 militia, in all 3,900; whilst Cornwallis's amounted to 4,000
regulars, 800 of whom were mounted.

In the course of these movements, besides articles similar to those already
mentioned, the British destroyed above 2,000 hogsheads of tobacco, with some
brass and a number of iron ordnance; but they were joined by no great number of
inhabitants, and scarcely by any of the native Virginians. Lord Cornwallis, in
his marches from Charleston to Camden, from Camden to the Dan River, from the
Dan through North Carolina to Wilmington, from Wilmington to Richmond, and from
Richmond to Williamsburg, made a route of more than 1,100 miles, without
computing deviations.

About the time lord Cornwallis reached Williamsburg, he received intelligence
from New York, setting forth the danger to which that city was exposed from a
combined attack, that was said to be threatened, by the allies. Sir Henry
Clinton therefore required a detachment from earl Cornwallis, if not engaged in
any important enterprise, and recommended to him a healthy station, with an
ample defensive force till New York should be out of danger. Lord Cornwallis,
in order to comply with this requisition, determined to retire to Portsmouth,
judging that he could more easily maintain that post, with a diminished force,
than his present position. For the execution of this project, he had to cross
James' River. The marquis de la Fayette, judging this to be a favorable
opportunity for an attack, advanced on the British. General Wayne being
informed that the main body of the British had crossed the river, July 6.
pushed forward with 800 men to harass their rear; but to his great surprise
discovered the British army, about sunset, ready to receive him. With great
presence of mind he extricated himself from his perilous situation, by boldly
attacking and engaging them for a while, and then retreating with the utmost
expedition. Lord Cornwallis, having secured the cannon which his adversary had
left behind, would admit of no pursuit. He suspected, from the strangeness of
the circumstances, that the whole was a scheme to draw him into an ambuscade.
The British passed the river at night, and retired to Portsmouth without
molestation.

Lord Cornwallis had previously taken the necessary steps for forwarding a part
of his command to New York. But before they sailed, an express arrived from sir
Henry Clinton with a letter, expressing his preference of Williamsburg to
Portsmouth for the residence of the army, and his desire that Old Point Comfort
or Hampton Road should be secured as a station for line of battle ships. The
commander in chief at the same time allowed his lordship to detain any part or
the whole of the forces under his command, for completing this service. It
being a principal object of the campaign to fix on a strong permanent post or
place of arms in the Chespeak for the security of both the army and navy, and
the places above mentioned having been found to be altogether incapable of
answering the end, York Town, on the river of that name, and Gloucester Point,
on the opposite side of the river, were considered as most likely to accord
with the views of the royal commanders. Lord Cornwallis availed himself of sir
Henry Clinton's permission to retain the whole force under his command, and
having evacuated Portsmouth, returned in August, with the army to that
peninsula which lies between the great rivers James and York, and composes one
of the richest and most beautiful parts of Virginia. York Town is situated on
the river of that name, on the narrowest part of the peninsula, where it is
about five miles broad; Gloucester Point is on the north and opposite side and
projects so far into the river, that the distance betwixt the two is little
more than a mile. They entirely command the navigation of the river which here
is of sufficient depth to admit ships of a very large size and burden. Both
these posts therefore, were now fortified with the utmost care and diligence,
and every method taken to make them equally strong on the sides of the land and
water, the whole of his force amounting to 7,000 men.

Whilst his lordship was thus exerting himself to render his post impregnable,
all the scattered operations of active hostility began at length to converge
into a point, and the grand catastrophe of the American war opened to the world.

An eventual plan of the whole campaign had been fixed at Weathersfield, at an
interview between general Washington, May 6.
Knox, and du Portal, on the part of the Americans, and the count de Rochambeau
and the chevalier Chasteleux, on the part of the French. This was to lay siege
to New York in concert with a French sleet which was to arrive on the coast in
the month of August. It was agreed that the French troops should march toward
the North River. Letters were addressed to the executive officers of New
Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Jersey, requiring them to fill
up their battalions, and to have their quotas 6,200 militia in readiness within
a week of the time they might be called for. Accordingly the French troops
marched from Rhode Island in June, and early in the following month joined the
American army. About the time this junction took place, general Washington
marched his army from their winter encampment near Peekskill, to the vicinity
of King's Bridge. General Lincoln fell down the North River with a detachment
in boats, and took possession of the ground where Fort Independence formerly
stood. An attack was made upon him, but was soon discontinued. The British
about this time retired with almost the whole of their forces to York Island.
Flat bottomed boats sufficient to transport 5,000 men were built near Albany,
and brought down Hudson's River to the neighborhood of the American army
before New York. Every movement was made which was introductory to the
commencement of the siege. It was not a little mortifying to general
Washington, to find himself on the second of August to be only a few hundreds
stronger than he was on the day his army first moved from their winter
quarters. He bore this hard trial, however, with his usual magnanimity, and
contented himself with repeating his requisitions to the states, and at the
same time urged them by every tie, to enable him to fulfill engagements entered
into on their account, with the commander of the French troops.

The tardiness of the states, which at other times had brought them to the
brink of ruin, was now accidentally of real service. Had they sent forward
their recruits for the regular army, and their quotas of militia as was
expected, the siege of New York would have commenced in the latter end of July,
or early in August. Whilst the season was wasting away in expectation of these
reinforcements, lord Cornwallis as has been related, fixed himself near the
capes of Virginia. His situation there, the arrival of a reinforcement of 3,000
Germans from Europe to New York, the delay in recruiting the army, and
especially the recent intelligence from count de Grass, that his destination
was fixed to the Chesapeak, concurred, about the middle of August, Aug. 15.
to make a total change of the plan of the campaign.

The American commander still kept up the appearance of an intention to attack
New York, in order to amuse and deceive the British general. Whilst this
deception was played off, the allied army crossed the North River, Aug. 24.
and passed on by the way of Philadelphia to York Town.

At the time that the attack on New York was in serious contemplation, a letter
from general Washington detailing the particulars of the intended operations of
the campaign, being intercepted, fell into the hands of sir Henry Clinton.
After the plan was changed, the royal commander was so much under the
impression of the intelligence contained in the intercepted letter, that he
believed every movement toward Virginia to be a feint, calculated to draw off
his attention from New York. Nor could he be brought to believe that the allies
had fixed upon Virginia for the theater of their intended operations, until the
best opportunity for striking them had elapsed. When general Washington arrived
at Chester, he received the joyful news that count de Grass had arrived in the
Chesapeak on the 30th of August, with 28 sail of the line from the West Indies.
Aug. 30.
The count on his passage fell in with and took a packet from Charleston,
having lord Rawdon on board, who was on his return to Great Britain.

Count de Grass, without loss of time, blocked up York River with three large
ships and some frigates, and moored the principal part of his fleet in Lynhaven
Bay. Three thousand French troops, brought in this fleet from the West Indies,
commanded by the marquis de St. Simon, were disembarked and soon after formed a
junction with the continental troops under the marquis de la Fayette, and the
whole took post at Williamsburg. Lord Cornwallis intended to attack this force,
but before all the necessary arrangements were fixed upon, he received letters
from sir Henry Clinton announcing that he would do his utmost to reinforce the
royal army in the Chesapeak, or make every diversion in his power, and that
admiral Digby was hourly expected on the coast. On the receipt of this
intelligence earl Cornwallis, not thinking himself justified in hazarding an
engagement, abandoned the resolution of attacking the combined force of Fayette
and St. Simon. And from an opinion that his instructions to stand his ground
were positive, or that effectual relief was probable, his lordship thought
proper to risk every thing on the issue of a siege. An attempt was made to burn
or dislodge the French ships in the river, but none to evacuate his posts when
that measure was practicable.

Admiral Greaves with 20 sail of the line made an ineffectual effort for the
relief of Lord Cornwallis. When he appeared off the capes of Virginia, M. de
Grass with his superior fleet went out to meet him, and an indecisive
engagement took place. The British were willing to renew the action; but de
Grass declined it. Sept. 7.
His chief object in coming out of the capes was to cover a French fleet of
eight line of battle ships, which was expected from Rhode Island. Agreeably to
a pre-concerted plan, count de Barras, commander of this fleet, had sailed for
the Chesapeak about the time de Grass sailed from the West Indies for the same
place. To avoid the British fleet, he had taken a circuit by Bermuda; and de
Grass now came out to prevent the British from intercepting him, on his
approach. Whilst the hostile fleets were maneuvering near the mouth of the
Chesapeak, count de Barras passed the British fleet in the night, and got
within the capes of Virginia. After the French fleet had obtained such a
superiority, admiral Greaves soon took his departure, and M. de Grass
re-entered the Chesapeak.

General Washington and count Rochambeau reached Williamsburg on the 14th of
September. They with generals Chastelleux, Sept. 14.
Du Portal, and Knox proceeded to visit count de Grass on board the ship the
Ville de Paris, and agreed on a plan of operations.

Whilst the combined armies were advancing to the siege of York Town, sir Henry
Clinton determined on an excursion from New York to Connecticut, vainly
thinking that the alarm might recall part of the American force to the defense
of that country. The conduct of this expedition was committed to general
Arnold, and its object was the town of New London in his native country.

"The troops employed therein, were landed in two detachments on each side of
the harbor. The one was commanded by lieutenant colonel Air, Sept. 6.
and the other by general Arnold. The latter met with little opposition. Fort
Trumbull, and a redoubt which was intended to cover the harbor, not being
tenable, were evacuated, and the men crossed the river to fort Griswold on
Groton hill. This was furiously attacked by lieutenant colonel Air. The
garrison defended themselves with great resolution, but after a severe conflict
of forty minutes, the fort was carried by the assailants. The Americans had not
more than six or seven men killed, when the British carried their lines; but a
severe execution took place afterward, though resistance had ceased. An
officer of the conquering troops inquired on his entering the fort who
commanded. Colonel Ledyard answered, "I did, but you do now;" and presented him
his sword. The colonel was immediately ran through the body and killed. Between
30 and 40 were wounded, and about 40 were carried off prisoners. On the side of
the British 48 were killed and 145 wounded: Among the latter was major
Montgomery, and among the former was colonel Air. About 15 vessels, loaded
with the effects of the inhabitants, retreated up the river, and four others
remained in the harbor unhurt; but all excepting these were burned by the
communication of fire from the burning stores. Sixty dwelling houses and 84
stores were reduced to ashes. The loss which the Americans sustained by the
destruction of naval stores, of provisions and merchandise, was immense.
General Arnold having completed the object of the expedition, returned in eight
days to New York." The British account of this assault is very different from
the above. See Continuation of Hume's History of England, Vol. VII, p. 634.


Soon after general Washington had visited the French admiral, count de Grass,
the latter, wrote to the former, that in case a British fleet appeared, "he
conceived that he ought to go out and meet them at sea, instead of risking an
engagement in a confined situation." This alarmed the general. He sent the
marquis de la Fayette, with a letter to dissuade him from the dangerous
measure. This letter and the persuasions of the marquis had the desired effect.

The combined forces proceeded on their way to York Town, partly by land, and
partly down the Chesapeak. The whole, together with a body of Virginia militia
under the command of general Nelson, amounting in the aggregate to 12,000 men,
rendezvoused at Williamsburg on the 25th of September, Sept. 25.
and in five days after, moved down to the investiture of York Town. The French
fleet at the same time moved to the mouth of York River, and took a position
which was calculated to prevent lord Cornwallis either from retreating or
receiving succors by water. Before the army marched from Williamsburg to York
Town, general Washington gave out in general orders as follows: "If the enemy
should be tempted to meet the army on its march, the general particularly
enjoins the troops to place their principal reliance on the bayonet, that they
may prove the vanity of the boast which the British make of their peculiar
prowess in deciding battles with that weapon."

The combined army halted in the evening, about two miles from York Town, and
lay on their arms all night. On the next day colonel Scammell, an officer of
great merit, was mortally wounded and taken prison in approaching the outworks
of the British. About this time earl Cornwallis received a letter from sir
Henry Clinton, announcing the arrival of admiral Digby with three ships of the
line from Europe, and the determinations of the general and flag officers in
New York to embark 5,000 men in a fleet, which would probably sail on the 5th
of October -- that this fleet consisted of 23 sail of the line, and that joint
exertions of the navy and army would be made for his relief. On the night after
the receipt of this intelligence, earl Cornwallis quitted his outward position,
and retired to one more inward. On the 9th and 10th of October, the French and
Americans opened their batteries; Oct. 10.
and a tremendous roar of cannon and mortars was continued for six or eight
hours without ceasing. Major Cochran was sent from New York on the 3d of
October with a duplicate of sir Henry Clinton's letter. That gallant officer
went in a vessel to the Capes, and made his way to earl Cornwallis, through the
whole French fleet, in an open boat. He got to York Town on the same day the
Americans opened their batteries; and soon after his arrival had his head
carried off by a cannon ball. On the 10th and 11th the shells of the besiegers
set on fire and burned the Charon, of 44 guns, together with a guard ship and a
transport. Earl Cornwallis, it is said, was advised at this juncture to
evacuate York Town, and, after passing over to Gloucester, to force his way
into the country. But had this movement been made, and the royal army been
defeated or captured in the interior country, and in the mean time had sir
Henry Clinton reached York Town with the promised relief, the precipitancy of
the noble earl would have been perhaps more the subject of censure, than his
resolution of standing his ground and resisting to the last extremity.

On the 11th the besiegers commenced their second parallel, 200 yards from the
works of the besieged. Two redoubts which were advanced on the left of the
British, greatly retarded the progress of the besiegers; it was therefore
determined to attack both at the same hour, on the evening of the 14th, as soon
as it was dark. To accomplish their reduction as soon as possible, Oct. 14.
as well as to prevent jealousies, the attack of the one was committed to the
French, of the other to the Americans. Both detachments having passed the
abbatis and palisades, with unloaded muskets carried them in a few minutes. The
Americans had only 8 killed and 28 wounded; but the French lost a considerable
number of men. Lieutenant colonel Lawrens, son to the former president of
congress, took the commanding officer prisoner. His humanity and that of his
associates so overcame their resentment that they spared the British, though
they were charged, when they went to the assault, to remember New London, and
to retaliate by putting the men in the redoubt to the sword. Being asked why
they had disobeyed orders by bringing them off as prisoners, they answered, "We
could not put them to death, when they begged for their lives." About five of
the British were killed and the rest were captured. Colonel Hamilton who
conducted the enterprise, in his report to the marquis de la Fayette, mentioned
to the honor of his detachment, "that incapable of imitating examples of
barbarity, and forgetting recent provocations, they spared every man who ceased
to resist."

The British were so weakened by the fire of the combined armies, but chiefly
by sickness, that earl Cornwallis could not venture any considerable number in
the making of sallies. The present emergency, however, was such, that he
ordered a sortie of about 400 men, under lieutenant colonel Abercrombie. He
made the attack with such impetuosity, Oct. 16.
that the redoubts which covered the batteries were forced, and eleven pieces
of cannon spiked. The French troops, who guarded that part of the intrenchment,
suffered considerably. This successful exploit did honor to the officers and
troops engaged, but produced no essential benefit. The cannon, being hastily
spiked, were again rendered serviceable; and the combined forces were so
industrious, that, about four o'clock in the afternoon of the same day the
batteries were finished, and fired briskly. Their several batteries were now
covered with nearly 100 pieces of heavy ordnance, whilst the British works were
so destroyed that they could scarcely show a single gun.

Lord Cornwallis being now reduced to the necessity of preparing for a
surrender, or of attempting an escape, determined on the latter. Boats were
prepared under different pretenses, for the reception of the troops by ten at
night, in order to pass them over to Gloucester Point. The arrangements were
made with the utmost secrecy. The intention was to abandon the baggage, and to
leave a detachment behind to capitulate for the town's people, and for the sick
and wounded; his lordship having already prepared a letter on the subject, to
be delivered to general Washington after his departure. The first embarkation
had arrived at Gloucester Point, and the greater part of the troops were
already landed, when the weather, which was before moderate and calm, instantly
changed to a most violent storm of wind and rain. The boats with the remaining
troops were all driven down the river, and the design of passing over was not
only entirely frustrated, but the absence of the boats rendered it impossible
to bring back the troops from Gloucester. Thus weakened and divided, the army
was in no small danger. However, the boats returned, and the troops were
brought back in the course of the forenoon with very little loss.

Things were now hastening to a period which would no longer be protracted; for
the British works were sinking under the weight of the French and American
artillery. All hopes of relief from New York were over, and the strength and
spirits of the royal army were broken down and exhausted by their constant and
unremitting fatigue. Matters being in this situation, Oct. 17.
on the 17th of October land Cornwallis sent a letter to general Washington,
requesting a cessation of arms for 24 hours, and that commissioners might be
appointed for digesting the terms of capitulation. Commissioners were
accordingly appointed; and on the side of the allies were viscount de Noailles
and lieutenant colonel Laurens, whose father was in close confinement in the
Tower of London, whilst the son was drawing up articles, by which an English
nobleman and a British army became prisoners.

On the 19th of October, the posts of York Town and Gloucester were
surrendered. The honor of marching out with colors flying, which had been
demed to general Lincoln, was now refused to lord Cornwallis, and Lincoln was
appointed to receive the submission of the royal army at York Town, precisely
in the same way his own had been conducted, about 18 months before, at
Charleston. The troops that surrendered exceeded 7,000; but so great was the
number of sick and wounded, that there were only 3,800 capable of doing duty.
The officers and soldiers retained their baggage and effects. Fifteen hundred
seamen shared the same fate as the garrison. The Guadaloupe frigate of 24 guns,
and a number of transports were surrendered to the conquerors. About twenty
transports had been sunk or burned during the siege, including the ships
already mentioned. The land forces became prisoners to congress; but the seamen
and ships were assigned to the French admiral. The Americans obtained a fine
train of artillery, consisting of 75 brass ordnance, and 69 iron cannon,
howitzers and mortars. The regular troops of France and America employed in
this siege, consisted of about 7,000 of the former, and 5,500 of the latter;
and they were assisted by about 4,000 militia. On the part of the combined army
about 300 were killed or wounded. On the part of the British about 500; and 70
were taken in the redoubts which were stormed on the 14th of October.

Lord Cornwallis tried to obtain an indemnity for those of the inhabitants who
had joined him; but he was obliged to consent to deliver them up to the
unconditional mercy of their countrymen. His lordship nevertheless obtained
permission for the Boneta sloop of war to pass unexamined to New York. This
gave an opportunity of skreening such of them as were most obnoxious to the
Americans.

A British fleet of 25 sail of the line, two fifty gun ships, and eight
frigates, having on board Sir Henry Clinton, with 7,000 of his best troops,
destined for the relief of lord Cornwallis, arrived off the Chesapeak on the
fifth day after his surrender; Oct. 24.
but on receiving advice of this event, they returned to Sandy Hook. And de
Grass remained in the Chesapeak till the 5th of November, when he set sail for
the West Indies.

The reduction of the British army occasioned unusual transports of joy in the
breasts of the whole body of the people. The door keeper of congress, an aged
man, is said to have expired suddenly, immediately after hearing of the capture
of lord Cornwallis's army. His death was universally ascribed to a violent
emotion of political joy. Nor is this improbable, as many similar instances
occur in history. Oughtred, the mathematician, died in the same way, when he
heard of the restoration of Charles II.
This event was considered as decisive of the independence of America; and
thanks were offered up in the churches as if that event had already happened,
and the independence of America been ratified by the court of Britain. The
preachers pointed out the extraordinary combination of circumstances which had
led to this great event, as evidently demonstrating the special interposition
of Providence i^ their favor. General Washington manifested his exultation by
a general release of all who lay under ^rrest, that there might not, as he
expressed himself, be a single American who should not partake of the universal
joy. Two days after the capitulation, divine service was performed in all the
brigades of the American army, in order to return thanks to the Almighty for
this decisive event; and the general recommended to all the troops that were
not upon duty, that they would assist at divine service "with a serious
deportment, and with that sensibility of heart, which the recollection of the
surprising and particular interposition of Providence in their favor claimed."

Congratulations were presented to the commander in chief by all the different
public bodies in America. Congress, on receiving official account of the great
events which had taken place at York Town, resolved that their thanks should be
presented to his excellency general Washington, for the eminent services which
he had rendered to the United States, and particularly for the well concerted
plan against the British garrisons in York and Gloucester; for the vigor,
attention, and military skill with which the plan was executed, and for the
wisdom and prudence manifested in the capitulation. To the French commanders by
sea and land the thanks of congress were likewise voted. And the 13th of
December was appointed to be observed as a day of thanksgiving and prayer,
throughout the United States.

The campaign of 1781 terminated in all parts of the United States in favor of
the Americans. The British were now confined to their garrisons in New York,
Charleston, and Savannah. After the capture of lord Cornwallis, general
Washington returned with the greatest part of his force to the vicinity of New
York. The British having good reasons for not urging hostilities without their
lines, and general Washington not being in condition to attempt the reduction
of that post, some indecisive excursions of small consequence took place. This
in a great measure was also the case in South Carolina. General Green had
possession of all the state except Charleston and the vicinity. The British
sometimes sallied out of their lines for the acquisition of property and
provisions. In opposing one of these near Cambahee, lieutenant colonel John
Laurens, 1782. Aug. 27.
an accomplished officer of uncommon merit was mortally wounded in the very
last moments of the war.

The British were less confined in their excursions in Georgia, about the
beginning of the year 1782, than in any of the other states; but they were soon
obliged to retire within their lines at Savannah.

After the surrender of lord Cornwallis, general Green being reinforced by the
Pennsylvanian line, was enabled to send general Wayne with a part of the
southern army to Georgia. General Clarke who commanded in Savannah, on hearing
of their advance, sent orders to his officers in the outposts, to burn as f^r
as in their power all the provisions in the country, ^^d then retire to the
capital. The country being ^vacuated by the British, the American governor
^ame with his council from Augusta to Ebenezer. ^oon after his arrival, he
issued a proclamation to every British and Hessian soldier, who should desert
from Savannah, 200 acres of land and some stock; which had the desired effect
in a certain degree.

Colonel Brown, at the head of a considerable force, marched out of the
garrison of Savannah with the apparent intention of attacking general Wayne.
May 21.
General Wayne, by a bold maneuver, got between Brown and the garrison,
attacked him at 12 o'clock at night, and routed his whole party. Though Brown
proved unsuccessful, yet general Green reckoned him one of the best officers
belonging to the British troops. May 24.
On the 24th a large body of Creek Indians, headed by a number of their most
celebrated chiefs and warriors and a British officer, made a furious attack
upon Wayne's infantry in the night. For a few minutes they possessed themselves
of his two field pieces, but they were soon recovered. In the mean time colonel
White with a party of the cavalry came up, and pressed hard upon them, whilst
general Wayne exposed himself greatly in order to retrieve matters. A smart
action ensued, in which both sides fought in close quarters with swords and
bayonets. The Indians displayed uncommon bravery; but, having to contend with
both horse and foot, were completely routed. Fourteen of their number were
killed, one of whom was a famous chief. The Americans had five slain and eight
wounded. Shortly after this affair, a period was put to the miseries of war in
Georgia.

In about three months after the capture of lord Cornwallis was known in Great
Britain, the king and parliament resolved to abandon all offensive operations
in America. In consequence of this, every idea of conquest being given up,
arrangements were made for withdrawing the royal forces from Georgia and South
Carolina, and stationing them in New York.

CHAP. XXXI.
Minorca taken by the Spaniards -- French conquests in the West Indies --
Admiral Rodney's decisive engagement with the French fleet -- Destruction of
the Spanish floating batteries at Gibralter -- Humanity of captain Curtis --
Proceedings of the British parliament -- The British nation wish for peace --
Sir Guy Carleton arrives at New York with powers to treat of peace -- Different
places evacuated by the British troops -- Independence of America acknowledged
-- The army dishanded, and general Washington resigns his commission -- Loss of
men and treasure by the war.

THE United States afforded few great events in the year 1782. Those which took
place in Europe and in the West Indies, in which the powers involved in the
American war were concerned, come now to be related.

Britain was at this time attacked in every quarter where she had foreign
possessions, and the combination against her was so great, that the island of
Minorea was left to its fate. After a tedious siege it surrendered to the
combined armies of France and Spain, Feb. 5.
under the command of the duke de Crillon in the service of his most Catholic
majesty. About the same time the settlements of Demarara and Essiquibo, which
in the preceding year had been taken by the British, were taken from them by
the French. The marquis de Bouille added to the splendor of his former fame
the reduction of St. Eustatius and St. Kitts; the former at the close of the
year 1781, and the latter early in the year 1782. The islands of Nevis and
Monserrat likewise fell into the hands of the French, who were at this time
firmly established in the West Indies. Their land and naval force was very
formidable. The monarchies of France and Spain had never before so prodigious
an armament in that quarter. Their combined navies amounted to sixty sail of
the line, besides a vast multitude of frigates and armed vessels. With this
force they expected to reduce a great part of the British islands.

In the mean time the British ministry sent a squadron under the command of
admiral Rodney for the protection of their possessions in that quarter. After
Rodney had formed a junction with sir Samuel Hood's squadron, and received an
addition of three ships from Britain, his force amounted only to thirty six
sail of the line.

It was the design of count de Grass, who commanded the French fleet at
Martinique amounting to 34 sail of the line, to proceed to Hispaniola and join
the Spanish admiral Don Solano, who with sixteen ships of the line and a
considerable land force was waiting for his arrival, and to make in concert
with him an attack on Jamaica.

The British admiral wished to prevent this junction, or at least to force an
engagement before it was effected. April 8.
Admiral Rodney came up with count de Grass, soon after he had set out to join
the Spanish fleet at Hispaniola. Partial engagements took place on the three
first days after they came near to each other. In these, two of the French
ships were so badly damaged, that they were obliged to quit the fleet. April 12.
On the next day a general engagement took place: This began at seven in the
morning, and continued till past six in the evening. There was no apparent
superiority on either side till between twelve and one o'clock, when admiral
Rodney broke the French line of battle, by bearing down upon their center, and
penetrating through it. The land forces, destined for the expedition against
Jamaica, amounting to 5,500 men, were distributed on board the French fleet.
Their ships were therefore so crowded, that the slaughter on board was
prodigious. The battle was fought on both sides with equal spirit, but with a
very unequal issue. The French, for near a century, had not in any naval
engagement been so completely worsted. Their fleet was little less than ruined.
Upwards of 400 men were killed on board one of their ships, and the whole
number of their killed and wounded amounted by computation to 3,000 killed and
6,000 wounded; while the loss of the British did not much exceed 1,100 men. The
French lost in this action, and the subsequent pursuit, eight ships of the
line. On board the captured ships was the money for the payment of the troops,
the whole train of artillery, with the battering cannon and traveling
carriages, intended for the expedition against Jamaica. One of them was the
Ville de Paris, so called from the city of Paris having built her at its own
expense, and made a present of her to the king. She had cost four millions of
livres, and was esteemed the most magnificent ship in France; she carried 110
guns, and had on board 1,300 men. This was truly an unfortunate day to count de
Grass. Though his behavior throughout the whole action was firm and intrepid,
and his resistance continued till he and two more were the only men left
standing upon the upper deck, he was at last obliged to strike. It was no small
addition to his misfortunes that he was on the point of forming a junction,
which would have set him above all danger. Had this taken place, the whole
British naval power in the West Indies, on principles of ordinary calculation,
would have been insufficient to have prevented him from carrying into effect
schemes of the most extensive consequence.

The ships of the defeated fleet fled in a variety of directions. Twenty three
or twenty four fail made the best of their way to Cape Francois. This was all
that remained in a body of that fleet which was lately so formidable. By this
signal victory, the designs of France and Spain were frustrated. No farther
enterprises were undertaken against the fleets or possessions of Great Britain
in the West Indies, and such measures only were embraced, as seemed requisite
for the purposes of safety. When the news of admiral Rodney's victory reached
Great Britain, a general joy was diffused over the nation. Before there had
been much despondency. Their losses in the Chesapeak and in the West Indies,
together with the increasing number of their enemies, had depressed the spirits
of the great body of the people; but the advantages gained on the 12th of
April, placed them on high ground, either for ending or prosecuting the war. It
was fortunate for the Americans, that this success of the British was posterior
to their loss in Virginia. It so elevated the spirits of Britain, and so
depressed the hopes of France, that had it taken place prior to the surrender
of lord Cornwallis, that event would have been less influential in disposing
the nation to peace. As the catastrophe of York Town closed the national war in
North America, so the defeat of de Grass, in a great measure, put a period to
hostilities in the West Indies.

Other decisive events soon followed, which disposed another of the belligerent
powers to a pacification. Gibralter, though successively relieved, still
continued to be besieged. The reduction of Minorca inspired the Spanish nation
with fresh motives to perseverance. The duke de Crillon, who had been recently
successful in the siege of Minorca, was appointed to conduct the siege of
Gibralter, and it was resolved to employ the whole strength of the Spanish
monarchy in seconding his operations. No means were neglected, nor expense
spared, that promised to forward the views of the besiegers. From the failure
of all plans hitherto adopted for effecting the reduction of Gibralter, it was
resolved to adopt new ones. Among the various projects for this purpose, one
which had been formed by the Chevalier D'Arcon was deemed the most worthy of
trial. This was to construct such floating batteries as could neither be sunk
nor fired. With this view their bottoms were made of the thickest timber, and
their sides of wood and cork long soaked in water, with a large layer of wet
sand between.

To prevent the effects of red hot balls, a number of pipes were contrived to
carry water through every part of them, and pumps were provided to keep these
constantly supplied with water. The people on board were to be sheltered from
the fall of bombs by a cover of rope netting, which was made sloping and
overlaid with wet hides.

These floating batteries, ten in number, were made out of the hulls of large
vessels, cut down for the purpose, and carried from 28 to 10 guns each, and
were seconded by 80 large boats mounted with guns of heavy metal, and also by a
multitude of frigates, ships of force, and some hundreds of small craft.

General Elliot, the intrepid defender of Gibralter, was not ignorant that
inventions of a peculiar kind were prepared against him, but knew nothing of
their construction. He nevertheless provided for every circumstance of danger
that could be foreseen or imagined. Sept. 13.
The 13th day of September was fixed upon by the besiegers for making a grand
attack, when the new invented machines, with all the united powers of gunpowder
and artillery in their highest state of improvement, were to be called into
action. The combined fleets of France and Spain in the bay of Gibralter
amounted to 48 fail of the line. Their batteries were covered with 154 pieces
of heavy brass cannon. The numbers employed by land and sea against the
fortress were estimated at one hundred thousand men. With this force and by the
fire of 300 cannon, mortars, and howitzers, from the adjacent isthmus, it was
intended to attack every part of the British works at one and the same instant.
The surrounding hills were covered with people assembled to behold the
spectacle. The cannonade and bombardment was tremendous. The showers of shot
and shells from the land batteries, and the ships of the besiegers, and from
the various works of the garrison, exhibited a most dreadful scene. Four
hundred pieces of the heaviest artillery were playing at the same moment. The
whole peninsula seemed to be overwhelmed in the torrents of fire which were
incessantly poured upon it. The Spanish floating batteries for some time
answered the expectations of their framers. The heaviest shells often rebounded
from their tops, while thirty two pound shot made no visible impression upon
their hulls. For some hours, the attack and defense were so equally supported,
as scarcely to admit any appearance of superiority on either side. The
construction of the battering ships was so well calculated for withstanding the
combined force of fire and artillery, that they seemed for some time to bid
defiance to the powers of the heaviest ordnance. In the afternoon the effects
of hot shot became visible. At first there was only an appearance of smoke, but
in the course of the night, after the fire of the garrison had continued about
15 hours, two of the floating batteries were in flames, and several more were
visibly beginning to kindle. The endeavors of the besiegers were now
exclusively directed to bring off the men from the burning vessels, but in this
they were interrupted. Captain Curtis who lay ready with 12 gun boats, advanced
and fired upon them with such order and expedition, as to throw them into
confusion before they had finished their business. They fled with their boats,
and abandoned to their fate great numbers of their people. The opening of day
light disclosed a most dreadful spectacle. Many were seen in the midst of the
flames crying out for help, while others were floating upon pieces of timber,
exposed to equal danger from the opposite element. The generous humanity of the
victors equalled their valor, and was the more honorable, as the exertions of
it exposed them to no less danger than those of active hostility. In
endeavoring to save the lives of his enemies, captain Curtis nearly lost his
own. While for the most benevolent purpose he was along side the floating
batteries, one of them blew up, and some heavy pieces of timber fell into his
boat and pierced through its bottom. By similar perilous exertions, near 400
men were saved from inevitable destruction. The exercise of humanity to an
enemy, under such circumstances of immediate action and impending danger,
conferred more true honor than could be acquired by the most ^lendid series of
victories. It in some degree obscured (...) impression made to the disadvantage
of human nature, by the madness of mankind in destroying each other by wasteful
wars. The floating batteries were all consumed. The violence of their explosion
was such, as to burst open doors and windows at a great ^istance. Soon after
the destruction of the floating ^atteries, lord How, with 35 ships of the
line, brought so the brave garrison an ample supply of every thing wanted,
either for their support or their defense. This complete relief of Gibralter
was the third decisive event in the course of a twelvemonth, which favored the
re-establishment of a general peace.

The capture of the British army in Virginia -- the defeat of count de Grass,
and the destruction of the Spanish floating batteries, disposed all the hostile
powers to a general peace.

It was expected indeed by most people in America, and by many in England, that
the capture of lord Cornwallis would instantly dispose the nation to peace; but
the American war was too much the favorite of the ministry to be relinquished,
without a struggle for its continuance.

The king of Great Britain, in his speech to parliament, after intelligence had
arrived of the capitulation of York Town, declared "That he should not answer
to the trust committed to the sovereign of a free people, Nov. 17. 1781.
if he consented to sacrifice either to his own desire of peace, or to their
temporary ease and relief, those essential rights and permanent interests, upon
the maintenance and preservation of which the future strength and security of
the country must forever depend." The determined language of this speech
pointed to the continuance of the American war. An address of thanks, couched
in the usual style, was voted in the house of commons by a majority of 131 to
54. In the house of lords a similar address was moved for, and, after great
debates, a motion for an amendment to the address being made by lord Shelburne,
the house divided, and the amendment was rejected, by a majority of 75 to 31. A
short protest against the address was entered in the journals of the house
signed by the duke of Richmond, the marquis of Rockingham, and earl
Fitzwilliam, in which they declared, that they diffented, "for reasons too
often urged in vain for the last seven years against the ruinous prosecution of
the unjust war carrying on by his majesty's ministers against the people of
North America, and too fatally confirmed by repeated experience, and the late
disgraceful loss of a second army, to s^and in need of repetition.

From the month of November till the month of February the house of commons
were employed in war^^ debates on the American war. During which time the
minority were daily gaining ground, and the ministry were giving up one point
after another. They at first consented that the war should not be carried on to
the same extent as formerly; then, that there should be no internal continental
war; next, that there should be no other war than what was necessary for the
defense of the posts already in their possession; and, last of all, none but
against the French in America.

As this war was made a parilamentary war, by an addrese to the king in
February, 1775, it was now no longer so, by an address of the most numerous
house, of the same parliament in February, 1782, for its discontinuance. To
this address his majesty answered, "that in pursuance of their advice, he would
take such measures as should appear to him the most conducive to the
restoration of harmony, between Great Britain and the revolted colonies." The
thanks of the ^ouse were voted for this answer; but the guarded ^nguage
thereof, together with other suspicious cir^umstances, induced general Conway
to move another ^^solution, to the following effect: "That the house would
confider as enemies to his majesty and the coun^ty, all those who should advise
or by any means attempt the farther prosecution of offensive war, on the
continent of North America, for the purpose of redu^ing the colonies to
obedience by force." This resolution, which was carried without a division, and
the address to which it had reference closed the scene of the American war. A
complete revolution in the cabinet was effected, March 27th, 1782, under the
ausplces of the marquis of Rockingham, who was appointed first lord of the
treasury. On the decease of the marquis of Rockingham, earl Shelburne was
appointed his successor. The first business of the new ministry, composed of
members opposed to the American war, was the taking measures for effectuating a
general peace.

The great change in the public mind in Great Britain favorable to American
independence took place between November, 1781, and March, 1782. In that
interval Mr. Laurens was released from his severe and tedious confinement in
the Tower. Before and after his release, he had frequent opportunities of
demonstrating to persons in power, that every hope of peace without the
acknowledgment of independence was illufory. The constant triumphs of the
ministry over every effort to oppose them, and their unremitting perseverance
to carry on the war with America in despite of every remonstrance at home and
calamity abroad, had, until the above period, nearly annihilated all popular
clamours on the subject. It was considered as an evil which could not be
remedied. But the defeat of lord Cornwallis, added to seven years experience,
convinced the greatest advocates for the American war, that the recognition of
the independence of America, was an indispensable preliminary to the
termination of a war, from the continuance of which, neither profit nor honor
was to be acquired.

On the 5th of May, 1782, fir Guy Carleton arrived at New York, being appointed
to the command of the Britist, troops in America in the room of fir Henry
Clinton. Two days after his arrival, he wrote a letter to General Washington,
acquainting him, that admiral Digby was joined with himself in a commission to
treat of peace with the people of America; transmitting to him, at the same
time, some papers tending to manifest the pacific disposition of the government
and people of Britain toward those of America. He also defired a passport for
Mr. Morgan, who was appointed to transmit a similar letter of compliment to the
congress. General Washington declined signing any passport till he had taken
the opinion of congress upon that measure; and by them he was directed to
refuse any passport for such a purpose. However, another letter was sent to
general Washington, dated the 2d of August, signed by sir Guy Carl^ton and
rear-admiral Digby in which they informed him, that they were acquainted by
authority that negociations for a general peace had already commenced at Paris;
that Mr. Grenville was invested with full powers to treat with all the parties
at was, and was then at Paris in the execution of his commission. They farther
informed him, that his Britannic majesty, in order to remove all obstacles to
that peace which he so ardently wished to restore, had commanded his ministers
to direct Mr. Grenville, that the independency of the thirteen provinces should
be proposed by him, in the first instance, instead of making it the condition
of a general treaty. But some jealousies were entertained by the Americans,
that it was the design of the British court either to disunite them, or to
bring them to treat of a peace separately from their ally the king of France:
they therefore resolved, that any man, or body of men, who should presume to
make any separate or partial convention or agreement with the king of Great
Britain, or with any commissioner or commissioners under the crown of Great
Britain, ought to be considered and treated as open and avowed enemies of the
United States of America; and also that those states could not with propriety
hold any conference or treaty with any commissioners on the part of Great
Britain, unless they should, as a preliminary thereto, either withdraw their
fleets and armies, or else, in positive or express terms, acknowledge the
independence of the said ^^ates. They likewise resolved, that any propositions
which might be made by the court of Great Britain, in any manner tending to
violate the treaty subsisting between them and the king of France, ought to be
treated with every mark of indignity and contempt.

In the month of June, the town of Savannah and the whole province of Georgia
were evacuated by the British troops, as was also Charleston, South Carolina,
about the close of the year. In the mean time, the negociations for peace being
continued, provisional articles of peace were signed at Paris, on the 30th of
November, by the commissioner of his Britannic majesty and the American
commissioners, in which his majesty acknowledged the united colonies of New
Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be "free, sovereign, and
independent states." They had constituted themselves such on the 4th of July,
1776; they had been acknowledged such by the French king on the 30th of
January, 1778, when he concluded with them a treaty of amity and commerce;
Holland had acknowledged them as such April 19th, 1782; Sweden acknowledged
them as such February 5th, 1783; Denmark the 25th February, Spain in March, and
Russia in July, the same year.

The definitive treaty was signed on the 3d of September, 1783; and, on the
25th of November following, 1783.
the British troops evacuated New York, which was immediately entered by the
Americans in a joyful and well conducted procession, headed by general
Washington and governor Clinton. Soon after this event, the soldiers of the
American army, cheerfully resuming the character of citizens, returned
peaceably to their respective homes, while their beloved and ever honored
commander, having taken a pathetic leave of his officers, repaired to
Philadelphia, where he was received with the utmost respect and affection, by
all orders of men, both in the civil and military line. There he delivered in
his accounts to the comptroller, from June, 1775, down to December the 28th,
1783, all his own hand writing; and every entry made in the most particular
manner, with a statement of the occasion of each charge. The total amount of
the expenditures was L.14,479 18 s. 9 d. 3 qrs. sterling. Happy would it be for
the United States, should each person who has the handling of the public money
prove equally exact and punctual. His excellency then went to Annapo^is, and,
on the 19th of December, at an audience with Congress (perhaps the most
singular and interesting that ever occurred) resigned his commission into the
hands of the president of that honorable body, amidst the acclamations of his
grateful and admiring countrymen.

According to the report of the committee appointed for that purpose the
Foreign Debt of the United States incurred by the war, amounted to 7,885,085
dollars, and the Domestic Debt to 34,115,290, total, at 4 s. 6 d. each, equal
to 9,450,084 l. sterling, the interest of which at 6 per cent. is 567,005 l.
But the cost to Great Britain is moderately computed at 115,654,914 l. and the
additional annual burden by it 4,557,575 l. since January, 1775. As to the
loss of men during this unhappy war, the States of America, according to
authentic estimates, lost by the sword and in prison near 80,000 men; and by
the British returns at New York, the number of soldiers killed in the service
amounted to 43,633.

CHAP. XXXII.
A general view of the political state of the Union, until the Federal
Government was established.

NO sooner was peace restored by the definitive treaty, and the British troops
withdrawn from the country, than the United States began to experience the
defects of their general government. Whilst an enemy was in the country, fear,
which had first impelled the colonies to associate in mutual defense, continued
to operate as a band of political union. It gave to the resolutions and
recommendations of congress the force of laws, and generally commanded a ready
acquiescence on the part of the state legislatures. Articles of confederation
and perpetual union had been framed in congress, and submitted to the
consideration of the states, in the year 1778. Some of the states immediately
acceded to them; but others, which had not unappropriated lands, hesitated to
subscribe a compact, which would give an advantage to the states which
possessed large tracts of unlocated lands, and were thus capable of a great
superiority in wealth and population. All objections however had been overcome,
and by the accession of Maryland in March, 1781, the articles of confederation
were ratified, as the frame of government for the United States.

These articles, however, were framed during the rage of war, when a principle
of common safety supplied the place of a coercive power in government; by men
who could have had no experience in the art of governing an extensive country,
and under circumstances the most critical and embarrassing. To have offered to
the people, at that time, a system of government armed with the powers
necessary to regulate and control the contending interests of thirteen states,
and the possessions of millions of people, might have (...) a jealousy between
the states or in the minds of the people at large, that would have weakened the
operations of war, and perhaps have rendered a union impracticable. Hence the
numerous defects of the confederation.

On the conclusion of peace, these defects began to be felt. Each state assumed
the right of disputing the propriety of the resolutions of congress, and the
interest of an individual state was placed in opposition to the common interest
of the union. In addition to this source of division, a jealousy of the powers
of congress began to be excited in the minds of the people. This jealousy of
the privileges of fre^^^en had been roused by the oppressive act of the British
parliament; and no sooner had the danger from this quarter ceased, than the
fears of people changed their object, and were turned against their own rulers.

In this situation there were not wanting men of industry and talents, who had
been enemies to the revolution, and who embraced the opportunity to multiply
the apprehensions of the people and increase the popular discontents. As soon
as the tumults of war had subsided, an attempt was made to convince the people,
that the act of congress passed in 1778, granting to the officers of the army
half pay for life, was highly unjust and tyrannical, and that it was but the
first step toward the establishment of pensions and an uncontrollable
despotism. The a^^ of congress, passed in 1783, commuting half ^ay for life for
five years full pay, was designed to (...) the apprehensions of people, and to
convince them that this gratuity was intended merely to indemnity the officers
for their losses by the depreciation of the paper currency, and not to
establish a precede for the granting of pensions. This act however did not
satisfy the people, who supposed that the officers had been generally
indemnified for the loss of their pay, by the grants made them from time to
time by the legislatures of the several states. Besides, the act, whilst it
gave five years full pay to the officers, allowed but one year's pay to the
privates, a distinction which had great influence in exciting and continuing
the popular ferment, and one that turned a large share of the public rage
against the officers themselves.

During this situation of affairs, the public odium against the officers was
augmented by another circumstance. The officers, just before the disbanding of
the army, had formed a society, called by the name of the Cincinnati, after the
Roman Dictator, Cincinnatus. Whatever were the real views of the framers of
this institution, its design was generally understood to be harmless and
honorable. The ostensible views of the society could not however screen it
from popular jealousy. The principles on which the society was formed, would,
it was said, in process of time, originate and establish an order of nobility
in this country, which would be repugnant to the genius of republican
governments, and dangerous to liberty.

The opposition to the congressional acts in favor of the officers and to the
order of the Cincinnati, did not rise to the same pitch in the other states as
in Connecticut; yet it produced much disturbance in Massachusetts, and some
others. Jealousy of power had been universally spread among the people of the
United States. The destruction of the old forms of governments, and the
licentiousness of war, had, in a great measure, broken their habits of
obedience; their passions had been inflamed by the cry of despotism; and like
sentinels, who had been suddenly surprised by the approach of an enemy, the
rustling of a leaf was sufficient to give them an alarm. This spirit of
jealousy operated with other causes to relax the energy of federal operations.

When the danger of war had ceased, and the vast importations of foreign goods
had lessened the quantity of circulating specie, the states began to be very
remiss in surnishing their proportion of moneys. The annihilation of the credit
of the paper bills had totally stopped their circulation, and the specie was
leaving the country in cargoes, for remittances to Great Britain; still the
luxurious habits of the people, contracted during the war, called for new
supplies of goods, and private gratification seconded the narrow policy of
state interest in defeating the operations of the general government.

Thus the revenues of congress were annually diminishing; some of the states
wholly neglecting to make provision for paying the interest of the national
debt; others making but a partial provision, until the scanty supplies received
from a few of the richest states would hardly satisfy the demands of the civil
list.

This weakness of the federal government, in conjunction with the flood of
certificates or public securities, which congress could neither fund nor pay,
occasioned them to depreciate to a very inconsiderable value. The officers and
soldiers of the late army, and those who furnished supplies for public
exigencies, were obliged to receive for wages these certificates, or promissary
notes, which passed at a fifth, an eighth, or a tenth of their nominal value;
being thus deprived at once of the greatest part of the reward due for their
services. Some indeed profited by speculations in these evidences of the public
debt; but such as were under a necessity of parting with them, were robbed of
that support which they had a right to expect and demand from their countrymen.

Pennsylvania indeed made provision for paying the interest of her debts, both
state and federal; assuming her supposed proportion of the continental debt,
and giving the creditors of her own state notes in exchange for those of the
United States. The resources of that state are immense, but she was not able to
make punctual payments, even in a depreciated paper currency.

Massachusetts, in her zeal to comply fully with the requisitions of congress,
and satisfy the demands of her own creditors, laid a heavy tax upon the people.
This was the immediate cause of the rebellion in that state, in 1786. But a
heavy debt lying on the state, added to burdens of the same nature, upon almost
every corporation within it; a decline, or rather an extinction of public
credit; a relaxation and corruption of manners, and a free use of foreign
luxuries; a decay of trade and manufactures, with a prevailing scarcity of
money; and, above all, individuals involved in debt to each other. These were
the real, though more remote causes of the insurrection. It was the tax which
the people were required to pay, that caused them to feel the evils which we
have enumerated -- this called forth all their other grievances; and the first
(...) of violence committed, was the burning or destroying of the tax bill.
This sedition threw the state into a convulsion which lasted about a year;
courts of justice were violently obstructed; the collection of debts was
suspended; and a body of armed troops, under the command of general Lincoln,
was employed during the winter of 1786, to disperse the insurgents. Yet so
numerous were the latter in the counties of Worcester, Hampshire, and
Berkshire, and so obstinately combined to oppose the execution of law by force,
that the governor and council of the state thought proper not to entrust
general Lincoln with military powers, except to act on the defensive, and to
repel force with force, in case the insurgents should attack him. The leaders
of the rebels, however, were not men of talents; they were desperate, but
without fortitude; and while they were supported with a superior force, they
appeared to be impressed with that consciousness of guilt, which awes the most
daring wretch, and makes him shrink from his purpose. This appears by the
conduct of a large party of the rebels before the magazine at Springfield,
where general Shepard, with a small guard, was stationed to protect the
continental stores. The insurgents appeared upon the plain, with a vast
superiority of numbers, but a few shot from the artillery made the multitude
retreat in disorder, with the loss of four men. This spirited conduct of
general Shepard, with the industry, perseverance and prudent sirmness of
general Lincoln, dispersed the rebels, drove the leaders from the state, and
restored tranquillity. An act of indemnity wa^ passed in the legislature for
all the insurgen^s, except a few of the leaders, on condition they should
become peaceable subjects and take the oath of allegiance. The leaders
afterward petitioned for pardon, which, from motives of policy, was granted by
the legislature.

As soon as hostilities between Great Britain and America were suspended, the
specie of the country was drained off to pay for foreign goods, the
importations of which exceeded all calculation. Within two years from the close
of the war, a scarcity of money was the general cry. The merchants found it
impossible to collect their debts, and make punctual remittances to their
creditors in Great Britain; and the consumers were driven to the necessity of
retrenching their superfluities in living, and of returning to their ancient
habits of industry and economy.

This change was however progressive and slow. In many of the states which
suffered by the numerous debts they had contracted, and by the distresses of
war, the people called aloud for emissions of paper bills to supply the
deficiency of a medium. The depreciation of the continental bills, was a recent
example of the ill effects of such an expedient, and the impossibility of
supporting the credit of paper, was urged by the opposers of the measure as a
substantial argument against adopting it. But nothing would silence the popular
clamor; and many men of the first talents and eminence united their voices
with that of the populace. Paper money had formerly maintained its credit, and
been of singular utility; and past experience, notwithstanding a change of
circumstances, was an argument in its favor that bore down opposition in
several of the states.

Whilst the states were thus endeavoring to repair the loss of specie, by
empty promises, and to support their business by shadows rather than by
reality, the British ministry formed some commercial regulations that deprived
them of the profits of their trade to the West Indies and Great Britain. Heavy
duties were laid upon such articles as were remitted to the London merchants
for their goods; and such were the duties upon American bottoms, that the
states were almost wholly deprived of the carrying trade. A prohibition was
laid upon the produce of the United States, shipped to the British West India
Islands in American built vessels, and in those manned by American seamen.
These restrictions fell heavy upon the eastern states, which depended much upon
ship building for the support of their trade; and they materially injured the
business of the other states.

Without a union that was able to form and execute a general system of
commercial regulations, some of the states attempted to impose restraints upon
the British trade that should indemnify the merchant for the losses he had
suffered, or induce the British ministry to enter into a commercial treaty and
relax the rigor of their navigation laws. These measures however produced
nothing but mischief. The states did not act in concert, and the ^estraints
laid on the trade of one state operated to throw the business into the hands of
its neighbor. Massachusetts, in her zeal to counteract the effect of the
English navigation laws, laid enormous duties upon British goods imported into
that state; but the other states did not adopt a similar measure; and the loss
of business soon obliged that state to repeal or suspend the law. Thus when
Pennsylvania laid heavy duties on British goods, Delaware and New Jersey made a
number of free ports to encourage the landing of goods within the limits of
those states; and the duties in Pennsylvania served no purpose, but to create
smuggling.

Thus divided, the states began to feel their weakness. Most of the
legislatures had neglected to comply with the requisitions of congress for
furnishing the federal treasury; the resolves of congress were disregarded; the
proposition for a general impost to be laid and collected by congress was
negatived first by Rhode Island, and afterward by New York. The British troops
continued, under pretense of a breach of treaty on the part of America, to hold
possession of the forts on the frontiers of the states. Many of the states
individually were infested with popular commotions or iniquitous tender laws,
whilst the^ were oppressed with public debts: The certificates or public notes
had lost most of their value, and circulated merely as the objects of
speculation: Congress lost their respectability, and the United States their
credit and importance.

In the midst of these calamities, a proposition was made in 1785, in the house
of delegates in Virginia, to appoint commissioners, to meet such as might be
appointed in the other states, who should form a system of commercial
regulations for the United States, and recommend it to the several legislatures
for adoption.

Accordingly, several of the states appointed commissioners who met at
Annapolis in the summer of 1786, to consult what measures should be taken to
unite the states in some general and efficient commercial system. But as the
states were not all represented, and the powers of the commissioners were, in
their opinion, too limited to propose a system of regulations adequate to the
purposes of government, they agreed to recommend a general convention to be
held at Philadelphia the next year, with powers to frame a general plan of
government for the United States. This measure appeared to the commissioners
absolutely necessary. The old confederation was essentially defective. It was
destitute of almost every principle necessary to give effect to legislation. It
was defective in the article of legislating over states instead of individuals.
It was also destitute of a sanction to its laws. When resolutions were passed
in congress, there was no power to compel obedience by fine, by suspension of
privileges, or other means. It was also destitute of a guarantee for the state
governments. Had one state been invaded by its neighbor, the union was not
constitutionally bound to assist in repelling the invasion, and supporting the
constitution of the invaded state. The confederation was farther deficient in
the principle of apportioning the quotas of money to be furnished by each
state; in a want of power to form commercial laws, and to raise troops for the
defense and security of the union; in the equal suffrage of the states, which
placed Rhode Island on a footing in congress with Virginia; and, to crown all
the defects, the want of a judiciary power, to define the laws of the Union,
and to reconcile the contradictory decisions of a number of independent
judicatories.

These and many inferior defects were obvious to the commissioners, and
therefore they urged a general convention, with powers to form and offer to the
consideration of the states, a system of general government that should be less
exceptionable. Accordingly in May, 1787, delegates from all the states, except
Rhode Island, assembled at Philadelphia, and chose general Washington for their
president. After four months deliberation, in which the clashing interests of
the several states appeared in all their force, the convention agreed to
recommend the plan of federal government.

From the moment the proceedings of the general convention at Philadelphia
transpired, the public mind was exceedingly agitated, and suspended between
hope and fear, until nine states had ratified their plan of a federal
government. The following exhibits, at one view, the order, time, etc. in which
the several states ratified the Federal Constitution.

Delaware, December 3, 1787, unanimously. Pennsylvania, December 13, 46 to 23
New Jersey, December 19, unanimously. Georgia, January 2, 1788, unanimously.
Connecticut, January 9, 128 to 40 Massachusetts, February 6, 187 to 168
Maryland, April 28, 63 to 12 South Carolina, May 23, 149 to 73 New Hampshire,
June 21, 57 to 46 Virginia, June 25, 89 to 79 New York, July 26, 30 to 25 North
Carolina, November 27, 1789, 193 to 75 Rhode Island, May 29, 1790, Vermont,
January 10, 1791, by a great majority. Kentucky.


Indeed the anxiety continued until Virginia and New York had acceded to the
system. But this did not prevent the demonstrations of their joy, on the
accession of each state.

On the ratification in Massachusetts, the citizens of Boston, in the elevation
of their joy, formed a procession in honor of the happy event, which was
novel, splendid, and magnificent. This example was afterward followed, and in
some instances improved upon, in Baltimore, Charleston, Philadelphia, New
Haven, Portsmouth and New York, successively. Nothing could equal the beauty
and grandeur of these exhibitions. A ship was mounted upon wheels, and drawn
through the streets; mechanics erected stages, and exhibited specimens of
labor in their several occupations, as they moved along the road; flags, with
emblems descriptive of all the arts and of the Federal Union, were invented and
displayed in honor of the government. Multitudes of all ranks in life
assembled to view the splendid scenes; whilst sobriety, joy and harmony marked
the brilliant exhibitions, by which the Americans celebrated the establishment
of their empire.

On the 3d of March, 1789, the delegates from the eleven states, which at that
time had ratified the constitution, assembled at New York, where a convenient
and elegant building had been prepared for their accommodation. On opening and
counting the votes for president, it was found that GEORGE WASHINGTON was
unanimously elected to that dignified office, and that JOHN ADAMS was chosen
vice president. The annunciation of the choice of the first and second
magistrates of the United States, occasioned a general diffusion of joy among
the friends to the Union, and fully evinced that these eminent characters were
the choice of the people.

On the 30th of April, 1789, GEORGE WASHINGTON was inaugurated PRESIDENT of the
United States of America, in the city of New York. The ceremony was performed
in the open gallery of Federal Hall, in the view of many thousand spectators.
The oath was administered by chancellor Livingston. Several circumstances
concurred to render the scene unusually solemn -- the presence of the beloved
FATHER and DELIVERER of his country -- the impressions of gratitude for his
past services -- the vast concourse of spectators -- the devout fervency with
which he repeated the oath, and the reverential manner in which he bowed to
kiss the sacred volume -- These circumstances, together with that of his being
chosen to the most dignified office in America, and perhaps in the world, by
the unanimous voice of more than three millions of enlightened freemen, -- all
conspired to place this among the most august and interesting scenes which have
ever been exhibited on this globe.

Hitherto the deliberations of the legislature of the Union have been marked
with wisdom, and the measures they have adopted have been productive of great
national prosperity. The wife appointments to office, which, in general, have
been made -- the establishment of a revenue and judiciary system, and of a
national bank -- the assumption of the debts of the individual states, and the
encouragement that has been given to manufactures, commerce, literature, and
^^^useful inventions, open the fairest prospect of the peace, union and
increasing respectability of the American States.

END OF VOL. II.
ERRATA IN VOL. I.
Page 90, line 12, read Possessors. P. 135, l. 4 from bottom, r. Charles II. P.
^ 37, l. 27, r. tallage. P. 145, l. 3 f. bot. r. persons were. P. 172, l. 3 f.
bot. r. ever. P. 179, l. 25, r. re^ea^ed. P. 183, in the note, r. Vol. I. P.
228, l. 9, r. that of an union. P. 282, l. 8 f. bow r. groom of the ^^te. P.
291, l. 19, r. an outlaw. P. 299 and 300, at top, r. [1773] P. 301, l. 12, r.
bone.

ERRATA IN VOL. II.
Page 23, line 4, read to her peace. P. 64, l. 18, r. when. P. 80, l. 6, r. the
privateers. P. 102. l. 17, r. sect. P. 109, l. 2, r. conquerors imagined, P.
134, 135, and 136, r. at top, [1776] P. 236, l. 7, r. of these. P. 278, l. 5 f.
bot. r. (...) joins. P. 311, l. 11 f. bot. r. Van Vert. P. 398, r. at top
[1783] and dele the year at top to the end of the volume.


