AN INTRODUCTION TO THE READING OF THE HOLY BIBLE: PARTICULARLY ADAPTED FOR THE
USE OF SCHOOLS.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, NO. 87, HIGH STREET.

1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following sheets were principally compiled by an anonymous person, said to
be a lady, in IRELAND; from a sense of the great want of something of the kind
in that country.

AS the work is in general executed with much simplicity and good sense, as
well as piety, it may be no less useful on this side of the water: where,
though we abound in small tracts for young persons, we have none that come up
to the idea here proposed, of making the Bible easy and intelligible to
children; and so as to guard them at the same time against the wrong
conceptions and prejudices which they might otherwise imbibe from reading the
histories at length, of the Old Testament especially, in a book of such a
singular cast and style, and treating of matters so much above their present
comprehension.

With regard to the method of teaching this book, says the author in a short
preface to the work, that which I have experienced to be most for the ease of
the Master and Pupil, is the following:

While the children are employed at any work, let the master or mistress read
to them one of these stories by way of amusement, beginning with the first; and
it will naturally entertain and interest them. When each has repeated it again
to the master, not in the words of the book, but in their own (retaining,
however, all the sense) then read them the next story.

The questions and answers at the end of the chapters, are of too much
importance to be passed over lightly; but they should not be taught by rote. If
the children do not spontaneously ask those questions themselves, let the
master first suggest, and then answer them. Let him occasionally repeat those
doubts to them, and he will judge by their answers, whether they have really
imbibed their meaning or not; and if it appears they have not, he must again
read to them the answers as in the book, till they are perfectly fixed in their
minds.

All this may be done in an easy good humoured way, as an indulgence, and not
as a task. A little every day will bring them on as fast as can be desired.

"I suppose it unnecessary to caution such masters, as are disposed to observe
the foregoing directions, that they must take care before they teach a new
lesson, to know whether the children remember the substance of all the
preceding ones. This is very easily done in the way of conversation; and by
trying whether they retain the titles of each chapter in their regular
succession."

Although this compilation from the scriptures is mentioned as being chiefly
designed for children, yet whoever knows the state of religious knowledge in
this country, will easily see, that those of a riper age may find it a good
assistant to lead them into just and proper views of the revealed history of
the dealings of Almighty God with mankind in the different ages of the world.

The alterations and improvements made in this (...) it is presumed, will still
better promote the original intent of the work.

AN INTRODUCTION, etc.
CHAP. I.
GENESIS i. THE CREATION.
WE find by the first chapter of the book of Genesis, which is the beginning of
the Holy Bible, that God Almighty made the world in six days. He made the day
and the night, the heaven above, the dry land and the sea, the trees, and
plants that grow upon the earth, the sun, moon, and stars, fish and fowl, and
four footed beasts, and he also made the first man. He formed him out of dust,
and called him Adam, and gave him power over every thing upon earth.

He commanded the seventh day to be kept holy for ever, which is one of the
reasons why we go to church every Sunday, and make it a holy day.

Ques. Who has the greatest power?

Ans. God. For he made every thing, he can do what he pleases, and there is
none can resist him.

Q. Who has the greatest goodness?

A. God. For he gave us life, and all we have. He keeps us from all harm, and
loves us as long as we endeavor to be like him in goodness.

Q. What do we learn from the history of the creation?

A. We should learn to praise God for having made birds, and beasts, and fish
useful to us; and we should not use any of them cruelly, or give them
unnecessary pain.

CHAP. II.
GENESIS ii. iii. THE FALL OF ADAM.
GOD Almighty put Adam into a pleasant garden, called Paradise, or the garden
of Eden; and God said, man should not be alone, he would make a companion for
him -- he did so; and gave her to Adam to be his wife. Adam loved her
exceedingly, and called her Eve.

Our kind Creator, who is all goodness, and desirous to make us happy, gave
Adam and Eve every thing, except one tree which stood in the middle of the
garden. He forbade them to eat the fruit of that tree, and told them if they
did eat of it, they should die.

They lived very happily in that garden for some time, and had nothing to
trouble them while they were good and innocent. But evil thoughts and desires
crept into the mind of Eve, and tempted her to eat what was forbidden; when she
had eaten of that forbidden fruit, she desired her husband to do the same, and
he was persuaded, though he knew that it was wrong, to eat some too. But when
they had done eating they were ashamed, and grew very uneasy, and went to hide
themselves behind the trees in the garden. -- All people who have done wrong
are troubled in mind, it is only good people that are happy within their own
breasts, and pleased with the rest of the world; because they know they have
done well, and that God loves them, and that every body should speak well of
them.

Adam and Eve, thought in their fright to hide themselves from God; but he
knows every thing, and sees every where, even into our thoughts. He called to
them and asked them, why they had eaten the fruit which he had commanded them
not to eat? Eve answered, that the Serpent, meaning her own evil inclination,
had persuaded her, and Adam said his wife had persuaded him. -- God is not to
be put off with excuses, what he commands, must be minded. So he directly
turned them out of that happy place, and sent them to wander about in a wild
country, overgrown with weeds and briars, where they could get nothing to eat
but what they dug and ploughed, and labored hard for. There they grew old, and
sickly, and died.

Q. What should we do when we have done wrong.

A. Whenever we have done wrong, we should never make excuses, or endeavor to
hide our faults, for that is a kind of falsehood; but we should at once confess
that we are to blame, be sorry for our fault, and endeavor to do so no more,
that we may be forgiven.

Q. How far can God see?

A. He can see every where, for he is not like us. He sees and hears from one
part of the world to the other, and for that reason all wise people fear God
more than man. It is impossible to hide any thing from him; and as he loves us,
he will always punish us one way or other when we do ill, in order to make us
grow better.

Q. What else do we learn from this history?

A. That we ought to be very careful not to do any thing that can be the least
displeasing to God, however trifling it may appear to us, as we cannot tell
what evil may befall us in consequence. We see that Adam and Eve were turned out
of Paradise for having once done wrong.

CHAP. III.
GENESIS IV. THE DEATH OF ABEL.
ADAM and Eve had two sons, Cain and Abel; Cain was a husbandman, and Abel a
shepherd; Cain was ill-natured and obstinate, but Abel was very mild, and
obedient to God and his parents. God therefore loved him better than Cain, and
this made Cain jealous of his brother Abel, and made him hate that good young
man -- He had much better have striven to have been like him, and then God
would have loved him as well as he loved Abel. One day when the two brothers
were abroad together in a field, Cain rose up against poor Abel and killed him.
He thought they were alone, and that nobody would ever know it, but God is
always present with us. He therefore was with Abel when he was so cruelly
murdered, and called out to Cain and told him that he knew it. Cain was then
ready to sink into the earth with fear, as well he might after such an action.
God drove him away that moment, and put a frightful mark upon him, so that
every body who saw him ran away. He was very unhappy all the rest of his life,
and at last he died.

Q. Where is God?

A. God is in Heaven. It is there he has promised that good people shall be
after death, where they will be happy for ever: but he is likewise every where
at once. He is here now, and knows all we are doing, and yet is in every other
place we can think of, at the same time.

Q. How was God made, and at what time?

A. He was never made, for he was before all time. He made all things, both in
heaven and earth, and was always as he is now. When we go to him after death,
we shall know him much better than we can do at present.

Q. What do we learn from the history of Cain and Abel?

A. We may learn from the history of Cain and Abel how wrong it is not to love
one another, and whenever we are going to do any thing that is ill-natured, or
to quarrel with one another, we should do well to remember, that by indulging
these habits, Cain was tempted at last to murder his brother, and was driven
away from his parents, into a strange country.

CHAP. IV.
GENESIS vi. THE FLOOD.
ADAM and Eve had another son, besides Cain and Abel, called Seth, and also
several other children.

Cain too had a great many children, and those children, when they grew up to
be men and women had several children of their own, so that the world became
full of people. After the death of their fathers, these children grew very
wicked, they were ill-natured and quarrelsome, gave way to their passions,
neglected to think of God, or to say their prayers; and God was so offended
with them, that he resolved to destroy the whole world.

There was however among them one good man called Noah, and God took care he
should not suffer with the rest. He therefore taught him how to make a kind of
covered boat, of prodigious bigness, called an Ark, and bade him to go into it
with all his family, and take with him all sorts of beasts and birds, and then
to shut himself up in it.

When he had done so, God sent so much rain for forty days and nights, that the
waters rose up to the tops of the houses and of the trees on the highest
mountains, so that the men, women, and children, were every one of them
drowned. All this while Noah's Ark floated safely upon the waters, and no
mischief befell him, for God was pleased with him. At last the Ark rested upon a
high mountain, which is called Mount Ararat; and at the end of seven months the
rain being gone, God sent a strong wind to dry the ground. Noah then opened a
window and let out a raven; this is a bird that feeds upon dead bodies, and he
found so much to eat that he went back no more. After seven days Noah let out a
dove, which is a bird like a pigeon, but it flew back to him very soon, because
it could find no dry place to perch upon. In seven days more Noah let out the
dove again, and it came back with an olive branch in its bill. Noah knew by
this that the waters were almost dried from off the earth, and when he let out
the bird again, it came back to him no more. He soon after ventured to open the
door and go out with all his family. The first thing they did was to kneel down
and praise God, for having saved them; good people always praise God for every
thing, because they know that all comes from him. God was so pleased with
seeing Noah thankful, that he blessed him, and bade him look up and see a
rainbow, which he told him was for a token, that the world never would be
drowned again. Noah lived a great while after this with his wife, his three
sons, and their wives and children. When he grew very old and weak, he died in
peace.

Q. What do we learn from the history of Noah and the flood?

A. We should learn to be good and to trust entirely in God.

Whenever you see a rainbow, remember it was the sign which God gave of his
forgiving mankind, and you should never look at it without thanking him in your
mind for his goodness and his mercy.

Q. What is dying?

A. It is for the body to become senseless, so as not to stand, or to move, or
see, or hear, or speak, or feel -- in short, dying is like going to sleep.

Q. Is there an end of men when they die?

A. No; men are to live after death: they that have been good in this world,
are to be raised again, and to be taken into Heaven, and to be with God, where
nobody can hurt them: where they will feel no pain, nor sorrow, nor sickness,
where they will be always good, and always glad and never die again. As for bad
people when they have died, they cannot go to Heaven, but they must be shut out
of that good and happy place. God will not have them near him, and they will be
exceedingly miserable for the idle and wicked lives they have led in this world.

Q. What is the greatest misfortune that can befall us?

A. It is to offend or displease God, who always punishes those that are wicked.

Q. What is the greatest happiness we can enjoy?

A. It is to be in favor with God, who always loves those that are good, and
blesses them.

CHAP. V.
GENESIS xi. THE CONFUSION OF BABEL.
NOAH left three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, and they had a great many
children, who, after their fathers were dead did many wrong things. They took a
fancy to raise a high building, called a tower, that should reach up above the
clouds, in order that they might get up there, and be out of the reach of a
second flood, if God should determine to destroy the world again: but God
seeing their pride, and their distrust of his promise, confounded them; so that
they spoke one in one language, and one in another, and they could not
understand each other; for when one asked for a saw, another who did not
understand him, perhaps would bring him a hatchet, or when he called for a
stone, bring him mortar. In such confusion the building could not go on. So
they left Babel, and all went and lived in different places, according as they
could understand each others language; and to this day one language is spoke in
one country, and some other in the next country, all over the world.

Q. What is the most foolish thing any body can do?

A. The most foolish thing any persons can do is to try to follow their own
fancy, without knowing whether it is agreeable to God; for if it is not
agreeable to him, he can and will take care that it shall not prosper. We
should therefore try to like what God likes; because it is in vain to wish for
any thing without his liking, and he knows best what is good for us.

CHAP. VI.
GENESIS xix. THE DESTRUCTION OF SODOM.
SOME time after this there was a man who feared God, called Abraham; and God
commanded him to leave his country where he had been born and had lived, and to
go to another country which was called the land of Canaan; and God promised
him, that if he obeyed him, that country should be given afterward to his
children. And Abraham did obey this command, and believed in the promise of
God; and he took with him a nephew, his brother's son called Lot: and they had
a great many cattle and servants, and there was not food enough in the country
for them all to travel together, and their servants began to dispute with each
other. And Abraham knew it was a great sin to dispute or quarrel, especially
among relations; he therefore said to Lot, we had better part. Do you go where
you like best, and I will stay in the land of Canaan, or wherever God pleases.
Then Lot left his uncle, and went to live near Sodom and Gomorrah. The people
of those two cities were very wicked, and God intended to punish them, as he
does at one time or other, all wicked people; but he sent two angels to save
Lot. When they came to his house, he took them for travelers, and received
them very civilly; for good people are always obliging to strangers especially.
After dinner the angels told him what they were, and that God had sent them to
take him out of that wicked place, himself and his family, telling him they
must leave it directly, and not once look behind. Lot, his wife, and his two
daughters, set out that moment with the angels; but Lot's wife disobeyed God,
and looked behind her, and for so doing she lost her life in an extraordinary
manner.

Q. What should we be the most mindful of.

A. Always to obey the commands of God as Abraham did, to whom, for this
reason, a blessing was promised. But Lot's wife was a simple woman, and
preferred the indulging of her own inclination, and so she lost her life.

Q. What more do we learn from the history of Lot?

A. That we should always be kind and civil to all men, even to strangers, and
to avoid bad company, lest we should learn to be wicked like them, and be
punished with them.

CHAP VII.
GENESIS xii. to xxv. 12. THE LIFE OF ABRAHAM.
ABRAHAM, after his nephew Lot had left him, lived in the land of Canaan, with
his wife Sarah. He was so very good a man, that God loved him exceedingly, and
told him Sarah should have a son, and that that son should have children, and
those children would have a great many other children. That in this manner he
would have a very large family, which should afterward inherit the land of
Canaan; and in that family would be born, after a great many years, Jesus
Christ, our Savior, who would teach men how they might be delivered from the
ignorance and wickedness, and doubts and fears, into which the greater part of
them would fall; and would tell them how to live well and die comfortably, and
to get possession of a better life, and a better happiness than they can have
in this world, neither of which will ever have an end: and that thus, in
Abraham and his family, all the nations of the earth should be blessed.

After Abraham had been told this by God Almighty, he and his wife Sarah lived
many years, till they were both grown old, and still she had no child: Abraham
was very easy about this, for he knew that what God promises he always performs
in his own good time; but Sarah being a silly woman, fretted and showed great
impatience. At last three angels came to him, and told him God remembered his
promise, and Sarah should soon bring him a son. She was behind the door and
heard them, but she did not believe God's word, but laughed at what they said,
though she might have remembered that God Almighty can do what he pleases. And
he, from whom nothing is hid, caused her to be asked why she laughed? upon
which she began to be frightened, and said she did not laugh. So she was guilty
of two great faults, the one was telling a falsehood, the other was not
believing God's power.

Soon after she had a son, and he was called Isaac. When he was grown a great
boy, and his father was very fond of him, and very thankful to God for his
goodness in having bestowed him, God Almighty had a mind to show the world that
Abraham trusted him as much as he ought, and believed in the promises of God
(that his descendants should possess the land of Canaan, and that of his family
by Isaac, Jesus Christ should be born) God therefore bade him take his son up
to a high mountain, and there sacrifice him; that is, kill him in a certain
manner, and burn his dead body. Abraham knew that what Almighty God has
promised he always performs, and that he never requires any thing which it is
not right and best for us to do: they who love God as much as his goodness to
us deserves, should be willing to give up their life, or any thing else to him
when he calls for it; and although Abraham loved his son much, he loved God
better, and was always ready to do whatever would please him. So with out
saying one word, though grieved to the heart, he directly took his son with him
to the mountain, and was just going to sacrifice him, when God called out to
him not to do it, for that he only meant to try him for an example to others.
He then came down from the mountain again very joyfully with his son, and God
told Abraham, that since he had been so ready to obey him, he should see his
son married, and have children; and that he would bless him in many ways. As
for Sarah, God Almighty did not think fit that she should live to see her son
married; but after her death, Abraham began to think of a wife for Isaac. He
did not like any of the women of that country, because they were not well
behaved; so he sent an old faithful servant into his own country among his
cousins, to get a wife for his son. When the servant came near the city of
Nachor in Mesopotamia, he stopped at a well, and kneeled down to pray for God's
blessing, for he knew nothing could be done without that. And he prayed to God
Almighty, to send to the well the woman he chose for his master's son Isaac;
and that when he asked her to draw water for him, she might answer, I will give
you water and to your camels too; by which he should know, that was the woman
God had sent. God Almighty, though he does not always grant us the particular
favors that we ask, because in our ignorance we often ask for what would hurt
ourselves or others, yet thought proper to hear this prayer of Abraham's
servant, for soon after Rebekah, the cousin of Isaac, came. He asked her for
water, and she said, I will give you water, and to your camels too. Then he
thanked God that he had found the woman he wanted, and he went with her home to
her father's, and asked his consent to the marriage. The father consented, and
so did she; after a few days he brought her to the land of Canaan; and Abraham
saw her married to Isaac, and she made him a very good wife.

Abraham lived after that some time, and continued with all his household to
set an excellent example of worshipping and serving the only true God; for
which he is honored with being called the friend of God, and will be rewarded
by him in another world.

Q. What should we learn from the history of Abraham?

A. Always to obey the will of God, however disagreeable it may seem to us; and
always to bear afflictions and disappointments with patience. We may be sure
that we are always doing right, when we obey the commands of God, and we should
consider that the unhappiness he suffers to befall us, is intended for our good,
and if we bear it with patience, it will make us wiser and better.

Q. What is most pleasing to God?

A. It is to obey him in all things, and trust to him in all things, as we see
Abraham did. Sarah did not, and so she brought a great many vexations upon
herself, both before Isaac was born, and afterward.

Q. What were the particular promises made to Abraham?

A. That his descendants should possess the land of Canaan, and that of his
family Jesus Christ should be born.

Q. When did Jesus live, and what is meant by the word Christ or Messiah?

A. Jesus was not born till about 1800 years after the death of Abraham, and he
was called the Christ or the Messiah, which signify anointed, on account of the
office to which he was appointed, and in allusion to the ancient manner in
which the especial ministers of God were established in their office: and for
this high employment he was most eminently fitted, by the very great wisdom and
power which God gave to him, and by his piety and perfect goodness: but of this
you shall hear more by and by.

Q. What are angels?

A. They are not men, but glorious beings, superior to men, whom God employs in
whatever way he thinks fit. They are very wise, good, and holy.

CHAP. VIII.
GENESIS xxv. 19. to xxxv. 29. THE LIFE OF ISAAC.
ISAAC and Rebekah had two sons, the eldest was called Esau, and the youngest
Jacob. Esau loved hunting, but Jacob staid at home with his father and mother.
One day Jacob was making some pottage for himself, when Esau came home from the
fields very hungry, and desired Jacob to give him his pottage; Jacob asked him
if he would give him his birthright for it, and Esau said he would. His
birthright was his father's particular blessing, which in those days always
belonged to the elder son; and Esau sold it for a mess of pottage. This was
foolishly done, because the mess of pottage was of no value in comparison of
his birthright, but after a bargain or promise is made, it ought to be
observed. Isaac knew nothing of that bargain; so when he was very old and quite
blind, thinking he was going to die, he called his son Esau to him, and desired
him to get him some venison, and when it was dressed, to bring it to him, for
he was very faint. And he told him that when he had eaten of it, he would give
him his blessing before he died. Esau should then have told his father that he
had sold his birthright to Jacob; instead of that, he said nothing to any
body, but made haste to get the venison. Rebekah overhearing this conversation,
called her younger son Jacob, and bade him go to his father before Esau came
home, and take some kid with him, and he would think it was Esau with the
venison, and would bless him. Jacob told her, he was afraid his father would
know him when he felt his hands, for Jacob had smooth hands, and Esau's were
hairy. Rebekah, who was an artful woman, immediately found a way to prevent
that, for she made him gloves of the skin of the kid, with the rough part
outward, and giving him the kid in a dish, she sent him to his father. When
Isaac had felt his rough hands, he thought is was Esau, and gave him his
blessing.

Q. Did Rebekah do well to teach her son Jacob to deceive his father?

A. Most undoubtedly she did not.

Q. Did Jacob do right in being persuaded by his mother so to do.

A. No, he did not; for we should not even obey our parents in any thing
contrary to the commands of God, and God has commanded that we should not use
any deceit one with another, and that every body should speak the truth from
his heart.

Q. Was not Jacob punished for taking the advantage of his brother, and
deceiving his father?

A. Yes, a little while before his father's death he went from home, and left
his mother, for fear of Esau; and besides that, he was in his turn deceived by
Laban, and he had many sorrows, as you will understand when you hear the
history of his life.

CHAP. IX.
GENESIS XXV. 26. to xlix. 33. THE LIFE OF JACOB.
WHEN Esau came home with the venison, and had prepared it for his father, he
brought it to him; but his father was much surprised, and told him he had been
with him already, and had got his blessing, and asked him why he came for it
again. Then when Isaac knew the truth, he trembled exceedingly, but he could
not contradict what he had already done. But Esau was very angry, and he said
that when his father was dead he would kill Jacob.

When Rebekah heard that, she advised Jacob to go away, for fear Esau should be
tempted to do like Cain, that murdered his brother. Isaac gave Jacob leave to
go, and desired he would take a wife among his own relations, as he himself had
done. So Jacob went to his mother's brother Laban, who lived in the same place
that Abraham's servant had taken Rebekah from, when he brought her to Isaac.

Jacob traveled on till it was dark, then he lay down in a field, and set his
head upon a stone for a pillow, and fell asleep. He dreamed that he saw a great
ladder, the top of it reaching to the heavens, and the angels of God ascending
and descending, that is, going up and down. He dreamed also that God Almighty
called to him from the top of it, and told him he was the God of Abraham and of
Isaac, and that he would bless him too, and he should have so many children,
that they and their children should be like the stars in the heavens, or like
grains of sand for number, and that the promises made to Abraham should be
fulfilled in his family.

The next morning after Jacob had prayed to God, as every body ought to do
night and morning, he went on his journey till he came to the well, where
Abraham's servant met his mother Rebekah. Soon after he had stopped there, he
saw a girl called Rachel, Rebekah's brother Laban's daughter, coming with a
pitcher to draw water: Jacob, who was a very civil young man, ran and drew the
water for her: then he told her he was her cousin, and went home with her to
Laban his uncle. Laban was very glad to see his sister Rebekah's son, and
desired Jacob to stay and live with him. Soon after Jacob desired Laban to let
him marry Rachel, and Laban told him he should have her if he would serve him
seven years. Jacob agreed to it; but at the end of the seven years, Laban was
so bad a man, that he broke his promise, and, instead of Rachel, he gave him
his eldest daughter Leah for a wife. Jacob was very sorry, because he did not
love Leah so well as Rachel, and he asked Laban how he could serve him so.
Laban said, he only did it because it was the custom of that country to marry
the eldest daughter first, but if he would serve him seven years more he should
have Rachel too. As for Jacob, he was so desirous to marry Rachel, that he
consented to any terms; and he got her for seven years' service more. Jacob
lived a long while with his father-in-law Laban, and was so careful, that God
prospered every thing he undertook. He also gave him several children, twelve
sons and one daughter, called Dinah, but there were only two of the sons that
belonged to Rachel, and their names were Joseph and Benjamin. At last Jacob
finding his family so large, had a mind to leave Laban, and go home to his own
country, and his father's house. But Laban was a selfish man, he thought of
nothing but his own interest; so because Jacob was very useful to him, he did
not care to part with him, and wanted that he should remain his servant all his
life. However, God is always the friend of the oppressed; that is, of those
people who are not so well used as they ought to be, and so he was on the side
of Jacob. He would not suffer Laban to use him ill; but thought fit that he
should go away, and Jacob went. He took with him his wives and children, his
servants, his cattle, and all his goods.

When they had gone a part of the way, some of his servants who went on before,
came running back to him, and told him they had seen his brother Esau coming,
and several people with him. Then Jacob was sadly affrighted, and did not know
what to do, for he dreaded some harm to his tender family; but wise people
always pray to God when they are in trouble, and if it is good for them, he
relieves them. Jacob therefore prayed fervently, and God put it in his head
what to do. He picked out some of the finest of his cattle, and of all the best
things he had, and sent them on before him, desiring his servants, when Esau
asked whose they were, to say they belonged to their master Jacob, and that he
sent them as a present to his brother Esau. A soft answer turns away wrath.
Esau was so moved at Jacob's mild and obliging behavior, that it drove away
all his anger, and when Jacob came near and kneeled down to him, Esau took him
up and kissed him, and they were very good friends. This made Jacob very happy,
for he found that his brother had forgiven him, and a good-natured man loves
peace and good humor, and hates to quarrel with any body. Then Esau went and
lived in Mount Seir, and Jacob traveled on toward the land of Canaan, where
Abraham and Isaac had lived. In his way there, he stopped at a place called
Sichem, to rest his family. Then his daughter Dinah took it into her head to go
and visit the girls of that country; and when she was abroad, one of the young
men of the place, son to the king, took hold of her and ran away with her. When
her brothers heard of it, they went after him and his companions: they fought,
and there were several people killed; all which mischief Dinah was the cause
of, because she did not stay at home, as sober modest girls all do, but went
away from those who would have befriended and protected her. And it grieved
poor Jacob very much to see how many had lost their lives by this accident.
Afterward he went on his journey, and came to the land of Canaan; but Rachel
died by the way, and he buried her About this time God Almighty was pleased to
signify to Jacob by an angel, that he should take the surname of Israel.

Q. Does God allow such near relations as brothers and sisters, or uncles and
nieces, or aunts and nephews, to marry one another?

A. This was practiced in those times, afterward God expressly forbad it, and
he allows no such near kindred to marry each other. To contract such a marriage
would be a very great sin now, and is called the sin of incest.

CHAP. X.
GENESIS xxxvii. to the End. THE STORY OF JOSEPH.
JACOB was much grieved for his wife Rachel, and he was fonder of Joseph than
of his other children, because he was her eldest son, and was a very good boy.
But his brothers hated him, and were very jealous of him, because their father
loved him so much: for bad people often hate good people out of jealousy; and
are spiteful to them, and try to hurt them, but God is their friend, and
defends them from all mischief, and never forsakes them, as you will see by
this story of Joseph. The young man dreamed one night that he was in the fields
with his brothers binding sheaves of corn, and that his sheaf stood upright,
and their sheaves bowed down to it. Joseph very innocently told his brothers
this dream, and another dream that was like it; but they were quite angry when
they heard them, and resolved to get rid of him at any rate.

One day they being out in the fields, a great way from home, taking care of
the flock, Jacob sent Joseph to them to bring him word how they did. When they
saw him coming, they cried out, here is the dreamer, let us kill him. But
Reuben, the elder brother, said, no, we will not stain our hands with a
brother's blood; but we will strip him and throw him into a pit. After they had
done it, some merchants that were going into Egypt, passed by, and the brothers
dragged him out of the pit, and sold him to them. Then they killed a kid, and
dipped Joseph's clothes in the blood, and brought them to poor old Jacob, and
made him believe that a wild beast had devoured Joseph; that is, had eaten him
up. Jacob was in the greatest grief that could be for the loss of so good a
child, and his wicked sons were so hardhearted as to see him suffer, and yet
not make his mind easier, by telling him the truth. But God Almighty directs
every thing for the best, and his blessing went with Joseph into the land of
Egypt; so that though he was among strangers, he was not friendless. The
merchants sold him to one Potiphar; and he served him some time, and behaved so
well, that Potiphar had a great regard for him. But Potiphar's wife was a very
bad woman, and wanted to persuade Joseph to be bad too! however he was too wise
and good to yield, that is, to give way to temptation; so then out of spite and
malice, she told a lie of him to her husband; and Potiphar believed all she
said, and was so angry with poor Joseph, that he sent him to prison. Joseph was
always mild and patient, and civil, which made every body love him wherever he
went; and the jailor, that is, the keeper of the prison, grew so fond of him,
he did not put him in irons, or fasten him with chains like the other
prisoners, nor keep him in one room, but let him go about the house. There were
in the same prison two other prisoners; the chief baker of king Pharaoh, and
his chief butler, whom they called his cup bearer. The chief baker dreamed he
had three baskets upon his head, full of baked meats for the king's table, and
that the birds of the air came and devoured them. As for the butler, he dreamed
that he held three branches of a vine-tree in his hand, that they were full of
grapes, and that he squeezed them into a cup, for wine to serve up at the
king's table. They were both very uneasy to know what these dreams could mean*
and Joseph saw by their countenances that they were troubled; he asked them
what ailed them, and they told him what strange dreams they had dreamed, and
that they wished to know the meaning of them.

Dreams very seldom have any meaning at all, and it is foolish to be concerned
about them; for when people sleep badly, their heads are disturbed, and
rambling thoughts pass through their minds. But as for these two dreams, God
Almighty directed them on purpose, for wise reasons of his own, as we shall see
by and by. He also put it into Joseph's head to explain those dreams to them.
So he told the baker, that his dream signified that in three days Pharaoh would
order him to be hanged; but as to the cup bearer, he told him, he would, in
three days, fill out wine to the king; and then he begged he would speak for
him, that he might be let out of prison. The cup bearer promised him fair; but
when he got out on the third day, his joy made him so ungrateful that he forgot
poor Joseph, who remained in prison two years longer.

At the end of that time God sent a strange dream to king Pharaoh, who wanted
to have it interpreted or explained, and none of the wife people of that
country could understand it, because God had not revealed, that is, had not
made it known to them; for we know nothing but what God discovers to us.

So then the chief butler thought of Joseph, and told the king of him; and the
king sent for him out of prison, and said to him, I hear that you can explain
dreams. I have had a strange one that I wish to know the meaning of. I thought
I saw seven fat oxen come out of a river, and seven lean ones come after them,
who eat up the fat ones. Then Joseph told him, that it was only by the power of
God that dreams could be explained, and that the seven fat oxen meant seven
years of great plenty, and after them would come seven years of famine, that
is, the weather would be so bad that the corn would be all spoiled, and there
would be none to make bread of for seven years; and this was the meaning of the
seven lean oxen that devoured the fat ones. Then Joseph advised him, when the
seven years of great plenty came, to build granaries or storehouses, and lay
up a great deal of corn in them, so that, in the time of famine, the king might
sell the corn to the people for money, and they would have bread enough. When
the king found that God had made Joseph so wise, he set him over every body,
and commanded all the people to obey him. Joseph, who was then become a great
man, took care in the seven years of plenty, to build granaries, and provide
corn sufficient to feed the people when the famine came; and the king had such
dependence on him, that when any persons came to him, he sent them all to
Joseph. The famine was all over Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, where old
Jacob lived. He was told there was bread in Egypt, but little thought his son
Joseph had the disposing of it. However, he sent all his other sons, except
Benjamin, into Egypt, with money to buy corn for bread. When they were brought
before Joseph, they bowed themselves down before him, with their faces to the
earth; they did not know him, but he knew them, and he asked them if their
father was alive, and if they had any more brothers. They told him they never
had but two more; one called Joseph, who had been devoured by wild beasts, and
the other, called Benjamin, was at home with their father. Then Joseph ordered
their sacks to be filled with corn, and bade his servants put in the money too,
which they had brought to pay for it. When they intended going away, he put
them into confinement for three days; and when he released them, he told them,
that when they wanted more they must bring Benjamin with them, or they should
have none; and he kept Simeon, one of their brothers, to make sure of their
coming back. They were all much affrighted at this, and they said one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore
behold also his blood is required. Thus we see* when bad men meet with any
misfortune, their consciences always accuse them, and their sufferings are much
harder to bear, when they consider that they have deserved them by their
wickedness. When they went home, and found the money with the corn in their
sacks, they were both surprised and afraid. Jacob said, that might be a mistake
of the servants, but bade them remember to carry it back, when they went again;
for an honest man would not cheat another, though he was sure of being never
found out; because God sees all we do, and never fails to punish us one time or
other. At last, when all the corn was eaten up, Jacob desired his sons to go
and buy more. This made them very uneasy, for they durst not go without
Benjamin, and they knew it would grieve Jacob to part with him. At last they
ventured to put him in mind, that the great man who sold them the corn, said
they should have no more unless Benjamin came with them. When poor Jacob heard
this, he cried, and said, he was already deprived of two of his sons, Joseph
and Simeon, and if he lost Benjamin too, it would break his heart. Then Judah,
the eldest son, begged he would not be uneasy, and promised to take all the
care he could of the boy, and all the other said the same. So Jacob gave them
money to buy more wheat, and did not forget to send back the other money that
was the price of the corn they had bought before. He then suffered Benjamin to
go with them, and prayed earnestly to God to bless them all.

When they came to Egypt, they were brought directly to Joseph, who, when he
saw his brother Benjamin, his mother Rachel's child, he was so moved he could
not help crying with joy, and turned away, that they should not see him. He
then invited them to dinner, and put five times more meat upon Benjamin's plate
than upon the others, which they all wondered at. When they took leave, he
privately ordered his servants, after they had filled their sacks with corn, to
put his silver cup into the mouth of Benjamin's sack. He also desired them to
follow his brothers, and ask them how they could be so ungrateful to their
master, who had been so civil to them, and why they stole his silver cup, and
were carrying it away. They all said, indeed they had not stolen any thing;
that all their sacks might be opened, and if it was found among them, they were
willing to go to prison. So all the sacks were opened, and it was found in
Benjamin's sack. Poor Benjamin, who knew nothing of the matter, was very much
ashamed, and grieved when he saw it; and the servants said, he must go directly
to prison. Then all his brothers went back with him to beg him off; for they
were not wicked now, as they had been when they sold Joseph, but were grown
very good, and had rather have gone to prison themselves, than leave Benjamin
behind; because it would grieve their father to lose him. So they went back
lamenting, and when they came to Joseph, they kneeled down before him; and
Judah begged he would put him in prison instead of Benjamin, and let the boy go
back to his old father; but Joseph appeared to be very angry, and said he would
not let him go. This gave all the brothers the greatest concern. Then Joseph
was so moved at finding they were penitent, that is, sorry for their past
fault, that he could hold out no longer, but threw his arms about their necks,
and said, I am your brother Joseph: Does my father yet live? Be ye not grieved,
or angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither; for God, who orders every
thing for the best, sent me here before you to preserve life. Then he desired
them to go back to Canaan, and tell their father that Joseph was alive, and in
favor with God and man; and that he must come down to Egypt, with his whole
family, where they should all be taken care of.

When Jacob heard the joyful news, he made haste to go and see his son; and as
soon as king Pharaoh heard that Joseph's father was come, he sent for him, and
spoke very civilly to him, and gave him a place to live in, called the land of
Goshen.

And after some time, when Jacob was a very old man, he died in Egypt, but his
sons carried him to the land of Canaan to be buried. Before he died, he called
all his sons together, and blessed them, and foretold many things that
afterward befell them.

Jacob, we see, in his life had many troubles. He was in fear of his brother
Esau, and had reason so to be. He was deceived by Laban, and was afterward
oppressed by him; his daughter behaved very imprudently, and his sons were very
revengeful; and then he lost his beloved wife Rachel. Afterward the evil
dispositions of some of his sons, and the loss (as for many years he
apprehended) of his good son Joseph, were indeed very heavy afflictions. But on
the other hand he had many blessings.

Q. Were these sorrows any of them occasioned by his having deceived his father?

A. Yes; some of them were, but he was afterward very obedient to the commands
of God, and Almighty God knew that he would be so, and was therefore so very
good as never to forsake him.

Q. Does God punish wicked people the minute they commit a fault?

A. He is sure to punish them one time or other. Sometimes it is that moment,
like Lot's wife, but, very often not till a good while after, and sometimes he
does not punish us in this world, but in another. And this is the worst of all
punishments.

Q. Does Almighty God ever pardon people that have done ill?

A. Never, if they do not repent.

Q. What is repenting?

A. It is acknowledging; that is, confessing our faults, and being very sorry
for them, praying earnestly to God to forgive us, and if we have done harm to
any persons, making it up to them every way in our power; and taking care never
to offend again. This is true repentance, or penitence; but if we are penitent
to day, and sin again tomorrow, our penitence is of no use. Nothing but
growing very good, can make up for our past sins.

Q. What is it to sin?

A. It is doing any thing that we believe to be wrong, and that God does not
like, and he does not like any thing that can hurt ourselves or other people,
or that shows disrespect to him. He has commanded us never to tell as lie, or
do any sort of mischief, to be very modest and civil, and to do every thing we
are bid by those who are set over us, if it is not contrary to the commands of
God. Then they will love us, and God will love us too, and we shall be happy in
this world and in the next.

You see that the brothers of Joseph, who had been so cruel and wicked toward
him, were afterward very sorry for it, and repented heartily; and when God
found they were become very penitent, he forgave them, and blessed them, and
they were very happy. Joseph forgave them too; for good people are always ready
to forgive offenses, as God is ready to forgive us.

Q. What were the names of Jacob's twelve sons?

A. Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphthali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulon,
Joseph, and Benjamin.

Q. May we learn any other lesson from the history of Joseph?

A. We may learn that Almighty God often serves himself of the evil bad
passions of men to bring about his own good purposes.

Q. Do we sometimes see that what we have thought our greatest sorrows, are in
the end very great blessings?

A. Yes. Jacob thought the loss of his son Joseph the greatest misfortune, yet
Jacob lived to see that his beloved son was by this means made an instrument of
great good to many nations, and that the persons of Jacob's own family in
particular were preserved alive, when they would otherwise have died for want
of food; and if Joseph had not been sold into Egypt, he would not have enjoyed
the happiness of saving his father, and forgiving his brothers.

Q. What should we learn from this?

A. To acquiesce patiently in, and to submit willingly to, all the events of
God's providence, and to believe, that if we bear them properly, they will in
the end make us happy.

Q. Does Almighty God see things as we see them?

A. No. For we see but a very little way; but Almighty God knows every thing
that will happen.

Q. Would Jacob have wept so, and have been so very sorry to have parted with
Benjamin, if he had known that Benjamin should go to the land of Egypt in
safety, that Joseph was alive and a great man there, and that he should see all
his children again?

A. No, he would not: his sorrow was caused in part by his ignorance of these
circumstances. Almighty God wisely hides from us the things that are to befall
us in this present world, for our trial and discipline, and to exercise our
faith and trust in his government and direction of all things for the best.

CHAP. XI.
EXODUS ii. to iv. ver. 18. THE BIRTH OF MOSES, AND THE PLAGUES OF EGYPT.
AFTER Jacob's death, his sons had several more children, and then they died.
And they left so many behind them that they were like the stars in the sky, or
the grains of sand upon the sea shore, which cannot be numbered, they are so
many. They were called the children of Israel, or Israelites, because of Jacob
having been surnamed Israel. A great while after Joseph was dead, and Pharaoh
the king was dead, there came another king Pharaoh in his place, who never knew
Joseph. He was a very bad man, followed his own proud cruel thoughts, instead
of hearkening to the commands of God, and used the Hebrews very ill. He made
them labor very hard, in hopes it would kill them, but when he found that would
not do, he ordered his servants, whenever a Hebrew woman was brought to bed of
a son, to take the child and destroy it. There was a Hebrew woman called
Jochabed, who was delivered of a son, The poor woman being very desirous to
save him, but afraid of the king's anger, put him in a basket, and carried it
to the river Nile, and set it among the rushes; then went a little way off, and
left her daughter Miriam to see what would become of it.

Soon after the king's daughter came with her maids to bathe in the river, and
when she heard the child cry, she pitied him, and said she would take care of
him. Then little Miriam was sent to look for a nurse, and she brought Jochabed.
So the child was nursed by its own mother; and when he was n^^sed ^he brought
him back to Pharaoh's daughter, and the king's daughter called him Moses, and
gave him a very good education.

After he was grown up to be a man, he one day saw an Egyptian; that is, a man
of the kingdom of Egypt, using a Hebrew very ill; Moses was provoked to see his
countryman oppressed, and in his defense struck the Egyptian, so that he fell
down and died. Then Moses was afraid the king would put him to death, so he ran
away to the land of Midian. The prince or priest of that country was called
Jethro; he married his daughter to Moses, and let him live with him, and take
care of his sheep. One day as Moses was in the fields feeding his father-in
law's flocks, he saw a bush flaming with fire, and yet the bush was not burnt;
that is, was not consumed by the fire. He thought this very strange, and drew
near to see how it could be, when a voice called out of it and said, I am the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; take off thy shoes, for
the place thou stand upon is holy ground. I have seen the oppression of my
people, and I will send thee to the king of Egypt, to command him to let my
people go back to the land of Canaan, from whence they came, and which was
promised to be given to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. Moses was the meekest
man in the world. He was struck with reverence and awe. He fell upon the
ground, and said, he feared Pharaoh would not mind what such a man as he should
say; but God answered, that he would make Pharaoh to mind him, and that Moses's
brother Aaron should meet him on the way, and go with him.

After this, God bade Moses throw his stick or wand upon the ground, and when
he had done so, it became a serpent. Moses was so startled at this that he ran
away, but God called him back, and desired him not to be afraid, but to take
hold of the serpent by the tail; he did so, and immediately it became a wand
again.

Q. May we be sure, that the promises of God will be fulfilled, whatever
appearances there may be to the contrary?

A. We may be sure of it. The children of Israel were at that time poor and
oppressed; the Egyptians were great and powerful; yet we shall see that
Almighty God helped and delivered the Israelites, and severely punished the
Egyptians.

CHAP. XII.
EXODUS v. to xv. OF THE PLAGUES OF EGYPT.
MOSES then, in obedience to the command of God, went into Egypt with Aaron his
brother, and when they saw Pharaoh, they told him, that God had sent them to
desire he would let the Hebrews go. But the king was so wicked, as not to mind
what they said; for he did not know that there is but one God, who is the Maker
of heaven and earth, and who is all-powerful: and therefore God, to punish him,
as also to teach him this great truth, turned all their waters into blood, and
all the fish died. This soon humbled Pharaoh, and he begged of Moses to pray to
God to cure the waters. Moses did pray, and they were cured, and yet he would
not let the people of Israel go. Then God sent a great quantity of frogs to
torment him. They overran all the country, and hopped about in the very rooms
where the king lived. Then he begged of Moses to pray to God to deliver him
from them, and he promised to let the Hebrews go. Immediately Moses prayed, and
God was pleased to send them away; but when they were gone, the king still
refused to keep his promise. As God Almighty can never be at a loss how to
punish perverse and obstinate people, he sent such a number of lice, that the
very dust seemed to be all turned into lice, which crawled about them, and gave
them no rest. Then the king applied again to Moses, and they were sent away,
but still his heart was hardened. Afterward God sent such swarms of flies,
they looked at a distance like black clouds, and buzzed about them so
intolerably, they were not able to bear it. Upon which the king again desired
Moses to pray for him; Moses did, and immediately the flies were removed. But
still Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he would not let the children of Israel
go. So then God sent a sickness among the cattle, that they almost all died:
and when that would not do, he sent such sickness among the people, that they
were all covered with sores and biles, and ulcers. After that he sent storms of
hail which killed all those it fell upon, beat down the roofs of the houses,
and destroyed all the buildings; yet still Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he
would not let the children of Israel go. So then God sent a strong wind, that
brought with it a number of locusts, which eat up all the fruits of the earth,
and every thing that grows for the use of man and beast. But still Pharaoh was
only frighted for the time. God then sent darkness all over that part of the
land where the Egyptians were, but the Israelites had light at the same time;
yet as soon as the plague was gone, Pharaoh forgot the goodness of God in
giving him relief; and also forgot the power of God to send a worse plague, if
he provoked him. Wicked people are always foolish. If he had had any sense at
all, he would have considered, that what God had done once he could do again,
or a great deal worse, if he pleased, and that there is no escaping him. At
last, however, God Almighty obliged Pharaoh to submit to him. He sent an angel
through the land, commanding him to kill the firstborn, that is, the eldest
child in every family; except among the Israelites, where none of the
firstborn died. And God commanded Moses to institute (that is, to appoint) a
fast, which was to be observed by the children of Israel every year, in
remembrance of this event, and which was to be called the passover; because
when the angel slew the firstborn of the children of the Egyptians, the
Israelites were passed over, i. e. were preserved alive When Pharaoh had lost
his own firstborn, he found God was not to be resisted, and so at last he let
the children of Israel go. And the Egyptians were so glad of it, because of the
plagues God had sent upon their account, that they let them have a great deal
of gold and silver, and several earrings and bracelets to carry away. So they
went away very rich; and as they traveled along, God went before them by day
in a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire. At last they came to the Red Sea,
but before they got there, Pharaoh's obstinacy had got the better of his fears,
and he repented that he had let them go. So he called together his army, and
followed them. Then the Israelites saw nothing but the Red Sea before them, and
the wicked king and his army behind them. They were so terrified, they were
ready to die with fear, for they forgot that the Almighty was their friend.
Moses prayed to God, and he immediately bade him strike the sea with his wand.
When he had done so, the waters divided on both sides, and there was a path
between for them to walk through. After they had passed over to the other side,
Pharaoh thought to follow them the same way with his army, but the waters
closed over them, and they were all drowned.

When the Israelites saw this they praised God, and Moses made a psalm of
thanksgiving, which they all sung, and they danced and were very joyful. Here
it will be proper to teach them that song, explaining all the words in it.


Q. What may we learn from the sad end of Pharaoh?

A. We may learn that it is a very dreadful thing to be of an obstinate proud
temper; and that after these bad dispositions have been long indulged, they
gain such power over the mind, as to lead persons forward, even to their
destruction.

Q. Is it any proof of a person's being in favor with God, that he is great,
and rich, and powerful?

A. No. Pharaoh was not only rich and powerful, but a great king.

Q. But may there not be other ends of God's providence answered, by raising a
wicked person to a high station?

A. Yes. The pride and obstinacy of Pharaoh gave occasion for that striking
display of the power of God, which would in its consequences be a blessing both
to the Israelites and the Egyptians, as we shall see by and by.

CHAP. XIII.
EXODUS xvi. etc. THE WANDERING IN THE DESERT.
GOD conducted, that is, led the children of Israel in their journey through
the wilderness. A pillar of a cloud went before them by day, and a pillar of
fire by night. They were fed miraculously; for God caused manna (of which they
made a kind of bread) and quails, to fall about their camp. When they could
find no springs of water, he caused water to come out of a rock; and their
clothes did not wear out all the time they were in the wilderness.

But notwithstanding the great things which God did for them, they often sinned
against him, and were often punished.

As they traveled along they met with a king called Amalek, and he came out
against them with a great army; but God gave the Israelites power over their
enemies, and they got the better of them, and vanquished them; that is, beat
them in battle.

One day Almighty God called Moses up to a high mountain, called Mount Sinai,
and covered him with a cloud from the sight of the people. Then God was pleased
to reveal his will to him, and gave him Ten Commandments written upon two
tables of stone, that he might teach them to the people. These are the Ten
Commandments which are frequently read in places of public worship, and which
we must all learn and observe, because they were given by God himself, and they
teach us our duty to him and to all the world.

Q. What is the first commandment?

A. Thou shall have no other gods before me.

Q. What is the second?

A. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth; thou shall not bow down thyself to them, or serve
them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Q. What do we learn from these commandments?

A. From the first and second commandments we learn that there is but one God,
that he only is to be worshipped, and that idolatry, which is adoring any other
being, or worshipping any image, or the likeness of any thing; is a very great
sin.

Q. Were there ever any people guilty of idolatry, or worshipping images?

A. Yes. The Israelites themselves frequently bowed down to idols, for which
they were severely punished; and so did most of the nations near them; for
which, and for other wicked things that they did, many of them were destroyed.

Q. Why are we to worship God?

A. Because he has all power, wisdom, and goodness; and because he has bestowed
upon us all that we possess that makes us happy in our present life; he made
the sun, which gives us light and heat; he sends rain upon the earth, that it
may bring forth corn and plants to feed us, and grass for cattle: he has
likewise blessed us with an understanding, that we may learn the proper use of
every thing which he has given us.

Q. If God be so good, how can he punish us?

A. The wicked certainly deserve punishment. But he generally punishes them in
order that they may repent and become good, or that their example may prevent
others from being wicked. The Jews, notwithstanding God had been so good to
them, grew forgetful of him, and worshipped idols, and committed sins, for
which reasons they were carried away by their enemies, and are now scattered
abroad in every part of the world, and generally despised and ill-treated.

Q. What further do we learn from the first and second commandments?

A. We should learn to love God above all things, and always to obey his
commandments. For if we prefer our own inclinations, or any thing in the world,
to our duty to God, we shall be serving and pleasing ourselves, instead of
serving and pleasing him; and this is a kind of idolatry.

Q. By what means shall we learn to serve God only?

A. We must never neglect saying our prayers, attending his worship, or any
religious duty, for the sake of our friends, our business, or our pleasure; and
at all times give up every advantage, and conquer any wish, that is contrary to
his will, and to what we believe to be right.

Q. What is the third commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. What is the meaning of taking the name of the Lord in vain?

A. To mention the name of God without reverence (that is, great respect) or
upon any other than a serious occasion, is certainly taking his name in vain;
but to call upon it to witness a falsehood, or in profane cursing or swearing,
is still more wicked.

Q. Is it then unlawful to swear?

A. Profane swearing is certainly forbidden by this commandment; and besides,
we are told by Jesus Christ, and by the apostle James, not to swear at all, but
always carefully to speak truth.

Q. How shall we learn to avoid this sin, which so many people are committing
every day?

A. By never keeping company with those who are in the wicked practice of
breaking this commandment -- We should also avoid reading plays, or ballads, or
romances, or any other books, where the name of God is frequently mentioned
without proper respect; for it is not enough that we guard against speaking
lightly of God, we must learn too never to think of him, but with awe and
reverence.

Q. Is there any other rule for us to observe, in order that we may keep this
commandment?

A. It is absolutely necessary that we always perform our religious duties with
seriousness and attention; never thinking of our worldly business, or our
amusements, when we hear or read good books, or whilst we are offering up our
prayers: for if we read of God with indifference, or speak to him in prayer,
without earnestly wishing that he should hear, and attend to our petitions;
then we shall prove disobedient to him, by breaking this commandment; and let
us remember, that God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. What is the fourth commandment?

A. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and do
all thy work, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man
servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within
thy gates. For the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Q. What must we do in order to keep the sabbath day holy?

A. We must spend it in the most useful and serious manner; thinking upon good
things, reading the holy scriptures and good books, and praying to God.

Q. Ought we not to be good every other day in the week, as well as on a Sunday?

A. We should always remember God, and keep his commandments. Every morning we
should pray to him, and resolve to be as good as we can during the day; and
every night repent of any thing that we may have done that is wrong, and
determine with the assistance of God to do so no more.

Q. How then are we to keep the sabbath more holy than other days?

A. On other days the cares of life, and our proper business, take up much of
our time, and therefore we have less time for reading and thinking. For this
reason we should not consider the sabbath as a day of amusement and rest, but
as a day appointed for going to worship, to read good books, to think of God,
and of another world after death.

Q. But we see that many persons do not regularly go to worship, but amuse
themselves on a Sunday. Do these all do wrong?

A. It is certainly a great crime not to keep the sabbath holy, and we may
suppose that those who do not remember their duty to God, to whom they owe
their life, and every comfort, we may naturally suppose that such in time
should be guilty of many sins. Indeed we find that most of the unhappy men who
are condemned to death for their wickedness, have generally begun by breaking
the sabbath, and keeping bad company.

Q. What is worshipping God?

A. To worship God, is to reverence him as our Sovereign and Creator, to love
him as our constant and kindest friend, and to thank him in the most grateful
manner, for the favors which he is continually bestowing, and earnestly to
desire that he would teach us how to deserve them, to lament our sins, to
resolve with his assistance to sin no more, and to be resigned to his holy
will. These dispositions sincerely felt, and humbly offered up to heaven, is
that worship which is acceptable to God.

Q. But may we not serve God in this manner at home?

A. It is very possible we may, and it is to be hoped that we frequently do;
but we should remember, that at home a thousand things may break in upon us,
and interrupt the discharge of this duty; it is therefore very right, that a
day should be set apart for it, and by attending a place of public worship on
that day, we are setting a good example to others.

Q. But are we sure that our example will be followed;

A. We know that men in general are much led by example, but if our example
should not be followed, at least we are doing our duty; let us therefore always
attend our different places of worship, since it will afford us the best
opportunity of thanking God, and learning how to obey him, and in order that we
may fulfill this commandment of keeping the sabbath day holy.

Q. What is the fifth commandment?

A. Honor thy father and mother.

Q. How must we behave to our parents, in order to honor them?

A. We must treat them upon every occasion with the greatest respect and
affection, attend to their advice, receive with patience their reproofs, and
obey them in every thing, which is not wrong, because God has placed them over
us, that we may improve by their good advice, and good example.

Q. How must those behave, whose parents are cruel and unkind?

A. They must still endeavor to serve, and to obey them, and return their ill
usage with gentleness and good humor.

Q. If our parents should be wicked, and set us a bad example?

A. That indeed would be a great misfortune; yet perhaps by seeing the vexation
and misery, which they suffer from their idleness, drunkenness, or their
dishonesty; we may learn the necessity of becoming industrious, sober, and
just; we should be still more watchful over our own conduct, steadily refusing
to obey, even our parents, whenever they would persuade us to do wrong.

Q. Will not this offend God, who has commanded us to honor our parents?

A. When God commanded us to honor our parents, he likewise required that our
parents should teach us how to be good, and to obey him. To submit then to the
advice of a good parent, is to obey God; but to refuse to follow the example of
bad parents, or their advice, when they advise any thing wrong, that is to
honor God, who is the father of us all.

Besides, by doing right in such cases, we set a good example to our parents,
we respect their happiness, which is honoring them in the best sense of the
commandment.

Q. What is the sixth commandment?

A. Thou shall not kill.

Q. Will God punish those who destroy the life of another?

A. Undoubtedly he will. It is one of the greatest crimes we can commit, in the
sight both of God and of men. In this world it is punished with death, for it
is one of those injuries we never can repair, and what God (as we see in the
example of Cain) punished even in this life, in a very exemplary manner.

Q. May we not kill ourselves when we become tired of living?

A. No. That is almost, perhaps quite as great a sin. God, who gave us life,
ought only to put an end to it. He gave it us for wise and good purposes, that
we might conquer every wrong disposition, and acquire every disposition and
principle that is good, so as to make ourselves worthy to enjoy eternal
happiness in the life to come. Therefore by putting an end to our lives whilst
we are in an unprepared state, we may deprive ourselves for ever of that
happiness which our future good conduct might have procured us.

Q. By killing another, may we not endanger his future happiness?

A. By taking away the life of another, we do not know what injury we may have
done him in this respect. It is certain that we unjustly deprive his relations
and friends of the comforts he might have procured them, and by such a crime we
forfeit our own lives, at a time when, instead of being prepared, we have
deserved the severest displeasure of God.

Q. What is the seventh commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Q. What is the meaning of this commandment?

A. It is not necessary to say much upon this subject at present. It may be
sufficient to observe, that it is a sin in which perhaps the happiness of an
innocent family, and the character of one who ought to be an example of virtue,
is wantonly destroyed. It is a sin, the consequences of which are highly
disgraceful and infamous among men, and it will be right to impress our minds
with a persuasion, that it is so wicked in the sight of God, that those who are
in the practice of it, cannot be admitted into the kingdom of heaven, as we are
assured in the holy scriptures.

Q. What is the eighth commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal.

As this is a crime to which too many are liable, you will do well to be very
much upon your guard against it. A thief, you know, is always despised; he
brings dishonor on his family, and infamy upon himself: he is liable to be
confined in a jail, and to perish in a shameful manner at the gallows. This is
the punishment to which he is exposed in this world; and as it is a crime so
strictly forbidden by God, we may be sure it will not go unpunished in the
world to come.

Q. What are the best methods we can observe in order to be kept from this vice?

A. Men are often led to steal from necessity, or want; and as idleness and
squandering are the common causes of want, we should endeavor, whilst we are
young, to get habits both of industry and of saving. For it is not always those
who can get the most, unless they are careful to save, and prudent in making a
proper use of what they get, that are the most comfortable. When parents who
can get money spend it in alehouses, and are drunken, and sometimes in
consequence idle, we see their children, and themselves dirty and ragged, and
frequently guilty of thieving.

Q. Is there any thing else that we can observe the better to keep us from this
sin?

A. If you are sober, industrious, and saving, you will have no temptation to
steal: if you are serious and mindful of your duty to God, and consider that
your happiness in a future life depends very much on your keeping his
commandments here, you will be shocked at the idea of every thing that is
dishonest; and you will not take any thing, however trifling, lest you get a
habit of stealing. For the worst and wickedest of thieves most likely began
with stealing things of little value.

Q. What is the ninth commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

All kind of falsehood whatever is highly displeasing to God, who is the God of
truth: -- and a liar is a character which all mankind abhor. Indeed it is easy
to conceive, that if the practice of lying was common amongst men, they could
put no trust in one another, and consequently could not live together. The good
would not know what poor to relieve, if they could not believe their distress.

Q. How do we know that lying is so displeasing to God?

A. God has strictly forbidden it, and as soon as you can read the new
Testament, you may find there a very remarkable account of a man and his wife,
called Ananias and Sapphira, who were both struck dead for telling a falsehood.

Q. Pray what is the meaning of bearing false witness against our neighbor?

A. This is the worst kind of lying, because it not only is a sin against God
and truth, but it is a sin against our neighbor, whom we ought to love. If we
bear false witness against our neighbor in any courts of law, this is called
perjury, and is punished by cutting off the ears, and exposing the guilty
person in a pillory. But if we raise a false or scandalous report, or tell
stories of a neighbor, this is called a calumny, and is a very mean and wicked
action, and will make us hated and despised.

Q. What is the tenth commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

Q. What is the meaning of coveting?

A. To covet is to wish for that which we have not, and which we have no right
to; to covet our neighbor's house is dishonest, and this covetous disposition,
if given way to, will lead us in time to cheat, and to tell lies, and to steal.
To covet our neighbor's wife is a kind of adultery; and to indulge a covetous
temper is to lay the foundation of almost every sin.

Q. How shall we prevent ourselves from breaking this commandment?

A. By never giving way to bad thoughts, but to check them in the very
beginning, because bad thoughts give rise to bad wishes and inclinations and to
covetousness; and bad inclinations, and covetousness, give rise to bad conduct,
and to stealing, adultery, telling lies, and to bearing false witness. So if we
would be good, we must shun the very first appearance of evil. For God, as we
may read in the New Testament, is displeased both with bad thoughts, as well as
with bad actions.

Q. If we never give way to bad thoughts, shall we never be guilty of bad
actions?

A. It is the surest way of guarding against them, and the easiest way to be
good; because bad thoughts always go before bad wishes and bad actions; and bad
thoughts are more easily avoided, than bad habits are conquered.

These are the ten commandments, which are frequently read in places of public
worship, and which we must all learn, and observe, because they were given by
God himself, and they teach us our duty to him and to mankind.

By the first, second, third, and fourth, we learn, that there is no God but
one, and that we should fear to offend, and love him above all things, and
worship him, because he made us, and can destroy us in a moment. We learn by
the fifth to be dutiful to our parents, and those that are set over us in their
stead: and by the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, we are taught
neither to murder, steal, or do any manner of wrong; nor to speak ill of any
body, or ever to covet; that is, to wish for any thing that belongs to another.
Because as God knows our thoughts, he will punish wicked thoughts, as well as
wicked doings.

Moses was forty days and forty nights at the top of Mount Sinai, learning all
these, and many more good things from God. But, in the mean time, the
ungrateful Israelites grew tired of waiting for him.

In their impatience they supposed that he never would come back, and so
required Aaron, the brother of Moses, to make an idol for them, that they might
worship, that is, that they might pray to.

Aaron was grieved to hear them talk so wickedly, and simply, but was so weak
as to fear that they would kill him, if he refused them. Therefore he took the
gold and silver which the Egyptians had given them; he melted it over the fire,
and made an image of it in the shape of a calf; and a great many of them
worshipped it, like their neighbors the heathens, and like the Egyptians.
While they were so doing, Moses came down from the mountain; and when he saw
what they were about, he was so provoked, that the tables fell out of his hand,
and were broken to pieces. And God was so offended at their wickedness, as to
command that the most notorious of those who were guilty of idolatry, that is,
of worshipping the idol or image, should be slain. There were twelve thousand
killed that day, and he made those who were left wander about forty years in
that place, which was called the Desert or Wilderness, Here it will not be
amiss to teach them the 95th psalm.
before they were permitted to go into the promised land, as a punishment for
their stubbornness. Almighty God also thought fit to punish several other bad
things, that some of them were guilty of.

Before this time, he had been pleased to command a sort of table to be built
with stones set over one another. This table was called an altar, and upon that
altar he bid them lay a lamb, or a dove, or some other thing; and whatever was
laid upon the altar with wood under it, was called the Sacrifice, because it
was sacrificed; that is, offered to God, as an acknowledgment that all we have
comes from him, and that our best services are due to him. And when God was
pleased with those who offered it, he sent down fire from heaven to burn or
consume the sacrifice, as a token that he accepted of it, and he forbade that
any common fire should ever be put to it. But one day two very bold young men,
Nadab and Abihu, had the assurance to disobey, and to put common fire upon the
altar to burn the sacrifice; but God soon punished their presumption by sending
fire from heaven, which burnt them up, and nobody could save them.

Another time there was a man who was so wicked and presumptuous as to speak
against God, his Maker; and this great sin is called blasphemy. And God
Almighty commanded, that every one should throw stones upon the blasphemer till
he was crushed to death, and it was done accordingly.

Even Moses, who was so good a man, forgot himself one day: he was so provoked
by the people's obstinacy, as to be in a violent passion, and offended his
Maker, who to punish him, said, he should not live till they went to the land
of Canaan, but bid him go to the top of a high mountain, and look at it. When
he came down again, he was very sorry for his fault; and God pardoned him, and
took care of him when he died. Here I would advise teaching the 105th and 106th
psalms.


Q. You said that Moses learned many other good things from God besides the ten
commandments. Pray what were they?

A. Amongst other laws and commandments, which Moses received from God, are the
following:

He that curses his father or mother, shall surely be put to death.

Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in
the land of Egypt.

Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child: if thou afflict them any
wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry.

Thou shall not raise a false report.

Put not thy hand with the wicked, to be an unrighteous witness.

Keep thee far from a false matter, for I will not justify the wicked.

Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise, and perverteth the
words of the righteous.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor.

Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his cause.

Thou shall not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause (meaning that you
must always judge justly, not favoring the poor, or the rich, but that you
should do what is right, without partiality.)

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete yard, in weight, or in
measure.

Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a hin (that is, just measures)
shall ye have.

Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.

Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him.

The wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee.

Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind.

Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man,
and fear thy God.

Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer.

He that kills any man, shall surely be put to death.

And he that kills a beast, shall make it good, beast for beast.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart.

Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of my people,
but thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.

If thou meet thine enemy's ox, or his ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again.

If thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and
would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him.

(From this we learn, that we should do good to all, even to our enemies -- and
that we should be merciful and kind to poor animals.)

When ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners
of thy field, neither shall thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest, thou
shall leave them for the poor and strangers.

Ye shall keep my sabbath, and reverence my sanctuary.

If thou sell ought unto, or buyest ought of thy neighbor's hand, ye shall not
oppress one another.

And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen into decay with thee, then thou
shall relieve him, though he be a stranger or sojourner.

Take no usury of him; thou shall not rule over him with rigor, but shall fear
thy God.

God gave several other laws to the Jews, and promised them his favor if they
were obedient, and threatened them with very severe punishment, if they were
disobedient.

God said to the Jews by Moses,

If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, to do them, then I will
give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the
trees of the field shall yield their fruit, and your threshing shall reach unto
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time, and ye shall eat
your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. And I will give peace in
the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid, and I will
walk among you and be your God, and ye shall be my people.

But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments, I
will appoint over you terror, and consumption, and the burning ague. And ye
shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. And if ye will not
for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your
sins. And your strength shall be spent in vain; for the land shall not yield
her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.

I will bring a sword upon you, I will send the pestilence among you, and ye
shall be delivered into the hand of your enemies, and ye shall eat the flesh of
your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall you eat; and I will make your
cities waste, and I will bring the land into desolation, and your enemies which
dwell therein shall be astonished at it. And I will scatter you among the
heathen, and will draw out a sword after you; and your land shall be desolate,
and your cities waste. And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of
your enemies shall eat you up. And they that are left of you shall pine away in
their iniquity in your enemy's land.

Now all these threatenings which were denounced more than three thousand years
ago, have been wonderfully fulfilled. The Jews, though they were so highly
favored of God, proved disobedient and idolatrous, and they have been driven
out of the promised land by their enemies. Their distress, when they have been
besieged, has been so great, that parents have eaten their children. Their
temple was utterly destroyed. Their land is now possessed by the Turks, and
they are scattered and despised over the face of the earth. There never was any
example of this kind of any other nation whatever.

Afterward we read in the book of Leviticus, that when they be in the land of
their enemies, that God will not cast them away, neither will he destroy them
utterly, but if they shall confess their iniquity, and their hearts shall be
humbled, he will still remember his covenants with them.

Q. What is the greatest affront that can be offered to God?

A. It is to worship or pray to any but himself; to any creature; to the sun,
moon, or stars; or to any thing that is made with hands, as God expressly says
in the second commandment; and praying to any thing but God is called idolatry.

Q. Were the Egyptians idolaters?

A. The Egyptians were great idolaters, and therefore the miracles and wonders
which God enabled Moses to perform, might be in mercy designed not only to
deliver the children of Israel, but also to cure the Egyptians of their
idolatry. The pride and obstinacy of Pharaoh gave occasion for these miracles,
and on that account he was judged a proper person to be their king by Almighty
God, who says, "for this purpose have I raised him up."

Q. What is meant, when it is said, that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh: Did
God make him wicked?

A. No: for Almighty God has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but would
rather that he should repent and live. It was therefore Pharaoh's own pride and
obstinacy that was the cause of his destruction. In other places, Pharaoh is
said to have hardened his own heart: it was not therefore by any extraordinary
influence of God upon his mind that his heart was hardened, nor could Almighty
God be said to have done it, in any other manner, than as he may be said to be
the doer of every thing which he does not prevent.

Q. What is the greatest happiness any one can attain?

A. The greatest happiness any one can attain, is to know the one living and
true God; that is, to have true apprehensions of his infinite holiness, mercy,
and righteousness; from which we may learn what we must do, and what sort of
persons we must become in order to obtain his favor. The Egyptians, in common
with other heathens, were great idolaters; they were miserably ignorant of the
great God, and worshipped various different animals: to bring them therefore to
the knowledge of himself, by whatever means, was really the greatest favor that
could be bestowed upon them.

Q. Pray how do we know all these things?

A. God Almighty in his great goodness was pleased, that Moses should write
them all down, and leave it for us who came after, that we might know his will
and his greatness.

So Moses wrote the history of the creation, the fall of Adam, the death of
Abel, the flood, the confusion of Babel, the destruction of Sodom, the history
of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, and the story of Joseph. All these he wrote
in one book, called the book of Genesis. Moses afterward wrote the account of
his own birth, of the plagues of Egypt, of the children of Israel passing the
Red Sea, of their wandering in the wilderness forty years, of all that befell
them there, and all that God directed them to do. These matters are in four
other books, called Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, which with
Genesis, are sometimes called the Pentateuch, i. e. five books.

God directed those that came in Moses's place, after his death, to write what
had happened in their time. So we have all the history of the children of
Israel, almost till the coming of Jesus Christ our Lord. We have also an
account of Christ's life and death. All this is together in one great book,
called the Holy Bible, because it contains the word of God. And the word of God
is called revelation, because God has revealed, that is, told it to us. Some
part of the Bible is always read in public worship. It is the wisest and the
best book in the whole world. Other books are written out of men's own heads,
or out of what they pick up from others, but the Bible was written by good men,
to whom God revealed his will; and it teaches all that is necessary for us to
know, and be, and do, in order to our passing comfortably through this world,
and being happy for ever in the next.

When you can read it, and are old enough to understand it, you will be allowed
to read it all yourself.

Q. What is virtue? or what is it to be virtuous?

A. It is when we are either tempted or persuaded to do what we know to be
wrong, to resolve against it, and not to yield to any body or any thing, though
we like it ever so much, if we know it will offend God. When we are tempted, we
must strive hard with ourselves, and pray to God to help us, like Joseph, and
all other good men, and then it will not be in the power of bad or foolish
people to spoil us; that is, to make us do ill.

CHAP. XIV.
THE HISTORY OF JOSHUA.
AFTER the death of Moses, it pleased God that Joshua, the son of Nun, should
succeed him; that is, stand in his place, to show the children of Israel the
way into the promised land of Canaan, defend them against their enemies, and
teach them their duty to their Maker. He was to instruct them in every thing
that was fit for them to do, and tell them what they ought not to do. He that
governed the Israelites in those days was called their judge.

When therefore Joshua became judge of Israel, he drew near the first city in
the land of Canaan, called Jericho, and sent privately into the city to get an
account of the place and of the people in it. They who are employed in this
manner are called spies; and when a spy belonging to the enemy is found in any
place, he is always put to death. These spies were very near being caught in
Jericho; but a woman called Rahab, who lived near the gate of the city, took
compassion on them. She hid them in her house till it was night, and then let
them out of a window by fastening cords to it. Before they went away, she made
them promise, that in return, for having saved their lives, she and her family
should be spared when the Israelites got possession of the city.

After this God commanded Joshua to march with all the people to the river of
Jordan, which ran between them and Jericho. He then ordered, that the sons of
Levi, called Levites, should carry the ark, and walk before the rest into the
river, and stand in the middle of it, with the ark. When they drew near,
behold! to the great amazement of all the people, the waters divided as at the
Red Sea, and they passed over without so much as wetting their feet. Afterward
the people passed over also, and then the waters immediately returned to their
old place.

The next wonder that God performed for the sake of his people, was at the town
of Jericho. He commanded Joshua to lead them round the town seven days
together, blowing a trumpet every time, and on the seventh day the walls of the
city tumbled down. By this means the Israelites marched in without any
difficulty, and were masters of the place. The people to whom it belonged
having opposed the Israelites, and being such wicked idolaters, God commanded
the children of Israel to kill them all, except Rahab and her family, according
to the promise the spies had made her. So they took great care of her, and all
that belonged to her, for what good man ever forgets those that have been good
to him? All the kings of that neighborhood, jealous of their success, came out
at different times and fought against them. Whenever the Israelites acted
wickedly, God suffered their enemies to beat them; and from the story of one of
them called Acham, which is mentioned in the scriptures, one may learn that
nothing is hid from the all-seeing eye of God. But whenever they repented and
behaved well, his anger was appeased, and then they again became stronger than
their enemies, and the victory was on their side.

Joshua having thus conquered almost all the land of Canaan, divided it into
twelve parts, according to the twelve tribes of Israel. He made eleven of the
tribes draw lots for their shares, that there might be no disputes among them.
As for the tribe of Levi, they did not draw, because God had provided for them
in another way; for he thought proper they should be his ministers, and always
attend on his immediate service; that is, employ themselves entirely in
explaining the scriptures, praying and doing sacrifice at the altar. And as
Joseph, the beloved son of Jacob, had two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, of these
were formed two tribes.

Q. Were the inhabitants of Canaan to be blamed for opposing the Israelites,
who came to take their country from them?

A. They were certainly not to be blamed for endeavoring to repel invaders, if
they did not know that what the Israelites did in this respect was by the
express command of Almighty God.

Q. Although they did oppose them, and were such wicked idolaters, why did God
order the Israelites to destroy them?

A. We do not always know the reasons of God's dispensations, but we may be
sure that they are ever founded in mercy as well as justice. You remember that
the land of Canaan had been promised to Abraham above four hundred years
before, and that this promise was very often afterward repeated; but it was
not to be fulfilled till the iniquity of the old inhabitants was full; that is,
till they were become so wicked that they were not fit to live; and Almighty
God had surely a right to destroy them in whatever way he saw best; by the hand
of the Israelites, as well as by an earthquake or famine. Moreover, this signal
destruction of the Canaanites, of which the Israelites themselves were made the
instruments, would be an awful warning to them, to avoid those sins which had
brought the divine judgments on that people.

Q. What was the ark which the Levites carried before the Israelites over the
river Jordan?

A. It was something like a chest, in which God commanded the two tables of the
law to be carefully kept; and this ark he committed to the care of the Levites,
and did not suffer it to be produced, but upon extraordinary occasions.

CHAP. XV.
THE BOOK OF JUDGES.
AFTER all these things, Joshua died in a good old age; and he had been so
worthy a man, that all Israel mourned for him many days. They remained some
time without any judge, and being like a flock of sheep without a shepherd,
very often went astray. Instead of obeying the laws of God, which they had been
so often taught, and which were sufficient to guide them, they chose to follow
the inclinations of their own hearts, which were disposed to evil. Bad people
cannot live long in peace and quiet with one another, for they always want more
than they have a right to, and do not scruple injuring others. Unjust actions
must always produce quarrels, for nobody will let another oppress him, if he
can help it.

The people of Gibeah, of the tribe of Benjamin, did a most barbarous wicked
thing by one of the Levites, for which all the other tribes resolved to punish
them. The rest of the Benjamites, instead of correcting their wicked relations,
took their part. This brought on a civil war, in which the tribe of Benjamin
was almost all destroyed. -- A civil war is, when people of the same nation go
to war with each other. -- This was a very bloody one, and when it was over,
the other tribes repented having dealt so hardly with their brethren the
Benjamites, and they all became good friends again.

They were, however, much oppressed by their neighbors the Syrians. They
called to God for help, and he appointed Othniel to be their judge, who led
them on to fight their battles, and saved them from their enemies. After his
death they fell into idolatry, and then God delivered them into the hands of
the Moabites; but when they repented, Ehud was made judge of Israel, and
overcame their adversaries; that is, their enemies. The next judge was Shamgar;
he conquered the Philistines, who had fallen upon them; but when he died, they
returned again. Then a wise woman, named Deborah the Prophetess, and Barak, a
valiant, that is, a brave man, both governed Israel together, and gained a
victory over the Philistines. When the Israelites found themselves delivered
from their enemies, they were very joyful; and Deborah the Prophetess made a
fine song, called a hymn or psalm of thanksgiving, such as are sung in places
of public worship, to praise God for his goodness to us.

After the death of Deborah, the Israelites fell again into idolatry, and God
permitted the Midianites to rule and oppress them for seven years; but when
they repented, and called to him for help, he sent his angel to call Gideon,
who was threshing wheat in a barn, and Gideon, with God's help, soon freed them
from their enemies.

When Gideon died, one of his sons, called Abimelech, murdered almost all his
brothers, intending to be king of Israel. This occasioned great disturbances
among them, but they were quieted by his untimely death; for God permitted his
life to be taken away by a woman throwing a stone at him

Tola was judge after him, and then Jair; in both their times the Israelites
provoked God by their sins, and he delivered them up to the Ammonites. After
this the people became penitent, that is, they repented, and then he gave them
Jephtha as their judge. He was a great warrior, but one rash action that he
committed, made the remainder of his life unhappy. When he was going out to
fight the Ammonites, he vowed, if God gave him the victory, he would sacrifice
the first thing he met when he returned home. He did conquer the Ammonites, but
his only daughter not having heard of his vow, was ^o impatient to see her
father again, that she met him first of all; so to his great grief he was
obliged to fulfill his vow, in consecrating her to the Lord to remain unmarried
all her days, that being the only way in which he could make good his vow in
respect of her. When Jephtha died, Ibzan was judge in his place; after Ibzan
succeeded Elon, and after Elon, Abdon was judge. When Abdon died, the
Philistines oppressed Israel very much, till Sampson was sent by the Almighty
to deliver them. It pleased God to make Sampson, the strongest man in the
world. He killed a lion without any help, and destroyed many of the
Philistines. At length he fell into their hands, but not till he had killed a
thousand of them with only the jaw bone of an ass; and then he carried away
upon his back the gates of the city where he was confined, and made his escape.
But it was not long before they took him again, by the treachery of a wicked
woman called Dalilah. The Philistines offered her money, if she would find some
means to deliver him up to them, which she did.

One day the Philistines made a great feast to their idol god Dagon, in his
temple, and when they were in the midst of their mirth and jollity, they sent
for Sampson, to laugh at him and tease him. But the time was come, when it
pleased God to deliver his people from such cruel enemies; for Sampson finding
himself in their temple with those bad people, called upon God to help him;
then taking hold of the pillars that supported the building, and loosening
them, the roof fell down and crushed them all to death. After this the
Israelites were quiet for several years, and Eli, the high priest, became judge
of Israel. There was a young man named Samuel, who had been bred up under Eli
from a child; and Samuel was so pious and virtuous a youth, that God was
frequently pleased to speak with him, and to reveal to him his will, so that he
became a great prophet; Eli the high priest was good himself, but he suffered
his children to be wicked, and that is a great sin. His two sons, Hophni and
Phineas, behaved very ill; and though he knew it was his duty to punish them
while they were young, in order to make them better, he gave himself no trouble
about it; and as they were not contradicted, they grew worse and worse. They at
last brought on their own ruin, as well as their father's, for they were killed
in battle by the Philistines, who overran all the country; the ark also was
taken; and when old Eli heard the news, he fell down with grief, and broke his
neck and died. Then was Samuel made a judge in his place, who kept the people
in very good order, and followed the will of God in all things. However, the
Israelites at last grew tired of having only judges over them, and had a mind
to be governed by a king, as other nations were. God Almighty, who knows all
things, knew they would never be so happy under a king as under a great
prophet, like Samuel, who consulted his will in every thing; but he told them,
since they had so great a desire for a king, they should have one. Accordingly
he commanded Samuel to anoint a young man, called Saul, of the tribe of
Benjamin. It is an ancient custom to anoint a king with oil before he is
crowned; therefore God commanded it, as a token that Saul was the king he had
chosen for them. Samuel, however, still governed Israel for a great while
longer, because the people knew he was a good man and a great prophet.

Q. What is a prophet?

A. A prophet is one to whom God communicates the knowledge of such things,
whether present, past, or to come, as cannot be learned without his particular
assistance; and to speak or to write such things is called prophesying. Moses
was a prophet, for he wrote the history of the creation; and he forewarned the
children of Israel before his death, what would be the consequence of their
disobeying the commands of God; he also foretold to the Israelites, in the
xviiith chapter of Deuteronomy, that in future times the Lord God would raise
up a prophet from among their brethren like unto him, who should speak unto
them all that God should command him.

Some silly people fancy, that witches and conjurers have the same power of
foretelling things; or, as they call it, fortune-telling; but witches and
conjurers are all cheats and impostors, who pretend to know what they do not
know, with a design to get one's money, and to cheat one; and it is a great
sin, as well as folly, to ask them questions, or listen to them.

A true prophet is very unlike these cheats; he does not attempt to get our
money, but endeavors to make us good; and may be known by the wonderful works
which God enables him to do, as he did Moses and many others. These wonderful
works are called miracles, of which our Savior and his Apostles worked a great
many, as you will read in the New Testament.

Q. What is a vow?

A. A vow is a solemn and religious promise made to God; and as all promises
must be faithfully observed, that is, kept, so must those which we make to God
in a particular manner. All that God does for us is of his own free goodness,
for we can give him nothing, because every thing is his own, and he can take it
when he pleases; and he desires nothing of us but that we worship him devoutly,
and obey his laws, as he has told us in many parts of the scripture. It is
better, therefore, to avoid these vows, which are frequently made in distress,
and to be resigned to God without doing any thing like making a bargain with
him.

We should be very cautious, even about making a promise, or taking an oath to
one another; for when once the words are gone out of our lips, if they are not
unlawful, that is, contrary to God's law, we must perform them. For nothing is
so base as not keeping one's promise; and nobody will be regarded after having
broken it. But it is still worse than that, to take a false oath; that is, to
swear a thing to be true which we know to be otherwise; or to swear a thing to
be false, which we know to be true. Either of these kinds of false oaths is
called perjury, which is a most horrible sin.

Q. What is a high priest?

A. The high priest of the Jews was the chief of the priests, whose office or
place it was, like them, to offer sacrifices and to burn incense, and to do
other services in the temple. It was his peculiar duty to go into the innermost
part of the temple once every year, on the day of atonement, as it was called,
to perform there the especial, that is, the particular services of that day. He
was appointed also to overlook all the temple worship, and to judge among the
priests and the people in many matters, both civil and religious.

Q. Where do we find the history of the Judges of Israel?

A. You will find it all in that part of the scripture called the Book of
Judges. There were fifteen of them after the death of Joshua; Othniel, Ehud,
Shamgar, Deborah, Barak, Gideon, Abimelech, Tola, Jair, Jephtha, Ibzan, Elon,
Abdon, Sampson, Eli, and Samuel.

CHAP. XVI.
1 SAMUEL x. etc. THE REIGN OF KING SAUL.
THOUGH Saul had been anointed king, he was still too young to govern the
people; therefore he went back to his father's house, and staid there till the
king of Ammon attacked the Israelites, that is, made war upon them. Saul then,
as he was their king, put himself at the head of their army, and beat the
Ammonites; upon which the Israelites were so pleased with his courage and
prudence, that they all acknowledged him to be their king. After this, he
gained many other victories; but at last he grew proud, and did not obey the
orders which God gave by his prophets, and by that means lost the favor of
God. He that gave him his crown resolved to deprive him of it, since he proved
unworthy.

CHAP. XVII.
2 SAMUEL ii. etc. THE REIGN OF KING DAVID
DAVID was great grandson to Ruth, of the tribe of Judah, who was a very good
woman, and had been remarkable for her dutiful behavior to her mother-in-law.
Her story is in the Holy Bible, and is called, The Book of RUTH. Her son Obed
was the father of Jesse, and Jesse was the father of David.

After David had been anointed king by the command of God, he continued with
his family, waiting till God thought proper that he should reign over the
Israelites, in the place of Saul.

Some time after, Saul being disturbed in mind, and very miserable, because he
knew he had offended God, desired his servants to send somebody who could play
well upon the harp, to amuse his grief. David could play very well, so he was
sent for. His music was so fine, that the king was much pleased: he listened to
him with delight, and yet the moment David ceased (that is, left off) playing,
the distemper of Readiness mind returned. -- There is no cure for a guilty
conscience, but reconciling one's self to God by hearty repentance and
amendment of life. -- So David went back to his father.

Soon after the Philistines made war upon the Israelites, and sent Goliath, a
giant, to challenge any one of them. A giant is a man much taller and stronger
than other men: and Goliath was so great a giant, that not one of Readiness
soldiers durst encounter, that is, fight with him, though Saul promised his
daughter in marriage to the man that should kill him. He came out for several
days together, during them to battle; but they were all terrified at the sight
of him. At last young David happened to be sent to the camp, to bring some
provisions to his brothers, who were soldiers. When he saw the giant, and heard
his insolent language, God inspired him with courage, and he resolved to go out
and meet him. All the army of Israel wondered and trembled for him: and when
Goliath saw what a stripling he was, he supposed he had been sent to mock him,
and was very angry. The giant then came forward to destroy David, but the young
man took a stone, which he threw from a sling at him. It struck his forehead,
and he fell down: then David ran to him before he could recover himself, drew
out Goliath's sword as he lay upon the ground, and with it cut off his head. --
David did many other great things, because God assisted him, which made all the
people admire him; and good Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved him as his own
soul. But as bad people are always jealous of those who are better liked than
themselves, so Saul hated David, and would have been glad to have done him any
mischief he could, though he was become his son-in-law, being married to his
daughter.

He tried so often to put David to death, that David was obliged to go away and
hide himself, sometimes with the prophet Samuel, and sometimes with the
Philistines. But the Philistines grew suspicious, and took him for a spy, so he
durst not stay long with them. He wandered about in the deserts, and lodged in
caves, while Saul was almost mad with fury that he could not find him. In the
mean ^^me David gained many friends, who went with him, and shared his
distresses; and there were several of the Israelites that assisted him. There
was, however, one man called Nabal, who was brutal and churlish, and behaved
with roughness and ill nature to him. But his wife Abigail, a prudent, sensible
woman, was much concerned when she heard of it; and to save her husband from
the resentment, that is, the anger he had reason to expect, she went to David
to make all the excuses she could, and to ask his pardon.

Still Saul pursued David wherever he went. One day Saul happened to go into a
cave where David was hid with two or three of his friends in a corner, out of
sight. Then Saul was in David's power, and he could have ended all his
distresses, by putting his unjust enemy to death. But a good man would suffer
any thing rather than take revenge, or do a base act, and would always return
good for evil. So David let Saul escape, and yet that stubborn king continued
still to be David's enemy.

Another time Readiness life was again in David's power, but no provocation could
tempt him to do him any hurt, so they parted again: and then David, to be
entirely out of his way, went and lived in the country of the Philistines.

Some time after, a fresh war broke out between that nation and the Israelites,
in which Saul and Jonathan his son were killed in battle. When David heard the
news, he was much concerned for Saul, because he was his father-in-law and his
king; and he grieved most exceedingly for Jonathan, who had always behaved to
him as a brother and a friend. He made a funeral song for Saul and Jonathan.

After the time of mourning was past, first two of the tribes, and then the
other ten acknowledged David king of Israel.

He ruled for a great while with justice and mercy, and was a wise and a great
king. He never forgot the friendship of Jonathan toward him, but treated a
poor lame son that he left behind, called Mephibosheth; with great affection.
His subjects were happy under his government. He was very devout, and made a
number of holy songs or psalms. We have in the Bible an hundred and fifty,
mostly written by him, which are called the Psalms of David. Some of these are
penitential, that is, written when he was sorry for his sins, and imploring or
asking earnestly. God's forgiveness; and some are thanksgivings for mercies
received. Some describe the goodness and greatness, and all the wonders of
Almighty God; and others are prophetical, that is, filled with prophecies of
what should afterward happen.

David also collected all the riches he could get, either in gold or silver,
ivory, precious stones, or fine timber, and laid them by, as materials for
erecting, that is, making a great temple at Jerusalem; a temple is a
magnificent building in honor of God, set apart for his service; where the
priests should be continually attending on his worship, and whither the people
should resort to pray and offer sacrifices. This was what he had chiefly at
heart; but it was not the divine will that the temple should be begun during
David's lifetime. God was, however, graciously pleased to acquaint him, by one
of his prophets, that he approved of his intention, and that it should be
executed, that is, done in the reign of Solomon his son. In short, David
reigned so well, that his neighbors loved him, and God called him the man
after his own heart. Jerusalem was his chief city, and where all the men were
every year to assemble three times, to observe the passover, and two other
festivals.

Who would have thought that such a wise prince could ever do wrong? But the
foolish pleasures of the world, the riches he possessed, and the respect every
body paid him, tempted him to forget his duty to God his maker, and to think
too much about pleasing himself: and whoever does that will soon be led astray.
It was just so with David; whenever he neglected studying to please God, and
began to think of pleasing himself only, he fell into the greatest sins; but
God Almighty was so good as to send him great afflictions, which made him think
of his sins and repent. After a great deal of sorrow and resolving to amend his
life, the Almighty forgave him and blessed him again. The sins of David were
very great indeed, but his sorrow for them was great too, and his punishment
very severe, which at some time, and in some manner, is what all sinners must
expect. David suffered great sickness for his crimes, and met with terrible
afflictions in his family. They quarrelled among themselves, and Absalom, one
of his sons, rebelled against him. He also lost the love of part of his people,
who ceased to respect him, when he became disobedient to God. The greatest part
of them joined with Absalom, and made him king, and drove David out of
Jerusalem, his capital city; but when God had sufficiently humbled him, he
suffered Absalom's army to be destroyed, and the young man himself lost his
life. The people then returned to David their old king. He grieved a long while
for his son Absalom, and took care never to offend God any more. He lived to a
great age, and governed the people well, and God to reward him, permitted his
son Solomon, though but a youth, to succeed him to the crown of Israel.

Q. Are the Psalms of David the same which we now have in the Bible?

A. Yes; and many parts of them are very proper for public or private christian
worship: but we are to remember, that it is of no use to repeat the words of a
prayer or psalm, unless we think, at the same time, of what we are saying. It
is highly displeasing to God to let our thoughts ramble, either at public or
private prayer.

Q. Is it a sin to divert ourselves, and to be cheerful?

A. Very far from it: God Almighty, who is goodness itself, and loves us,
permits us to be as cheerful, and to divert ourselves as well as we can,
provided our diversion or mirth is not sinful; that is, that it does not hurt
ourselves or others. When it can do no harm, it is called innocent mirth; and
good people always feel mirth and pleasure, because they know that God Almighty
loves them, and protects them. It is, however, certainly a sin to employ our
whole time in diversion only, because that prevents necessary and useful
business from being done. But as king David's son says, in the book of
Ecclesiastes:

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven.

A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck
away that which is planted.

A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

Wise people, therefore, are always careful to divide their time in a proper
manner.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 KINGS i. etc. THE REIGN OF KING SOLOMON.
SOLOMON had been taught by his parents, that religion and virtue are true
wisdom: and that true wisdom is more valuable than riches, because it procures
us the esteem of good men here, and purchases us eternal happiness hereafter.
Therefore, when he prayed for God's blessing, he asked for nothing but wisdom;
and the Almighty was so pleased with his moderation, that he granted him the
wisdom he asked for, and riches and honors besides. By means of this he was
the greatest king ever heard of; and to this day, when we would praise any
body's wisdom, we say, he is as wise as Solomon. He did many good things, which
are mentioned in the scriptures; and wrote some of the books that are in it.
One of them is called the Proverbs of Solomon. It is full of wise sayings and
beautiful thoughts, very improving and entertaining. He built the temple of
Jerusalem, which was a most beautiful building. We find the description of it
in the Holy Scriptures. Solomon also made a great palace for himself, and
several other fine buildings. And his wisdom was so much talked of abroad, that
the queen of Sheba came from a distant country to see him, and to admire the
wonders of his country.

Yet, even this great and wise man went astray; with all his wisdom, Solomon
fell. We all must remember to have read, how careful Abraham was to choose a
good wife for his son Isaac; and also, how Isaac, when he grew old, sent Jacob
to Padan-Aram, to marry one of his relations, because they had had a good
education. A good woman behaves well to her husband, and takes care of his
family and his children: but Solomon, wise as he was, did not consider that. He
took wives from among bad people, that were idolaters and idle, and did nothing
but eat and drink, and make merry. These bad women persuaded Solomon to do like
themselves, by which means he fell from all his glory. He was despised in his
old age, and a prophet from God foretold him, that the crown of Israel should
not continue in his family; so he died in shame and disgrace.

CHAP. XIX.
1 KINGS xii. THE DIVISION OF THE KINGDOM UNDER REHOBOAM.
REHOBOAM, the son of Solomon, succeeded him, but did not resemble him, that
is, was not like him in wisdom. He had not sense enough either to ask it of
God, or to consult the experienced old men whom his father used to employ in
the affairs of the nation. This weak prince, on the contrary, encouraged by his
young and foolish companions, behaved to his subjects with such pride and
severity, that ten of the twelve tribes rebelled against him, and made
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, their king. Only two of the tribes continued with
Rehoboam, the tribe of Judah, and that of Benjamin; and God Almighty never
permitted him nor his sons to regain the rest. So that he remained only king of
Judah, while Jeroboam was called king of Israel.

This Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, was a very bad man, and an idolater; and so
were his sons that reigned after him, and every king that succeeded them. There
were about twenty of them, one after another; that is, in succession. Omri, the
fourth king, built a great city, called Samaria, and it became the capital,
that is, the chief city in Israel, as Jerusalem was the capital city of the
kingdom of Judea.

CHAP. XX.
1 KINGS xvii. THE CAPTIVITY OF THE ISRAELITES.
GOD Almighty bore with their idolatries, and other sins, for some time, to
leave them room to repent; but at last, as their wickedness increased, he would
bear with it no longer. So in the reign of Hoshea, their last king, Samaria was
taken by the king of Assyria, and Hoshea, with almost all his people, were
carried away into Babylon, the capital of Assyria; and, at the same time, a
number of Babylonians were sent to Samaria, to inhabit that city, and enjoy the
lands of the Israelites.

Q What were the names of those kings of Israel?

A. Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Omri, Ahab, Ahaziah, Jehoram, Jehu,
Jehoahaz, Jeroboam, Zach^riah, Shal^um, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah, Hoshea.

CHAP. XXI.
2 KINGS xxiv. xxv. THE TAKING OF JERUSALEM, AND THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TEMPLE.
AS for the kingdom of Judah, it was governed by kings of the family of David,
for fourteen generations, and to the number of twenty kings after him. Some of
those kings were good men, and zealous for the worship of the one true God,
like their grandfather David; such as Asa, Amaziah, Azariah, Jotham, Hezekiah,
and Josiah: but most of the others followed the example of their brethren, the
kings of Israel, and were idolaters, like them. The people also of the one
kingdom became as bad as those of the other. The goodness of God did not fail
to warn them, by several prophets, that he would destroy them as a nation, if
they persisted in their wickedness. We read in the Bible of Elijah and Elisha,
great prophets; also of Hosea, Amos, Zedekiah, Micaiah, and a great number of
others, who were all sent for that purpose. Not one of these was able to
persuade the Jews, that is, the Judeans, to amend their lives; and even the
example of the fatal end of the kingdom of Israel was not sufficient to make
that of Judah to reform, that is, to grow better; so that in the reign of
Zedekiah, king of Judah, that kingdom was also overrun by the Assyrians, who
carried away the king and people to Babylon, and plundered the temple of God,
about six hundred years before the coming of Jesus Christ.

Q. What were the names of the kings of Judah from Rehoboam?

A. Rehoboam, Abijah, Asa, Jehosaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah, Joash, Amaziah,
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim,
Jehoiachim, Zedekiah.

Q. Where can we find the history of all these kings?

A. We find a full account of all these kings in that part of the Bible called
the books of Samuel, and in the books of Kings, and of Chronicles.

Q. May we be sure that the threatenings of Almighty God will be executed, as
well as his promises fulfilled?

A. Yes, we may be sure of it.

Q. Did not the Israelites know this, and had not Moses told them many years
before, what would be the consequence, if they disobeyed the will of God?

A. They did know it; and Moses had told them that they would be carried away
captives by their enemies; but this is what wicked foolish people do every day;
they know if they commit sin, that they cannot be happy, yet they behave as if
they did not know it.

CHAP. XXII.
EZRA, NEHEMIAH, etc. THE RETURN OF THE CAPTIVES, AND RESTORATION OF THE TEMPLE.
THE Jews continued in the land of their captivity about seventy years. At the
end of that time, Cyrus, king of Persia, being also king of Babylon. God
Almighty put it in his mind and heart to send home most of the children of
Israel.

They were by that time sufficiently humbled, and very penitent, and never went
back into idolatry again. God therefore took compassion on them, and they were
enabled, after some difficulties, to settle themselves again at Jerusalem, and
repair the temple, but they could not make it so beautiful as it had been at
first. However, the high priests and Levites officiated in a regular manner,
and the service of the temple was conducted with decency, for they had the free
exercise of their religion; though in most other matters, they were obliged to
submit to a governor appointed by the kings of Persia.

We read of the return of these captives, of the repairing of the temple, and
rebuilding the walls of the city, in the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther,
which are part of the Holy Bible. We also find in that divine and wonderful
volume, the prophecies of Isaiah, of Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and a great
number of others, which foretold all those great events.

Q. Did these prophets live at the same time?

A. No: some of them lived in the times of the kings of Israel and Judah; some
of them after the destruction of their kingdoms; and some after the return of
the Jews from captivity.

Q. What were these prophets commissioned to do?

A. They were sent by Almighty God, to forewarn the people of Israel and Judah,
of the sad consequence of their disobeying the laws of God, and to exhort them
to repentance; and sometimes they were sent with messages from God to other
nations. The books which are called by their names, contain many very fine
discourses delivered at different times: they likewise speak in several places
of the coming of the Messiah; and Isaiah in particular, describes his excellent
character, and many of the circumstances of his sufferings and death.

CHAP. XXIII.
DANIEL i. iii. vi. OF DANIEL AND HIS THREE COMPANIONS.
IN the beginning of the book of Daniel we have an account of him, together
with Shadrach, M^shach, and Abednego, being brought captives, that is,
prisoners, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and educated at the court of king
Nebuchadnezzar, on account of their great abilities, to sit them for some posts
of trust under his government; when they gave a noble example of piety and
temperance, by living on pulse and water, and refusing to taste the king's
meat, because the Babylonians ate such things as were forbidden by the law of
Moses. But Nebuchadnezzar, full of pride and folly, made an image of gold,
commanding that all his subjects who did not worship it should be put to death;
and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, being brought before the king, upon his
asking them why they did not serve his gods, nor worship the golden image which
he had set up? replied to him, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer
thee in this matter. If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us
from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O
king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.

Then Nebuchadnezzar commanded a furnace to be heated seven times more than
usual, and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to be cast into it. But they were
miraculously preserved by an angel of God, so that the fire had no power upon
their bodies, nor was an hair of their heads singed, nor any thing about them
burnt.

When king Darius, who reigned after Nebuchadnezzar, had placed Daniel at the
head of all his affairs, the great men of the kingdom, envying his power, and
seeking his ruin, craftily obtained an order from the king, which could not be
changed, to forbid any prayers to be made for the space of thirty days, to any
God or man whatever, except to the king, thinking thereby to ensnare Daniel.
But he fearing nothing, continued to pray in his usual manner, with his windows
open, three times a day. This being easily known, these wicked men took
advantage of it, and accused him to the king, who was very sorry to find his
faithful servant in danger from his order, and labored all he could to save
him, but in vain, and was forced to command him to be cast into the den of
lions.

The king passed the night in sadness and solitude, neither were any
instruments of music brought before him, and his sleep went from him. And he
arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions. And
when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel, and the
king spoke and said unto him; O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God
whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions? Then said
Daniel unto the king; O king live for ever (this was an usual manner of
speaking to kings in those days.) My God has sent his angel, and has shut the
lions' mouths: forasmuch as before him innocence was found in me; and also
before thee, O king, I have done no hurt. Then the king was exceeding glad, and
commanded Daniel to be taken out of the den, and the men that accused him to be
brought and cast into it; over whom the lions had the mastery, and broke all
their bones in pieces, before they came to the bottom of the den.

Q. Why would not Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego worship Nebuchadnezzar's
image?

A. Because it was forbidden them by the first and second commandments.

Q. Ought not we to be ready to suffer any thing, rather than go against our
consciences, and worship any other than God?

A. Yes: because God can deliver us out of the greatest dangers, as he did
these men. If not, he can make us happy in another world.

Q. But might not Daniel have forborne to worship God for thirty days in the
public manner he was known to do, and have contented himself with praying to
him in secret, rather than disobey the laws, and expose himself to be devoured
by wild beasts?

A. By no means: for that would have been to act deceitfully, and would have
appeared to be a forbearing to worship God at the command of a king. Whereas on
such occasions, and at all proper times, we are to make open profession of our
religion, without fear of man.

CHAP. XXIV.
DANIEL. OF THE FOUR MONARCHIES.
THE next thing these prophets foretold, was God's punishment of the Assyrians
or Babylonians, whose city would be destroyed by the Persians, for having
treated the Israelites with such cruelty. They also foretold, that those
Persians would afterward be conquered by the Greeks, and that those Greeks
would, at last, be overcome by the Romans, which Romans would become masters of
the world: that the Jews would, as well as other nations, be obliged to submit
to them; and that after all those things, our Savior Christ would come into
the world. All this has accordingly come to pass, and these four monarchies, or
powers, have governed the world in their turn. First, the ^ssyrians, who
subdued the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and every other country within
their reach Secondly, the Persians, who, commanded by Cyrus, made themselves
masters of the proud city of Babylon, and permitted the Jews to return home.
Several other kings of Persia succeeded him, till, thirdly, the Greeks,
commanded by king Alexander, called the Great, marched into Persia, beat their
armies, and took possession of their dominions. The Jews were frequently
disturbed by them till they submitted to the Romans, who, fourthly, came out of
a city called Rome, and, by degrees, conquered almost every nation in the
world. When every country had yielded to them, and all nations were at peace,
Augustus Caesar was emperor of Rome; at which happy time our blessed Savior
came to deliver us all from sin and death.

Q. Were the Jews in subjection to the emperor of Rome, when Jesus Christ was
born?

A. Yes: but the Romans suffered them to be governed by their own laws, to
enjoy the free use of their religion, and to be ruled by a king of their own
nation; only they had not the power over life and death, and they were obliged
to pay tribute; that is, such a sum of money as the emperor pleased to demand
every year to be paid to him.

Q. Had any of the prophets foretold where Jesus Christ should be born?

A. Yes, it had been foretold that he should be born in Bethlehem of Judea

Q. Did the people of the Jews then expect, that about that time the Messiah
should be born?

A. Yes, there was such a general expectation, not only among the Jews, but
throughout all the east; but the Jews mistook the true character of the
Messiah, and expected a great temporal prince, who would make them a powerful
nation, and deliver them from their subjection to the Romans.

CHAP. XXV.
OF THE BOOK OF JOB.
I HAVE now given an account of most of that part of the Bible which is called
the Old Testament, except the Book of Job. It contains the life of that good
man, and is one of the finest histories in the Holy Scripture. It is not known
what time he lived; but he is mentioned as a pattern of goodness, patience, and
submission to the will of God. No man ever underwent harder trials; for he was
deprived of all his fortune, his friends, and his children, and endured the
most painful sickness; but all this served to show his great dependence upon
God, and his humility, and that no extremity of sufferings could tempt him to
do evil. When Job's piety had been sufficiently manifested, God Almighty
restored to him all he had lost, fortune, friends, children, and health; and
added a great deal more, so that the latter end of his life was still more
prosperous than the beginning had been.

Q. Are there no more books in the Old Testament than those we have given an
account of?

A. Yes, there are; and you will see them when you shall be able to read the
Holy Bible.

CHAP. XXVI.
THE LIFE OF OUR SAVIOR.
OUR Savior Jesus Christ was born in the country of the Jews, whilst Augustus
Caesar was emperor of Rome, and in the time of a general peace. The particular
circumstances that attended his birth are related in the New Testament.

Soon after he was born, some wise men from the eastern country, where the
expectation of the Messiah was general, having been informed by the appearance
of an extraordinary star, of that happy event, came into Judea, to pay homage
to him. Herod, whom the Romans had set over the land of Judah, was much alarmed
at the news; for mistaking in common with the rest of the Jewish people, the
true character of the Messiah, he feared that Jesus Christ would be raised to
the throne in his place.

This bad man, therefore, tried to find out the child, with an intention to
destroy him; but Mary, the mother of Jesus, and Joseph her husband, were so
poor and so little known, that he could not discover him. Then cruel Herod, in
order to make sure of him, commanded all the infants to be put to death, who
were in or about Bethlehem, where it was foretold that Christ should be born.
But God discovered his wicked intention to Joseph in a dream, desiring him to
make haste, and take the child and his mother into Egypt. They went and staid
there, till God again informed him by another dream, that Herod was dead, and
commanded him to return home, but to go to Nazareth, and not to Bethlehem, for
fear of Herod's son, who then reigned, and who was as cruel as his father.

When Jesus was but twelve years old, he astonished all who saw or heard him,
by the extraordinary wisdom he displayed. But before he made any appearance as
a prophet, John the Baptist was sent out by God Almighty, to prepare people's
minds for the coming of the Messiah, and he encouraged and endeavored to
persuade every body to repent, and also to be baptized; a ceremony by which
they publicly expressed their desire of becoming the disciples of the Messiah,
acknowledging that repentance was necessary in order to their becoming such,
and their belief that John was divinely commissioned to prepare men for his
reception.

When our Lord was about thirty years old, he began to act himself suitably to
the intentions of his coming. First of all, he was baptized by John, at which
time the Holy Spirit of God, in a particular manner, came down upon him. Jesus
was after this put under a very singular (...), to exercise him beforehand,
and to fit him for his great office of Teacher and Savior of a sinful world;
and he fasted forty days, all which time was spent in holy meditation and
prayer, and receiving divine instruction and direction. When this was ended, he
began to call upon the people to repent and amend their lives. He went up into
a mountain, and delivered some of the most excellent discourses, or sermons,
that ever were heard. In these discourses he taught that which we call the
Lord's Prayer, as a pattern for all addresses or prayers to Almighty God. He
teaches us also that we must be humble, submissive, patient, and good-natured;
in short, that we must neither do nor say, nor even think any thing that is
wrong, and that we must study to do kindness, even to our greatest enemies. For
by so doing we imitate God himself, who is kind to the disobedient, as well as
the pious and obedient; who sends no afflictions but to make us better, or to
keep us good; and who permits the enlivening sunshine, and refreshing showers,
to visit the good and bad alike.

When our Savior came down from the mount, he practiced all he had been
preaching; for he went about doing good, and using the great power which he had
received from God for the benefit of men. He cured distempers of all kinds by a
word, or a single touch. He made the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, the blind
to see, the dumb to speak, and raised the dead to life. In one instance there
was such virtue accompanying him, that a distempered person who touched his
clothes, in hopes of being cured, was immediately well; and though he had no
lands or money, he twice satisfied the hunger of several thousands with a few
loaves and fishes. The history of his raising Lazarus from the dead, and the
whole account of that family, gives us a most pleasing picture of tenderness,
humanity, and friendship. Our blessed Lord, not content with doing what good he
could personally, or by himself, chose twelve from among his disciples to be
constantly with him; he particularly instructed them, and after they had been
enabled by Almighty God to work miracles, he commanded them to disperse
themselves about to instruct, that is, to teach the ignorant, as he did, and to
relieve every kind of distress. He told them they would frequently meet with
very bad usage, but that they ought to submit patiently for his sake; that what
they suffered was in the service of God, for the good of mankind, and for their
endeavors to teach truth and righteousness: and that if we live in this world
in ever so inoffensive, or even useful a manner, we may still have some enemies.

Q. Were not all men delighted with so great, and good, and amiable a
character, and did they not do every thing in their power to show their love
and respect for him?

A. No, indeed they did not, a very few persons excepted.

Q. How could this happen; one would think that every body would be almost
ready to lay down his life for such a person?

A. One would think so; and this would have been the case, had not the people
of the Jews been at that time very wicked, having their minds poisoned by many
bad passions; in particular they were proud, conceited, and ambitious; that is,
wished to make themselves great and powerful, at the expense of the happiness
of other people; when, therefore, they found that Jesus would not gratify them
by taking to himself any worldly grandeur, they were so disappointed and
offended, that they were easily prevailed upon by their rulers, and
particularly by the Pharisees, to seek his destruction.

Jesus, however, still went on teaching his disciples and the people every
thing that was useful for them to know. He told them also a great deal besides,
that would come to pass afterward; such as the nature of his death and
sufferings, of the time and manner of his second coming, of the life of men
after death, and of their reward or punishment, according as they had been good
or bad. Some things in his teaching he delivered in short hints and striking
stories, called parables, which, if they were not quite so easy to be
understood, were less displeasing to some who heard him, and likely to be
remembered by them, till they became better disposed to receive the instruction
that was contained in them. What he said at some times darkly, at other times
he delivered more clearly, and he explained all things to those disciples who
were very much with him. And in one way or other, he has abundantly furnished
us with all things necessary to lead us to the knowledge of our duty, and to
excite us to the practice of our duty; to help us to avoid and to overcome
temptation, and to support and comfort us in difficulties and afflictions.

Q. Did Jesus know that he should suffer a very painful and cruel death, and
did his disciples know it?

A. Jesus knew it from the first, but it did not at all abate, that is, lessen
his zeal in the great work in which he was engaged; and he often foretold, even
the circumstances of his death to his disciples; but although they were honest
well-meaning men, they were led away by the general mistake, that the Messiah
was to be a great temporal prince.

Our Savior's words and discourses astonished every body. Numbers of the
people admired and followed him; but the priests, the scribes, the Sadducees,
and Pharisees, were against him from envy and jealousy. These last were
hypocrites, who pretended to be wiser and better than other men, but were full
of pride and deceit. Such men always hate those who are truly good, especially
when they find they are better liked than themselves.

They therefore persecuted our Lord, and tried to puzzle him with artful
questions, and to draw him in to say or do something contrary to law, in order
to have a pretense for putting him to death. But he showed himself as much
above them in wisdom as in virtue, and often sent them away confounded at the
wisdom and prudence of his answers.

Their malice grew to a great height, and they persuaded many to unite with
them; our Savior knew they would soon obtain their wish; and he knew that he
was sent into the world, not only to do good by his miracles and discourses,
but also to do good by the violent and public death which he was to undergo. By
this death the sincerity of his professions (that is, his truth in respect of
what he had told them) his obedience to God's will, his confidence in his
heavenly Father, and his own belief in a future life and recompense to the good
were to be proved: by this death also, his disciples were to be encouraged and
prepared to endure all things in the ministry to which they were appointed: by
this death also, a clear proof was to be given of his love to all persons; and
lastly, his death was to be followed by his resurrection from the grave. That
resurrection would be a proof that his followers will not perish when they die.
For this violent and public death, therefore, a very awful, though very useful
event, Jesus carefully prepared both himself and his disciples.

Q. Who were the Scribes and Lawyers, and Pharisees and Sadducees?

A. The Scribes and Lawyers were persons, who were supposed to be learned in
expounding or explaining the law of Moses; and the Pharisees and Sadducees were
two sects of men amongst the Jews, who held very different opinions indeed; yet
as they had all of them private ambitious ends of their own to answer, and were
worldly-minded and covetous, they agreed in persecuting and condemning Christ,
whose excellent doctrine and holy life, were equally a reproach to them both.
The Pharisees were men of learning, and pretended to uncommon holiness; but
their religion consisted chiefly in the observance of rites or certain forms,
and ceremonies, for which they sought to be admired of men, whilst they
neglected the weightier matters of the law, which are judgment, mercy, and
faith. The Sadducees disbelieved a future life after death.

Q. What were the dispositions of mind that made the Pharisees pretend to be
what they were not, or be such hypocrites?

A. Vanity (that is, the love of admiration) covetousness (by which is meant
the love of money) and ambition (by which is meant the love of power) and when
any of these vices get root in the mind, they oppose themselves to every thing
really excellent, they mislead the judgment, make the heart bad, and are very
hateful in the sight of God. To persons of such dispositions, the deep
humility, the perfect kindness, and the universal goodness of our Lord, could
not but be very displeasing.

On the night that Jesus was to fall into the hands of his enemies, he sat down
to supper with his disciples, and acquainted them that one of that company
would betray him; and hinted that Judas Iscariot was the man. After supper he
brake bread and blessed God for it, and gave some to each of them, saying,
Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for many. Eat this in remembrance
of me. He also took the cup of wine, and gave it to them, saying, This is my
blood which is shed for many. Drink this in remembrance of me.

Soon after supper, those to whom Judas had betrayed his Master, came and
seized upon him and carried him away.

As to the manner of his examination before Pilate, his crucifixion, his
resurrection, his appearance to his disciples after his burial, and his
ascension into heaven: it is so finely related by the sacred writers of that
part of the Holy Bible, called the New Testament, that we cannot do better in
this respect than to read it over frequently, and with attention.

Q. You said that Jesus Christ delivered some very excellent discourses, pray
what were they?

A. You will read them in the New Testament. Amongst others is an excellent
sermon from the mount; on which Christ pronounced the following blessings, and
taught the following doctrines.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for their's is the kingdom of Heaven.

Q. What is the meaning of being poor in spirit?

A. To be poor in spirit signifies to be humble-minded, to be of a quiet
teachable disposition, not to think highly of ourselves, or to indulge a
violent or stubborn temper, but to be contented with our situation whatever it
may be. These are the poor in spirit, and to these the kingdom of heaven is
promised.

The next blessing is to them that mourn, promising that they shall be
comforted.

Q. What does this mean?

A. It means, perhaps, that those shall be comforted who mourn, or are
distressed, from a sense that they have done wrong, and who are sincerely
desirous of doing right in future, or who are sorry for the weaknesses and
faults of others: this is a very proper and affectionate temper, and will
always be attended with great comfort, and satisfaction in the mind.

The third blessing is to the meek, with this promise, that they shall inherit
the earth.

Q. What does this mean?

A. The meek are those of a quiet and gentle disposition, who are not disposed
to be quarrelsome and angry, but to forgive. These are the people who pass
through life most comfortably, by not resenting little offenses, they avoid
making any enemies; by a gentle and kind behavior, they make many friends; and
so they may be said to inherit the earth. -- Whilst those who are of a
quarrelsome temper, make every body about them unhappy, and are unhappy
themselves: if they are rich they have no comfort in their riches, because they
are miserable in their own minds: and if they are poor, nobody scarcely will
help them, because they have made themselves disliked.

The fourth blessing is to those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, and
it is promised to them that they shall be filled.

Q. Pray what are we to understand by this?

A. To hunger and thirst after righteousness, means an earnest and constant
desire to be righteous, that is, to be good: and God has graciously promised
that those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, they shall be filled
(that is, they shall become good) let us therefore always, and with all our
might, strive to leave undone those things which we ought not to do, and to do
those things that we ought to do; firmly believing that God will help us when
we endeavor; and that in time, we shall become as perfect as we have
endeavored to become.

The fifth is, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

By this blessing we are encouraged to show a kind, affectionate, and forgiving
temper. It is the surest method of gaining us the love and good will of men; he
who is cruel and unkind, who speaks ill, and behaves harshly to others, seldom
meets with compassion when he falls into distress: and the recollection of his
own cruelty, must make him very unhappy. -- But every body pities, and many
endeavor to relieve the distresses of a kind and merciful man, so that he
often obtains mercy even in this world, and he is sure (which is much better)
to obtain it in the world to come.

The sixth promises to the pure in heart, that they shall see God.

From this blessing, we see it not only necessary to avoid doing wrong, or
saying any thing wrong, but that we must endeavor to keep the heart pure from
every bad wish, for all evil begins either in our thoughts, or our desires; and
we-find that in order to see God, and to be happy in the next world, we must
keep our hearts pure in this. -- Let us then shun every appearance of evil, and
conquer every bad wish or thought in the beginning.

The seventh blessing declares, that the peacemakers shall be called the
children of God.

From this we should learn not only to avoid a quarrelsome temper ourselves,
but endeavor as much as possible to hinder, and to reconcile any quarrels
amongst our friends and neighbors. Those then who go about telling tales, and
making mischief amongst their neighbors, we may be sure are displeasing to
God, since it is the peacemakers who shall be called the children of God.

In the eighth, Jesus Christ says, blessed are they who are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for their's is the kingdom of heaven.

In former times many people were persecuted, that is, they were punished, and
often put to death, for speaking and doing what they believed to be right, to
them Christ has promised the blessing of the kingdom of heaven.

And in the next blessing, which is very much like it, he says, blessed are ye
when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely, for my sake; rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great
will be your reward in heaven.

Now, though in this country, no people are put to death for their religion,
yet there are many thoughtless and wicked people, who are apt to make a jest of
every thing serious, who not being good themselves, laugh at others for saying
their prayers, going regularly to worship, and being sober, and mild, and
peaceable, and religious. But do not let such treatment discourage you, but, on
the contrary, let it encourage you -- for remember -- that great will be your
reward in heaven.

In another part of his sermon, Christ recommends them, to be patterns of
goodness and piety, that others seeing their good works, may glorify their
father who is in heaven.

Those who have opportunities of reading this excellent sermon, and of learning
their duty to God, and to mankind, should attend to this, and endeavor to be
such patterns of goodness, that others may follow their example.

Jesus Christ farther tells them, that by the Jewish law, murder and adultery
are forbidden; and that those who are guilty of these crimes, are liable to
judgment, and to be punished: and at the same time, proposes a much higher
virtue or goodness, for he tells us, that we must guard against every thought,
or wish, or temper, that would lead us to do wrong; and that, whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, does wrong in the sight of God, and is
in danger of punishment.

Therefore, if thou bring thy gift before the altar, and there rememberest that
thy brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar,
first go and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
From hence we may learn, that God requires of us before we attempt to worship
him, to be reconciled to all men (for we should in this sense consider all men
as our brothers.) If, therefore, we would wish that God should listen to us,
forgive us our faults, and love us, we must be kind and forgiving to others,
and make them amends for any harm we have done them, before God will hear us.
And if we should find that any pleasure, or any temper, or habit, that is ever
so natural and agreeable, and seemingly almost necessary to us, should prove
hurtful in making us less good; however dear it may be, we must get rid of it,
if we would be happy in heaven, though it should be as dear to us as a right
hand, or a right eye.

Again Christ says, ye have heard that it has been said, thou shall not
forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto
you, swear not at all, etc. but let your communication be yea yea, and nay nay,
for whatsoever is more than that comes of evil.

By this we are to understand, that upon every occasion we should most
carefully tell the truth, and not take the name of God in vain, or speak
lightly of serious things: for when we are strictly good, and strictly just, we
shall upon every occasion be as much shocked at telling a falsehood, as a bad
man can be at swearing falsely, for which the laws have provided a punishment
here, and God will punish hereafter. Let us therefore never swear, but be
simple and sincere in our discourse.

Again, in this sermon, Christ adds, I say unto you, resist not evil; but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And
if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also; and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain
(that is, two.)

Here Christ recommends that we should not resent, or be angry at injuries or
affronts, but that we should forgive them: this meekness is so far from being a
proof of a mean and low disposition, that it is a strong proof of a great, a
good, and christian temper. Besides this, it is really the most wise, for it is
the way to make our enemies our friends; it will make us happy in our own
minds, and procure us the favor of God; and it is better to put up with many
little injuries, rather than to go to law, which not only makes men unhappy in
themselves, but often brings them to poverty and distress.

Again, Christ says, Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would
borrow of thee, turn not thou away.

If you have it not in your power to give money, you may give advice, and lend
your assistance. You are taught by this to do every good and kind action in
your power.

Again, Christ adds, I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you,
and persecute you: that ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven, for he makes the sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust.

For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the
publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than
others? Do not even the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect. -- For let us
remember, our Father which is in heaven, is perfect.

Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them, otherwise
ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. But when thou do thine
alms, let thine alms be in secret, and thine heavenly Father who sees in
secret, himself shall reward thee openly.

The meaning of this is, that when we do charitable actions, we should do them
from a kind and merciful disposition, and because all mankind are our brethren;
(and to relieve and assist our brethren, is pleasing to God) now if we do good
for these reasons, we shall not want the praise of men, and God, who sees in
secret* will reward us openly in the other world.

But those who do actions that seem to be good, only in order that men may see
and praise them, they are vain, and proud, and silly; and such dispositions as
these cannot recommend them to God.

And so with prayers, we should pray in secret at home, when we are by
ourselves, as well as at places of public worship, and God will reward us.

After this manner, therefore, pray ye; Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed
be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven:
Give us this day our daily bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them who trespass against us: lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil; for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever Amen.

For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.

And as we are directed to pray that we may not be led into temptation, it will
be wise in us not to expose ourselves to it, but to avoid every thing that is
likely to lead us to do wrong, especially those temptations to which we are
most likely to give way.

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth* and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves
treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal.

Take no (over anxious) thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, nor yet for your bodies, what ye shall put on: Consider the lilies
of the field, they toil not, neither do they spin, but seek ye first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and (as your heavenly Father knows that
food and raiment are necessary) all these things shall be added unto you.

Those who are of a sober, serious, and religious conduct, and consider their
duty to God, and the duties of religion, of public worship, private prayer, and
good will to their neighbors; we see that they are likewise the most diligent
in their business, and they have the best enjoyment, and the greatest share of
the comforts of this life: at least to the fear of God, and to his
righteousness, all other things that are needful are added.

Judge not, that ye be not judged; for with what judgment ye judge others, ye
shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again. From this we should learn to be very charitable and kind, in judging
others; and very cautious how we condemn them.

We should think favorably (at least as favorably as possible) of their
conduct; for with what judgment we judge, let us remember God will judge us,
and this is a very serious consideration.

Ask and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. From this we should learn never to neglect our prayers to God,
but we should be earnest and constant in our desires to become good, and gain
the blessing of Providence, and every virtuous and good disposition. If we ask,
it shall be given; if we seek, we shall find; if we knock, it shall be opened.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.

After this excellent doctrine, or advice, and more of the same kind; Jesus
Christ concludes his sermon by saying, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine,
and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a
rock: and the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.

And every man that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand: and the rains
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Whatever good advice we may hear, and however regular we may be in attending
worship -- yet if we do not practice in the week, what we hear on a Sunday, we
shall be like the foolish man, who built his house on the sand; all our labor
will be in vain. But if we are mindful to treasure up all these good sayings,
and to rule our conduct by them every day in the week; if we resolve every
morning to observe them, and compare our behavior with them in the evening,
and where we have acted contrary to them, to resolve to be doubly careful in
future; -- we shall in ^ime get a habit of doing them, and then we shall be
like the wise man, who built his house upon the rock, whatever temptations,
difficulties, and misfortunes, we may meet with in life, our foundation will be
sure -- for we shall have the protection of God, we shall either resist, or
bear them patiently here, and they will prove useful trials, to fit us for
happiness hereafter.

CHAP. XXVII.
OF THE APOSTLES.
AFTER the books of the four evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, we find
a book called, The Acts of the Apostles, in which there is some account of what
became of them after their Lord had left them. As for poor wicked Judas, his
guilty conscience drove him to such despair, that he hanged himself. -- It is
thus that one sin generally leads to another. But self-murder could only add to
the crime he had before committed. We have no right to take away the life that
God has given, whether other people's, or our own. We may repent of other sins,
after having been guilty of them. There are, however, very few people, if any,
who are not out of their minds, that attempt to commit such a crime. The other
apostles, or disciples of Christ, did in obedience to God's commands, go about
preaching the gospel, and doing good works. We read, that they very soon,
according to the promise of Jesus, were enabled by the power of God to speak
many languages which they had never learnt, to work miracles like those of
their Master, and to conduct themselves on very difficult occasions, with
extraodinary fortitude and wisdom.

They almost all died martyrs to the faith; that is, were put to cruel deaths,
by barbarous men, because they would persist in speaking the truth, which they
had received from Christ, and witnessing what they had seen and known relating
to him.

St. Paul, the author of many epistles, or letters, which compose a part of the
New Testament, had not been originally a disciple of Christ, but had been a
Jew, and persecuted the church at Jerusalem; that is, the assembly of
Christians there. God however, was pleased to convert him at last from his
errors, and he became a good Christian, and a zealous Apostle. St. Peter, and
the other apostles, seemed to confine themselves chiefly to the conversion of
the Jews: but St. Paul worked upon a larger plan, for he adressed himself to
the heathens also, and converted an infinite number of them. He went twice to
Rome, and preached the gospel there. St. Peter and St. Paul were great friends
and fellow laborers in the work to which they were appointed. St. Paul, before
he went to Rome, wrote a long letter to the Romans, and by the knowledge of the
gospel revealed to him, he tells them what they were to believe and to do.

St. Peter wrote two epistles, which are directed to all the strangers, new
Christians, both Jews and Gentiles, scattered about Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; who by reason of their afflicted and persecuted
state, might be called strangers upon earth.

St. John also wrote three epistles, one to the universal Church; that is, the
general society of Christians all over the world, and the other two to
particular societies.

We have, besides these, some other Epistles, written by different Apostles.

The last book in the New Testament, is the Revelation of St. John, which is
written in so sublime and figurative a style, and altogether prophetic, or
foretelling things to come, that the learned only are capable of searching into
its meaning; and common readers need not perplex themselves at all about it.
Let us therefore content ourselves like St. Paul, with the knowledge of Christ
crucified; and let us aim at nothing else so much, as imitating his virtuous
and amiable life.

The design of these Epistles is to fix upon the mind a serious belief in the
truths of christianity, and to persuade men to the practice of every virtue.

Q. What is the meaning of the word Testament?

A. Testament means the same as covenant or agreement, which always supposes
two parties. Thus Almighty God was pleased in ancient (...) to separate Abraham
from his own family and kindred, and to promise him, that as a reward of his
faith and obedience, his descendants should obtain the land of Canaan, who were
to continue to possess it in prosperity and peace so long as they obeyed the
law that should be given to them by Moses.

This, therefore, on the part of God, was conditional, and only to be performed
in consequence of obedience to his laws on the part of Abraham and his
posterity: hence the former part of the sacred history, although it contains a
great variety of other matters, is called by the name of the Old Testament, or
Covenant.

Q. Do we know any thing of what might be the further design of God in thus
distinguishing one particular family?

A. This dispensation respecting Abraham was a principal means of* preserving
the knowledge of the one living and true God in the world, and of preparing the
way, and providing evidence for the gospel; and thus Abraham became the happy
instrument of the greatest benefit and blessing to many others.

The latter part of the sacred history refers to the promises of God made by
our Lord Jesus Christ, of a future happy and never-ending life after death, if
we on our part are careful to observe and to do whatever he has commanded us,
and this is called the New Testament, or Covenant.

Q. Will our being called Christians, and having been baptized, or the holding
any particular opinions, entitle us to be heirs of his promise?

A. No indeed, not any of these things if we do not lead holy and exemplary
lives. Ye are my friends, when you do whatsoever I command you. -- If any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Q. What were the principal things which our Lord Jesus came into the world to
teach men?

A. He was sent to teach us, that if we do indeed purify ourselves from all sin
and iniquity, and faithfully and steadily endeavor as our first pursuit to
obtain the favor of God by obeying his laws, that then our heavenly Father, of
his own free mercy and goodness, will forgive our past offenses, receive us
into his favor, and admit us to the glorious privilege of being called his
children: and that although we must, in this world of trial, expect some
dissappointments, yet if we persevere to the end, in the exercise of all
christian dispositions, and the practice of all christian duties, we may be
certain that God will never forsake us; and that after death, he will raise us
up again to a life of glory and happiness, which will never end.

Q. What is the true character of a christian? Is every body a christian who
reads the history of Jesus Christ, and who believes all that is written in the
New Testament concerning him?

A. To be a christian, it is necessary not only to read, and believe the
history of Jesus Christ, we must endeavor also to become like him in
disposition and conduct; always avoiding pride, and being careful never despise
another, for Jesus Christ was of a meek and humble spirit; and as he was the
friend and teacher of mankind, his true follower will endeavor like him,
always to assist and be kind to others; the christian who is not blessed with
riches, to feed the hungry and clothe the naked, will yet pity their sufferings
-- help them in their labors -- reform the wicked, and set forth by his
conversation and example, the comforts and advantages of a devout and holy
life; thankful for all worldly blessings, that providence has set within the
reach of virtuous industry, he takes them that he may use them for others, as
well as for himself; remembering that of all his powers, and of all his
talents, he is to render an account. His heart, however, is not set on external
blessings; he seeks a better portion both for himself* and for all who are
within his influence. True Goodness always meets with whatever support and
encouragement he can give it, and while he abhors the vices of the wicked, he
pities them, that would reclaim them. The love of goodness disposes him to
associate with those who are good.

The word of God is his delight, and his counselor; his day is always welcome
to him, and he loves the habitation of his house.

The true christian although he weep with those who weep, will yet be enabled
to support his own sorrows without murmuring; always saying in his heart, "thy
will oh Lord! not mine be done;" and ever bearing in mind the calmness and
moderation of Jesus Christ toward his enemies, he also will endeavor to
suffer even insults, reviling, and ill usage with patience, and a composed
mind; and as the true christian will make choice of every means to advance
nearer and nearer toward the perfection of Christ, he will diligently study
those precepts which Christ delivered on earth, in order to teach men how to
resemble himself, by becoming virtuous and wise, which alone can make us happy.
The true christian will frequently examine his own character, and endeavor to
correct every thought, and word, and action, that may appear contrary to these
doctrines; and instead of encouraging anger, hatred, revenge, dishonesty,
intemperance, deceitfulness, swearing, or falsehood, he will endeavor, on the
contrary, to please God, by following the instructions of Jesus Christ, which
teach us to live peaceably with all men, to forgive our enemies, and to aviod
every evil disposition, or wicked practice, which might lead us to forget God,
to injure another, or to love this world better than that which is to come. The
true christian, therefore, loving God with all his heart, and always doing to
others that which he would wish that others should do to him, according to the
example and gospel of Christ, will lead a life of peace, always remembering in
poverty, and sickness, and every distress, that these afflictions can last but
for a season, and that every day he approaches nearer toward that time, when
God shall admit him into heaven, and make him happy with himself for ever. With
these joyful expectations; the true christian will find comfort under all his
sufferings, and when at length through temptation, trials, and tribulation, he
shall be sufficiently prepared for another, and a better life, he will then be
enabled to meet death with a composed mind, and to say with Jesus Christ in his
last hour, I have glorified thee on earth, and now, Oh Father! glorify thou me.

This it is to be a true christian.

FINIS.

