A TREATISE, ON THE FEVERS OF JAMAICA, etc.

A TREATISE ON THE FEVERS OF JAMAICA, WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE
Intermitting Fever of America, AND AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING SOME HINTS ON THE
MEANS OF PRESERVING THE HEALTH OF SOLDIERS IN HOT CLIMATES.

By ROBERT JACKSON, M.D.

Ne mea dona tibi studio disposta fideli,
Intellecta prius quam sint, contempta relinqua^.
Lucret. lib. 1. -- (...)
(...)
Pind: Olym. 4. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL, BOOKSELLER. 1795.

PREFACE.
THE observations contained in the following pages, were made during the time
that I lived in Jamaica, or while I attended some part of the army in America.
The materials were collected between the years 1774 and 1782; and the present
performance would have been offered to the public before this time, had I
sooner sound leisure to attend to the business of publication. The
insufficiency of Dr. Hillary's work, the most esteemed book on the diseases of
the West Indies, and the only one with which I was acquainted while I remained
in that country, furnished me with a motive for the undertaking; a motive,
which may be thought, perhaps, no longer to exist, as two treatises have been
published lately by Dr. Hunter and Dr. Moseley, expressly on the diseases of
which I have written. I might remark, that the present attempt, such as it is,
was nearly completed before the treatises to which I allude came to my hands.
The views which they afford of fevers, as they differ from each other, so they
likewise differ from those which I have ventured to advance. I have weighed
their merits maturely, and cannot say that I discover any information, which
gives me cause to change those opinions which I had formed, or which renders
the publication of the present work unnecessary. I may observe, that Dr. Hunter
details, with candor and perspicuity, the mode of practice, which was followed
by the most respectable medical people of Jamaica, at the time that I lived in
the island. He perhaps prescribes the bark in larger quantities, than was then
customary; but I do not perceive any thing in the plan of treatment essentially
new; neither will Dr. Moseley, though he pursues innovation with great
eagerness, be better able to establish his claim to original discoveries. The
plentiful and long continued purging, on which he places a considerable share
of his merit, has been a favorite practice with numbers for many years past;
and the free use of the lancet, which he recommends so much in fevers, was
employed in several districts of Jamaica, before this author's name was known.
Dr. Spence, a practitioner of some eminence at Lucea, in the Western extremity
of the island, wrote a pamphlet (I believe in the year 1776) with a view to
enforce its safety and utility, in promoting the cure of the general class of
febrile diseases. The publication was well received, and served to remove the
dread of the lancet, which some people till then had falsely entertained.

I have thus explained the motive which induced me to write; and I leave it to
people of experience to judge of the manner in which I have executed the task.
I shall only observe, that, when I first intended to prepare my observations
for the inspection of the public, I had no other design than to mention such
circumstances in the history and cure of fevers, as did not appear to be
generally known. Having spent the earlier part of my life in situations, which
did not admit of a continued plan of study, I had not till lately much
acquaintance with the opinions of medical writers. About four years ago, when I
found a settled abode, I began occasionally to look into the works of the
ancient physicians. In examining Hippocrates, I discovered such a similarity in
the fevers of the Archipelago, with those of Jamaica, that I suspended my
design of publishing, till I should have given that author's writings a careful
perusal. I soon was convinced that many observations, which I had considered as
my own, were actually known to this father of physic; and though I was probably
disappointed in being anticipated in offering something new to the public, I
was still gratified by the coincidence of remark, that gave me a confidence in
my accuracy which otherwise I durst not have assumed. After I had carefully
perused the writings of Hippocrates, I consulted and compared such other of the
Greek physicians, as I was able to procure. I even descended with a similar
examination to the present times; but as my collection of medical writers,
particularly of modern ones, is small, I have probably omitted some who ought
to have been mentioned, or perhaps advanced observations as my own, which in
reality belong to others. If I have done so, I must be allowed to say, that I
have done it without consciousness.

It may appear, perhaps, that I have treated the opinions of great names with
too little respect; but if facts have at any time occurred to me, which
contradict established theories, I should hope that these facts will be
examined before they are rejected. No medical authority ought to prevail over
the certain evidence of truth. I am not conscious of having misrepresented, for
the sake of a theory, the minutest circumstance of what I have actually seen;
-- if I have been mistaken in any instance in forming conclusions, I shall
receive the correction of my inaccuracies with gratitude.

CHAP. I. OF THE GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE REMITTING FEVER OF JAMAICA.
AS it is perfectly well known, that fevers, which are essentially in
themselves the same disease, vary in their appearances, from difference of
climate and season, it would be very superfluous to attempt any proof of what
is so generally acknowledged. Even Hippocrates, who lived more than two
thousand years ago, does not seem to have been unacquainted with this fact.
This industrious physician, as we learn from many passages in his works, not
only visited the various islands in the AEgean Sea; but traveled likewise into
various parts of the adjacent continents. The motive of his journeys, we are
taught to believe, was principally to observe the different situation of
places, and to mark their corresponding diseases. He has described very fully,
in a curious and useful treatise, the effects of air and local situation on the
human frame; and in the history of fevers, related in the books of Epidemics,
has seldom forgotten to mention, not only the general constitution of the
seasons with respect to diseases; but likewise the nature of the climate, where
his observations were more particularly made. The species of fevers, it is
true, that are found in the writings of Hippocrates are extremely multiplied;
yet this author seems still to have been clearly of opinion, that diseases,
which are essentially ^he same, assume, in some respects, a different
appearance in the island of Thasus, and at Abdera, on the contiguous coast of
Thrace. Observations to the same effect have been made by many others in
different parts of the world; nor is the fact capable of being better
illustrated in any country than in Jamaica; where a very small change of place,
or the ordinary revolution of seasons, are often observed to influence in a
high degree, the appearances of the common endemic of that island. But this
observation, -- that local situation and the change of seasons, are the cause
of varieties in the appearances of the same disease, has been so long known,
that it is almost unnecessary to mention it; nor would it have been repeated
now; unless to obviate any objections which might be made to the history, that
is given in the following pages, should it not be found exactly to correspond,
with that which has been observed by others, who have lived in the other
islands of the West Indies, or in other parts of Jamaica; or perhaps even in
the same part of Jamaica, at a different period of time. It is presumed,
indeed, that the same fundamental distinctions of fever obtain in every island
within the tropics; yet the description that is given in this place, (it may
not be unnecessary to mention), is affirmed to be strictly exact, only in the
district about Savanna la Mar; and that only for a short space of time: viz.
from the year 1774 to the year 1778.

The fever, that chiefly prevailed at Savanna la Mar during the period
mentioned above, was usually mild in its symptoms, and more regularly remitting
in its form than I understood the endemic disease to be in most other parts of
the island. To what circumstances in the local situation this might be owing, I
do not pretend to determine. Savanna la Mar is situated close by the sea: its
particular site, and the surrounding country to the distance of several miles
is perfectly level; whilst in consequence of its being open to the sea on the
east, it is visited early, and constantly by a salutary and refreshing breeze.
There is a small rivulet, indeed, which, losing itself almost entirely in mud,
forms a morass that partly surrounds it on the north. From vicinity to this
morass the situation of Savanna la Mar has been suspected to be unhealthy; but
it is not so in fact. The sea at high water, particularly in the spring tides,
overflowing the swampy ground, contributes in a great measure, prehaps, to
diminish the more usual noxious qualities of the marsh exhalation. The opinion
of many eminent writers, however, is not altogether favorable to this idea;
but there seems to be reason to doubt, whether the opinion formed by those
writers in this instance, is the result of accurate and careful observation; or
if it is merely a suggestion of theory. I am inclined to the latter way of
thinking, as I have never found the neighborhood of Salt-marshes, in the
different parts of America that I have had the opportunity of visiting, less
healthful than the rest of the country: -- on the contrary, they were
frequently more so.

Before proceeding to a particular description of the fever, that chiefly
prevailed in the district of Savanna la Mar, it may not be superfluous to give
the outline of its character, that we may be the better enabled to trace its
resemblance with the fevers of other climates, and to determine its place in
the general class of febrile diseases. The common fever of Savanna la Mar,
which, as I mentioned before, was usually mild in its symptoms, and regular in
its form, seems to be properly ranked with those, that strictly speaking are
called remitting. It is difficult to fix the boundaries between remittents and
intermittents, if a fixed boundary actually exists. The paroxysms of the fever
of Jamaica are observed, in many instances, to terminate in more perfect
remissions than the paroxysms of the endemic of North America, which is known
to be fundamentally an intermitting disease. Hence authors generally are of
opinion, that all the difference which appears to take place in those fevers,
depends merely on an accidental cause: viz. on the greater or less heat of the
climate. I shall not be positive that it is not so; yet I cannot help remarking
that certain appearances incline me to be of opinion, that there subsists,
between the endemic of Jamaica and the endemic of North America, a difference,
in some degree, fixed and essential. I cannot pretend to ascertain the
difference precisely; or to offer a conjecture about the modification of the
morbid cause in which it consists; yet the following circumstances give reason
to believe, that to a certain degree at least it actually takes place. The
common fever of Jamaica, for instance, was not only disposed to terminate of
its own accord; but it was disposed to terminate on certain critical days,
often at an early period, and by signs of crisis too clear to be mistaken;
neither did the Peruvian bark, in the manner at least in which it was managed,
ever cut short its course with certainty. The endemic of America on the
contrary often lasted long. It frequently, indeed, changed to another disease
after a length of time; but no period could be assigned for its natural
termination. The signs of crisis, it may likewise be remarked were so obscure
as scarcely to be distinguished with the closest attention; at least for my own
part I will own, that after an experience of several years, and the greatest
care in observing the minutest circumstances, I never yet was able to say with
confidence, that the endemic of America, particularly in the northern
provinces, was gone not to return again, till the hour of its return was past:
neither did the Peruvian bark, though its effects were so equivocal in the
fever of Jamaica, scarcely ever fail of stopping the progress of this disease.
To which we may add, that the complaint, which strictly speaking is called the
intermittent, or ague and fever, can scarcely be said to belong to Jamaica; at
least it was not known at Savanna la Mar. In the course of four years I did not
once observe it; and those, who had lived much longer at this place, assured me
they had never seen an instance of it; unless in persons who were newly arrived
from aguish countries. This is a fact of some importance, as it shows to us,
that though the proper intermittent is not the endemic disease of the country
it is still capable of existing in the climate: -- no weak argument, that, the
two diseases of which we have been speaking, actually do possess some
difference in the modification of the general cause, though we are unable to
define the precise bounds and limits of it.

The circumstances which I have mentioned might incline us to be of opinion,
that the fever of Jamaica, and the common endemic of America are not exactly
the same disease; that is, that though they depend on the same general cause;
yet that this cause undergoes some fixed and permanent modification in those
different climates, so that an essential difference actually arises. But though
this really appears to be the case; yet I must acknowledge, that the reigning
epidemic of the southern provinces of America, often loses its distinctive
marks of intermission in the hot months of summer; whilst it approaches, in
other respects, so near to the fever of Jamaica, as to be distinguished from it
with difficulty. This was particularly the case at Eben^^er in Georgia, in the
year 1779, during the months of June and July. A cold fit was seldom observed
in this place; unless perhaps in the first attack; lowness, languor, headache,
pain of the back and other disagreeable feelings remained even in the most
perfect remissions: the disease was likewise much disposed to terminate of its
own accord: on the usual critical days, frequently by signs of crisis, that
were far from being obscure: yet though these resemblances were so very
striking, the fever of Ebenezer was perfectly under the control of Peruvian
bark, which was not exactly the case with that of Jamaica. I must remark,
however, that bark was used with a freedom in America, that I never thought of
attempting in the West Indies.

But though it still may be thought doubtful by some, whether the autumnal
fever of aguish countries, and the endemic fever of Jamaica are
characteristically different, or essentially the same disease; yet it is not so
difficult to trace a specific resemblance, between this fever of the West
Indies, and the prevailing endemic of the AEgean Sea. The fever described in
the Epidemics of Hippocrates has every striking feature of the disease which is
the subject of the following treatise. The general character is the same; the
course and mode of termination are often alike. If the duration is sometimes
different, it is probably much owing to the more decisive practice of the
moderns: for though it remains uncertain, whether a remedy has yet been
discovered, which absolutely cuts short the fever of Jamaica in the midst of
its course; yet no doubt remains, that there are various modes of treatment,
which may, and actually do render the ordinary changes of the critical day,
decidedly critical. The fevers of the AEgean Sea, as described by Hippocrates,
and of Min^^ca, as described by the accurate Cleghorn, bear the nearest
resemblance to the endemic of Savanna la Mar. The fevers of Italy, of different
parts of the continent of Asia, as described by various writers, as well as the
fever of America, of which I have had personal experience, however obscure
their remission seem rather to be degenerated intermittents, than the disease
described in the following pages. But that I may not be thought to insist too
much on this opinion, which few, perhaps, may consider as of much consequence,
I shall relate the history of the fever of Savanna la Mar, as accurately as I
can, leaving it to others to determine, whether it should be considered as an
intermittent degenerated into a remitting form, in consequence of the greater
heat of the climate, or allowed to possess something characteristic in its own
nature.

CHAP. II. OF THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF PERIODICAL FEVERS.
A Knowledge of the types and periods of fevers, though so necessary to be well
understood by those who pretend to cure the disease, has unfortunately been
little attended to by the practitioners of Jamaica, In that country, I met with
some who were able to foretell the returns of the single tertian; but I met with
none, and I have good reason to believe that there actually were few, who
troubled themselves about forms of greater complication. There were many, on
the contrary, who, blinded by theories of accumulated bile, ridiculed
altogether the idea of this stated regularity in the movements of nature. To
enter into a dispute with such would be labor lost. The existence of a regular
type in the fevers of the West Indies does not admit of a doubt, yet we must
not forget to mention, that those types are traced with greater difficulty in
that country, where remissions are obscure, than in others, where every
paroxysm is ushered in by a cold fit. In Jamaica it is impossible to follow
them without the most careful attention, or perhaps to attain a clear and
systematic knowledge of them, without writing down and analyzing many of those
cases which occur in practice. I remember to have been impressed with the idea,
at a very early period, that one observation made by myself would in reality be
more useful than twenty equally important in themselves, which I only retained
in my memory from reading. Convinced of this truth I ceased to look for
information in books, from the time that I arrived in the West Indies; but,
trusting wholly to my own experience, wrote down minutely, in the presence of
the sick, the history and cure of the most important cases of fever that
occured to me. At stated times I reviewed that which I had done, and arranged
under proper heads the most striking circumstances, that I found recorded in my
notes. Among other unexpected appearances I observed a regularity and order in
the types of fevers, of which at first I had no idea. But though the laws of
nature appeared to be fixed and stable, in producing this varied but stated
regularity of form; yet a knowledge of those laws was not easily attained. Two
years were spent, and not fewer than a hundred cases were analyzed, before my
views of the subject were in any degree accurate. The labor, perhaps, was
superfluous; there being many authors who have described minutely every variety
and every combination of type that has ever been observed to take place. But as
I had little knowledge of the writings of others at this period, I shall
content myself in the first place with relating the history of types as they
occurred to my own observation; at the same time that I shall not omit to take
notice occasionally of the more constant peculiarities, which are found in
authors of credit, who have practiced in different countries. The influence of
climate I may observe is of considerable effect in modifying the various forms.

The single tertian, the period of which is forty-eight hours, is a form of
fever that occurred frequently in Jamaica, particularly in the dry and healthy
season. Its course was easily traced, as the remissions were often distinct,
and the accessions sometimes distinguished by a slight horror or shivering.

But though the abovementioned type was by no means of rare occurrence at
Savanna la Mar; yet the double tertian, with similar paroxysms on alternate
days, was still more common, particularly in the rainy and sickly months. This
form of fever, which seemed to consist of two single tertians, that ran a
separate and independent course, began usually in the morning. Its hour of
invasion was from eight to ten; and its accession was generally distinguished
by a cold fit. The paroxysm, which for the most part was regularly formed,
declined after a continuance of eight or ten hours; and the patient remained
free from fever, not only during the night, but during the following day, till
four in the afternoon, or later. A feverish indisposition usually came on then,
which continued the whole or the greatest part of the night. A remission took
place; but it was soon succeeded by a paroxysm similar in its symptoms, and
manner of attack, to the paroxysm of the first day. This having declined
toward evening, the patient, as formerly, was free from fever during the night
and the day following. At the usual hour, however, or more generally before it,
a paroxysm more distinctly formed in all its parts, and more violent in degree,
than the preceding one which corresponded with it, returned, and continued till
morning. It subsided; and was soon succeeded by the paroxysm of the fifth day,
which declined, as formerly, after the usual duration. Such was the general
course and progress of the disease. -- The fever of the odd day, which began
for the most part in the morning, usually returned later and later, and with
decreasing violence every succeeding paroxysm; whilst the fever of the even
day, which generally began in the afternoon or evening, as usually returned
earlier, and when this was the case, frequently increased in force. The fever
which came on in the morning generally began the disease. It was for the most
part a fever of complete and regular paroxysms from the first attack. The fever
of the evening, on the contrary, was little more than an indisposition in its
beginning; nor was its time of appearing at all certain. It often was not
perceived till the evening of the fourth day; sometimes not till later, neither
was its continuance of a fixed duration. Sometimes it went on after the fever
of the morning had ceased; and in other cases it terminated, while the other
pursued an uninterrupted course.

The type, which was so frequent in Thasus, and the other islands of the AEgean
Sea, seems to be a species of the double tertian. Mention is made frequently of
such a form in the Epidemics of Hippocrates; yet the double tertian of
Hippocrates is directly opposite, in some respects, to the type which I have
just now described. -- The evening fever generally began the disease in those
islands: hence the great exacerbations, and consequently the crisis were
frequently on the even days. Such also appears to have been sometimes the case
in Minorca: yet Cl^ghorn acknowledges, that a type, similar to that which I
have described as prevailing so commonly at Savanna la Mar, was by much the
most frequent form of the abovementioned island. It was also, I may add,
frequent in the southern provinces of North America, particularly in the hot
months of summer and autumn.

A quotidian type has been described by almost every author, who has written on
the subject of intermitting and remitting fevers: neither can it be denied,
that forms of disease frequently occur, where the paroxysm returns every day at
the same hour, with symptoms so nearly alike, that an ordinary observer can
perceive no difference. Yet Mr. Senac, an author of considerable eminence,
boldly maintains, that a real quotidian type does not exist in nature. The
question, perhaps, is not easily determined. I can only mention from my own
experience, that I have frequently seen fevers with quotidian exacerbations of
such a kind, that there was no perceivable difference between them, either in
symptoms or in manner of attack; yet I must likewise own, that these
exacerbations were generally in the evenings; and that the disease was not in
every respect of a distinct intermitting form.

I have now mentioned those types that are most frequently met with in the
fevers of Jamaica; yet besides these, there now and then occur others of more
complicated and perplexing forms. Thus, I have sometimes seen at Savanna la
Mar, a fever, which seemed to be compounded of a single tertian with a
quotidian. In the space of forty-eight hours there were three separate
exacerbations, two of which were exactly alike, that it was impossible to
perceive a difference; whilst the whole three followed each other in such an
order of time, that to a superficial observer, there appeared to be only one
long paroxysm of thirty-six hours or more. An example will make it more plain.
On Monday, for instance, the paroxysm of a fever was observed to begin about
nine in the morning, preceded by some degree of coldness and shivering. This
paroxysm was usually violent in its first attack: But declined gradually
toward evening; though before it was gone off totally, another exacerbation
commenced, which continued the whole of the night. This likewise abated on
Tuesday morning; and the patient remained apparently free from fever till five
in the afternoon or later. A paroxysm then made its appearance, similar to the
paroxysm of the preceding evening. It ran over a course of similar duration,
and scarcely had abated on Wednesday morning, when a paroxysm resembling that
of Monday succeeded it; which, as formerly, declining toward evening, was soon
followed by an exacerbation, that lasted till the morning of Thursday. On
Thursday, as on Tuesday, there was no fever till late in the afternoon; when
the evening exacerbation returning at the usual hour, proceeded in its usual
course.

The tertian type, simple, or variously compounded, is the form of fever, which
prevails most universally in all climates. The quartan in those countries were
I have lived was rare; and the existence of a real quotidian, perhaps, is
doubtful. To that compound form, which I have just now described, I should be
inclined to give the name of Semitertian. It is expressly the disease, which I
now find has been described under this name by Hoffman; but it is more
difficult to determine exactly, if it is the Hemitritaeus of the ancients. The
Hemitritaean form is frequently mentioned by Hippocrates; but his definition is
too lo^se to enable us to judge precisely of its nature. It is in fact
impossible to say with certainty, whether it is to a type similar to that which
I have described, or to the extended and subintrant paroxysms of the double
tertian, that he has applied the name. This last, indeed, seems to have been
the idea of many of the ancients, particularly of Celsus and Agathinus. -- The
physicians of the earlier ages, were less curious in minute distinctions than
their followers; and probably applied the name of Hemitritaeus to those fevers,
the paroxysms of which were simply of unusual duration, no less than to those
that were of a complicated or compound nature. This actually appears to have
been the case for a great length of time; but at last, and not long indeed
before the days of Galen, the sophistical genius of the professors of medicine,
which exerted itself chiefly in things of little importance, multiplied the
types of fevers to an endless variety, and attempted to establish distinctions
which have no existence in reality. Galen, who is copious in most things, has
discussed very fully the subject of types in general, and described
particularly the nature of the Semitertian at great length. But whatever credit
may be otherwise due to the observations of this illustrious writer, it is
evident that the description, in the present instance, is merely the result of
theory. He has attempted, indeed, to illustrate his opinion by an example; but
the case he has furnished us with, is constantly varying its hour of attack;
and if accurately examined, appears rather to be a triple tertian, properly so
called, than the form of fever that I have described above. After the Greeks we
may next take a short view of the Arabian physicians, who, as they borrowed
much of their knowledge from the writings of Galen, likewise adopted his idea
of the compound nature of the Semitertian. Avicenna, the most eminent among
them, has defined this form of disease with a good deal of precision; but we do
not find that he has added any thing very material to the opinions of his
predecessors. Galen indeed, had discussed the subject so fully, that, though
succeeding writers sometimes changed names, they do not seem in reality to have
furnished much new observation. As we descend to less remote times, Hoffman and
Cleghorn are the most accurate of the moderns, on this subject, who have yet
come to my hands. The former describes under the name of Semitertian the
express form of disease, that I met with in Jamaica; the latter refers this
title to the extended and subintrant paroxysms of the double tertian. It is
with unwillingness that I differ in opinion from Cleghorn, who has thrown more
light on the history of periodical fevers, than perhaps, all the writers of his
time: yet I cannot help observing, that I never recollect to have met with an
original Semitertian, such as that he has described in his well-known treatise.
I must own, indeed, that I have several times seen the morning fever of the
double tertian anticipate, so as to be mixed with the decline of the paroxysm
of the preceding evening; thereby producing a form of disease, that could only
be distinguished, by the most careful attention, from one long paroxysm of
thirty hours or more: yet this was in fact, only a degenerated double tertian,
the paroxysms of which became accidentally mixed with each other.

The types which I have described above are all the varieties, that I observed
in the fevers of the West Indies; yet more extensive experience might have,
perhaps, brought to my knowledge still further complications: for besides the
forms mentioned in the preceding pages, I had the opportunity, in the southern
provinces of North America, to see several instances of the triple tertian,
properly so called. In forty-eight hours there were three separate paroxysms;
all of them differing from each other, but corresponding with others that
followed. -- They were easily traced, as the accessions in that climate were
usually distinguished by a cold fit. In Jamaica, on the contrary, complications
and irregularities were marked with difficulty. The anticipation of type among
other things occasioned considerable perplexity. Thus the single tertian, whose
regular period is forty-eight hours, often completed its revolutions in
forty-six. But though the paroxysms frequently returned one hour or even two
hours sooner than the usual time; yet these anticipations were seldom longer,
unless the disease was of a malignant nature, or disposed to change to a
continued form. In either of these cases anticipations of twelve or fourteen
hours were not uncommon. Of the different forms of fever the anticipations of
the single tertian were the longest and most remarkable. It was observed,
indeed, that the evening paroxysm of the double tertian very generally returned
before the usual hour; yet this return was seldom more than an hour at once;
nor did the time of invasion in the whole course of the disease, so far as I
have observed, ever go beyond twelve at noon. (...) morning paroxysm, on the
contrary, frequently postponed; yet I have likewise observed it sometimes to
anticipate six or eight hours at one time; by which means, it encroached on the
paroxysm of the preceding evening, and produced the disease which Cleghorn has
distinguished by the name of Semitertian. The observation of this fact does not
seem to have escaped Avicenna.

There undoubtedly are accidental circumstances, which have some effect in
accelerating or retarding the return of the paroxysm for a short space of time;
yet it would appear, upon the whole, that the cause, why a fever anticipates or
postpones, depends upon something that is peculiar to the particular nature of
the disease. Thus, a fever, which once begins to anticipate, generally goes on
anticipating through a great part of its course; a certain proportion being
frequently preserved between the anticipations of the different paroxysms. This
was particularly the case in the single tertian of America. The paroxysms of
the fevers of that country often anticipated to a certain point, by short
anticipations, which bore a regular proportion to each other; whilst they were
sometimes likewise observed to postpone, in the same gradual manner, toward
the termination. This seldom happened in the fevers of the West Indies.

The anticipations I have mentioned often occasion perplexity in tracing the
types of fevers; yet the complications which arise in the progress of the
disease, have a still more considerable effect in embarrassing the appearances
of regularity. Fevers which begin as single tertian, often continue such
through the whole of their course; yet it sometimes likewise happens, that
complicating fevers make their appearance on the even days for instance, and
continue longer, or terminate sooner than the original complaint, in such
manner, as if their existence no way depended on it. To be able to distinguish
those complications from the anticipations of a single type is frequently very
useful, and a knowledge of it may, in general, be attained with a good deal of
certainty. Thus for instance, if the disease is moderate in its symptoms, and
without suspicion of malignity, the appearance of a paroxysm twelve or fourteen
hours before the usual time, especially if there is no material difference in
the nature of the symptoms, gives reason to suspect that the premature return
is in reality the complication of another fever. On the contrary, where the
disease has betrayed signs of malignity, or where the symptoms differ from
those of the former paroxysms only in a greater degree of violence, there is
then reason to apprehend that this appearance is only an anticipation. On the
subject of complication of type, some curious observations may be found in the
writings of Galen and Avicenna. The opinions of those authors, indeed, are
often mixed with whimsical theories; yet in many respects they are
fundamentally true and highly interesting.

It would be a matter of some utility could we learn to foretell, from the
nature of the types, the accidents that are likely to happen in the progress of
the disease, or to form a probable conjecture of the event. Something certainly
may be gained if we observe with attention. Thus I may remark, that I never
found anticipations of one hour or even two to be of much consequence in the
fevers of Jamaica, particularly if they happened at an early period; yet if
they were longer, or did not happen till after a long continuance of the
disease, they often indicated an approaching crisis. On the contrary, where the
paroxysm anticipated twelve or fourteen hours at one time, there was always
suspicion of danger, at whatever period this might happen. It either indicated
danger and malignity, or a disposition in the fever to change to a continued
form. Anticipating fevers were likewise observed to be more disposed to
terminate of themselves, and likewise to terminate more speedily, than those
which steadily preserved the same hour of return. This seems to have been known
to the ancients. -- But farther, as anticipating types are generally a sign of
increasing violence, though of a more speedy termination; so the postponing of
the paroxysm, has usually been allowed to indicate a disease, whose violence
has begun to decline. Such is the common observation; nor have I ever found it
to be otherwise; unless in some cases of weakness and impaired sensibility,
where the fatal paroxysm did not come on till after the usual hour of attack.

I am afraid I may appear to many as unnecessarily minute, on a subject, which
is not in general considered as of much importance; yet still I cannot forbear
to mention some circumstances of connection, between the hour of invasion and
the future type of the fever, which appear to be not only curious, but useful;
and which, so far as I know, have not been taken notice of by any preceding
writer. Galen, it is true, boasts the knowledge of foretelling, from the
appearance of the first paroxysm, the nature of the future type of the disease;
yet the hour of invasion is not included among the number of those signs, from
which he has drawn his information. The rules, indeed, which he has left us are
not altogether without foundation; yet they are by no means to be depended on
alone. They have, in fact, arisen from theories of bile and phlegm, rather than
from accurate and careful observation. There is not, perhaps, any one criterion
on this subjuct that applies equally in every climate. Those rules, which I
thought I had discovered, are only local. They varied in the different parts of
Jamaica, and in most parts of America did not apply in any degree. Having
adopted, on my arrival in the West Indies, the method of writing down and
analyzing such cases of fever as came under my care, the difference of hour, at
which fevers of a different type usually commenced, struck me as a matter of no
small curiosity. The single tertian, for instance, was constantly remarked to
begin in the forenoon, usually between the hours of eight and eleven; whilst
those forms of disease, that were evidently quotidian, or still more continued
as constantly began in the evening, generally from four to eight. This seemed
to be a fixed distinction; it is an important one; and so far there was no
ambiguity: but it was extremely difficult, perhaps impossible, to discover
signs at an early period, which were capable of distinguishing the fever, which
continued simple in its form throughout, or which became complicated at a
certain period of its course. I have often made a fortunate conjecture; but I
believe it would occasion embarrassment, rather than afford information, were I
to attempt to describe those circumstances, which sometimes determined my
opinion. They must, in fact, be learnt from actual observation. I have just now
mentioned, that it is extremely difficult to distinguish the single from the
double tertian, by the appearances of the first paroxysm, when the morning
fever of this last form begins the disease; so neither is it easy to
distinguish the double tertian from the quotidian, when the illness commences
with the evening paroxysm of that complicated type. This is a case, indeed, as
far as my experience goes, rarely happens; yet where it does happen, the
circumstances, with which the evening fever is usually attended, mark a further
distinction. The quotidian commences usually by a distinct and regular
paroxysm; the evening fever of the double tertian, for the most part, only by a
slight indisposition.

This connection which I have just mentioned, between the hour of invasion and
the type of the fever, was observed constantly at Savanna la Mar in Jamaica;
but the same rules did not by any means hold true in the different parts of the
continent of America. The most usual hour of the invasion of the single tertian
was twelve at noon in that country; though in some cases the paroxysm came on
so early as ten in the morning, or so late as two in the afternoon. Of the
other forms I cannot speak with any certainty.

But besides the different hour of invasion of the different types, I must
likewise take notice of some other circumstances, that seemed to be connected
with the various forms. The duration of the paroxysm for instance, was usually
longer in the single tertian than in the double tertian, or quotidian; and of
the double tertian, the paroxysm of the morning was usually longer than that of
the evening; and besides being longer, was generally of greater violence, at
least in the beginning of the disease. The cold fit was likewise more
remarkable in the single tertian, than in the other forms of fever. -- I do not
speak of the quartan, of which I know but little. Of the bilious vomiting, so
much insisted on by Galen as a distinguishing mark of the single tertian, I am
at a loss to speak positively. I can, indeed, affirm that I constantly observed
such evacuations to be more frequent in the different forms of the tertian,
than in those that appeared to be quotidian, or that approached nearer to a
continued type.

Such were the types of the fever of Jamaica, and such were the principal
circumstances that appeared to be connected with them. The types of fevers it
may be observed seem to be modified by climate; and there are not perhaps two
different countries, or even districts of country, in which they are exactly
alike. The hour of invasion of the same form of disease was different in
Jamaica, and on the continent of North America; neither does it appear to have
been exactly the same in Jamaica, and in the different islands of the
Mediterranean. The prevalence of certain forms in certain climates, and the
various changes of the form according to the changes of the season, is a matter
of curiosity, and of considerable importance in the history of the disease. In
Jamaica for instance, for one single tertian, there were at least three double
ones; whilst in America, the single tertian bore the proportion of ten to one,
perhaps, to all the other forms. In the higher latitudes of this country, the
single tertian was almost the only form which was seen, in the winter months
and in spring; yet in the southern provinces, particularly in the heat of
summer and sometimes in autumn, the double tertian, and even still more
complicated types were by no means uncommon.

I have thus endeavored in the preceding pages to describe the types of
remitting fevers, as they occured to my own observation. I have likewise
attempted to compare my own descriptions with those of other authors; so that
the reader may, in some degree, be able to attain a systematic view of this
species of disease, as it appears in the different parts of the world. The
labor I am aware will be reckoned superfluous by many; and a discussion on
types, will probably be considered as partaking too much of the school of
Galen, who is held in contempt by the writers of the present day. I by no means
contend for the infallibility of Galen or the ancients; yet I cannot help
believing, that though they have left us much false and superfluous theory,
they have likewise left us many valuable observations, on the nature and
progress of febrile diseases, which the moderns seem to have neglected. Though
the theory of Galen on the present subject is probably ill founded, his
observations are certainly exact; and from what I have myself seen, no
assertions, which will convince me, that an intimate acqaintance with the types
and periods of fevers, is not an essential knowledge to the practitioner. It
is, indeed, the first step; and it is a step of such importance, that our
future progress will neither be satisfactory nor safe, unless it is properly
understood. I may be allowed to speak from my own experience. It fell to my lot
to have the charge of men's lives at an early period of life. I had then no
knowledge of the types and periods of febrile diseases, and I must not conceal,
that the method of treatment I pursued, and the returns of the disease so often
interfered, that though actual harm was seldom done, yet many opportunities of
doing good were certainly lost. The patient, if he had the least penetration,
could not, sometimes, avoid seeing, that, though I might be acquainted with the
common routine of practice, I was ignorant of the nature and progress of the
disease, from which I had undertaken to relieve him.

CHAP. III. CRITICAL DAYS IN FEVERS.
THE critical days, which are intimately connected with the types and periods
of fevers, come properly to be considered in this place. The subject is
important, and though very fully discussed by medical writers, does not as yet
appear to have been satisfactorily explained by any one. If we attempt to trace
the doctrine to its source, we shall find the first mention of it in the
writings of Hippocrates. The followers of this author's opinions are numerous;
and the endeavors, they have employed in attempting to establish his system,
have been strenuous and unremitting. But critical days have unfortunately
afforded a field for controversy in all ages; and there still are many who
maintain, and others who as confinently deny the existence of any such power in
affecting the termination of febrile diseases. In the midst of this perplexity,
a man who has had no experience of his own is totally at a loss, which way to
turn. There are great names on both sides of the question, but clear and
decisive evidence on neither. A detail, therefore, of such observations as
promise to remove many of those circumstances of embarrassment, cannot fail of
being useful, and I hope acceptable to the public. I am aware, indeed, that an
attempt to explain a mystery, which has hitherto eluded the researches of the
most eminent physicians, will not probably escape censure: -- In an obscure
man, perhaps, it may be deemed arrogant; neither is it altogether without
hesitation that I undertake the discussion; though very unequivocal proofs of
the truth of the principles on which I proceed, arise from a view of the cases
of fever which came under my care, during the time I lived in the West Indies.
The principle on which the critical days in that climate depend, appears from
the facts found in the following pages to be indisputably established; the
deviations are satisfactorily accounted for; and the fundamental rules, it is
presumed, are such as may be extended to every climate on the globe. But, I
shall state in a few words the leading circumstances, which occurred to me on
the subject. If they afford not light enough to remove all the difficulties, it
is hoped they may at least point out a road, by which these difficulties may in
future be removed.

It may not be improper to remark in the first place, that I had heard of the
doctrine of critical days in fevers before my arrival in the West Indies; yet I
may likewise observe, that it was a doctrine, which I had only heard of by
name. I had no knowledge of it, and I soon found that the idea was treated with
ridicule by practitioners, who very generally supposed the course of the fevers
of Jamaica to be cut short by bark, or other powerful means. Influenced,
perhaps, by the authority of older men, I found myself disposed to acquiesce in
the common opinion, that this doctrine was only one of the fanciful theories of
the schools; yet it was not long before I acquired a different view of the
subject. I soon observed that fevers sometimes ceased before a single grain of
bark was given; sometimes after a few doses, and sometimes not till after
several ounces. The observation of this fact did not fail to undeceive me.
Under the circumstances I mention, it would have been the height of obstinacy
to have persisted in believing, that the cure of the fever was in reality owing
to the power of this celebrated remedy. But though it was soon evident, that
the termination of the disease depended on some other thing than that which was
generally supposed; yet a considerable time past over, before I was able to
determine what this something actually was, or before I was able to ascertain
the laws which it obeyed. I soon discovered, indeed, that fevers had a general
tendency to terminate on particular days; but it was not till the year 1776,
that I discovered the proportion those days bore to each other, or the sources
of the many deviations, which occurred. The subject seemed to be important; --
and I felt an eagerness to determine a question, which hitherto had been
fruitlessly pursued. With this view I wrote down with care and attention every
case of fever which I met with in the year 1776 and 1777; and in looking over
the memoranda sometime after, found, that the critical days bore to each other
the following proportion: viz. of sixty cases, which terminated favorably, ten
terminated on the third, ten on the fifth, twenty on the seventh, ten on the
ninth, five on the eleventh, three on the thirteenth, and two on the
seventeenth. Of nine which terminated fatally, one terminated on the sixth, one
on the seventh, six on the eighth, and one on the tenth. These facts are
precise and determinate; but I must not forget to mention, that if we are
guided wholly by obvious appearances, there sometimes occur circumstances,
which occasion embarrassment. Thus in the present instances, I not only
reckoned the time by the periods, or revolutions of the disease, but I likewise
simplified the complicated types; that is, I reckoned every revolution of the
single tertian as forty-eight hours, though it was often completed in less;
whilst I considered the corresponding paroxysms of the double tertian, only as
the same disease. It may also be farther remarked, that the disease, which was
the subject of this investigation, was of a regular, remitting form. Paroxysms
and remissions were always discernible, and signs of crisis were generally
distinct.

The state of the critical days, as represented above is literally exact, where
the complicated types were simplified, and where the time was reckoned by the
periods of the disease; but I must likewise observe, that unless this method of
calculation was adopted, there occured numerous instances, which seemed to
deviate from the general rule. In the first place, if the type of the fever was
single tertian, which neither anticipated nor postponed, -- and with paroxysms
which did not exceed twelve hours in duration, the crisis was uniformly on an
odd day: yet if the type anticipated, and the sum of the anticipations, in the
course of the disease, was equal to twenty-four hours, the crisis was then
necessarily removed t^an even day, if the time was reckoned by the natural day;
though still on an odd day, if reckoned in the manner which has been mentioned
above. In like manner, if the type postponed, while the duration of the
paroxysm exceeded or amounted to 24 hours, the crisis was necessarily
protracted to an even day. But this was a case, which seldom happened. In
fevers likewise of the double tertian type, the type which prevailed
principally at Savanna la Mar, there occurred much seeming irregularity. This
form of fever, as was said before, seemed to consist of two diseases, which ran
a separate and independent course. Thus, if the fever which began on the odd
day was critical; that is, if the paroxysm of the odd day terminated the
disease, the crisis was necessarily on an odd day; but if that fever, the first
attack of which was on the even day, consisted of an equal number of paroxysms
with the other, or continued after that had ceased, the crisis was then on an
even day, reckoning from the beginning of the illness, though still on an odd
day, dating from the commencement of the second fever. It was the observation
of this fact which first gave me the idea of simplifying complicated types, and
of calculating the critical days by the periods of the disease. The idea may
perhaps be reckoned fanciful; but experience has afforded me sufficient proofs,
and it will still afford the same to those who take the trouble to look for
them, that the various types of complicated fevers actually run a separate and
independent course; a fact when established, which removes all doubt and
ambiguity from the apparently varying laws of critical days in the compound
forms of febrile diseases. With regard to the quotidian it remains to be
remarked, that the crisis was generally on an odd day. It was likewise
generally on an odd day in those that were still more continued and acute; -- a
fact which seems to have been well known to Avicenna. But though the rules I
have mentioned are clear and uniform, I must still own, that I have sometimes
met with fevers of a very continued kind, which terminated late on the sixth,
or rather very early on the seventh. The disease was then of more than usual
violence on the sixth: -- how far this might be owing to anticipations of the
paroxysm of the seventh, accumulated upon that of the sixth, is difficult to
determine with certainty.

The anticipation, the postponing, and the complication of type are the
principal circumstances, which usually disturb the regular critical periods in
fevers of short duration; yet in those of longer continuance, there is still
another cause, which deserves to be particularly attended to. In the fevers of
Jamaica, especially in those which approached to a continued form, some very
apparent change in the nature of the symptoms, or in the mode of action of the
febrile cause, was generally observed on the seventh, or before it. In
consequence of this change, the order of the critical days was sometimes
disturbed, and appearances were often produced, which seemed to contradict the
rules, which we have attempted to establish. It was a common remark, that after
the seventh there was less apparent regularity in the movements of nature,
This, as we shall afterward attempt to prove, was the consequence of a
septenary revolution, which accidentally disturbed the regular order of the
ordinary days of crisis. It is a fact of which the ancients were not ignorant;
and of which I shall have occasion to make frequent use: viz. that a relapse
has a tendency to run over a course of duration equal to the original fever.
This is confirmed by the authority of Hippocrates; but I may also add, that not
only those recurrences of fever, which are more properly styled relapses; but
further, that in those instances, where the disease undergoes any remarkable
change in the nature of its symptoms, the disorder is generally disposed to
continue for the same length of time in this new form, as it had done in the
former. Thus a remarkable change of symptoms on the fifth was followed by a
crisis on the ninth; sometimes, perhaps, only by another change of symptoms on
the ninth, the final crisis not happening till after another period of five
days. In like manner, a change of symptoms on the seventh was often followed by
a crisis on the thirteenth; or only, perhaps, by another change on the
thirteenth, the disease completing another revolution of seven days before a
final termination. That such changes actually do take place at certain periods,
not only those cases of fever, which have come under my own care, but those
related by Hippocrates, in the books of Epidemics, give sufficient room to
believe. Thus in every one of those instances, where the history is so
circumstantially detailed as to leave it in our power to trace the disease in
its progress, it will constantly be found, if the day of crisis deviates from
the general rule, that a change of symptoms, often an evident renewal of fever,
had actually taken place at some period of the course. In this manner, if the
change of symptoms of which I speak happened on an odd day, the odd days
continued to be critical, as if no change had been; on the contrary, if the
paroxysm of the odd day completed its course, the remission which followed was
often more perfect than usual: -- a distinct period was marked in the history
of the disease, -- or in other words, there was an obscure or imperfect crisis.
But on the day following, which was an even day, a fever with a different train
of symptoms made its appearance, and ran over a course, for the most part,
equal in duration to the former. If this change, or renewal of the disease
happened on the sixth, a change or crisis was not expected till the tenth, if
on the eighth, not till the fourteenth. I have said just now, that relapses
were generally disposed to run over a course of the same duration as the
original disease; yet I must likewise remark, that they were sometimes also of
shorter continuance. Thus I have frequently observed a change of the nature of
the symptoms on the seventh, and a final crisis on the eleventh; the renewal of
the disease, instead of seven, being only of five days continuance.

The above circumstances are capable of explaining the ordinary deviations from
the regular critical periods in the fevers of the West Indies; but I cannot
affirm with the same certainty, that a similar explanation will be constantly
admitted in the long fevers of this country. I have however reason to believe,
that changes at the septenary periods frequently take place here, and sometimes
apparently disturb the critical periods of the disease. Those cases which I
have been able to trace with accuracy give strong proofs of it, -- I shall
relate two or three of them to serve as an illustration. The first, is that of
a young man, who had been il^ of a fever more than three weeks before I was
called to him. Two days before I saw him; and after an evident abatement of the
symptoms, there happened a sudden and unexpected relapse, or renewal of the
disease. Informed of this circumstance, I dated from the new attack, and
calculated the critical days in the manner which has been shown above. Minute
attention discovered the type, though it was only an obscure one. -- It was
Semitertian, or there was an exacerbation every evening, with a more evident
paroxysm on the alternate days. A crisis happened at the period I had foreseen,
but it was not final. A fever returned again in the evening, different however
in type, as well as in symptoms, from the preceding. It had distinct quotidian
exacerbations and an imperfect crisis happened on the seventh. But in twelve or
fourteen hours, a coldness and shivering marked a renewal of the old, or
perhaps the invasion of a new disease. The symptoms were not only different in
their nature from the symptoms of the former; but they were likewise more
violent in degree. The disease continued in this form for seven days, and the
crisis, which at last was only imperfect, was soon succeeded by another renewal
of fever, the beginning of which was marked by a similar degree of coldness and
shivering. The symptoms of this were likewise different from the preceding, but
its form was the same, and it ran over a course of equal duration. The
septenary revolutions were very plain in this case. I shall relate another in
which they were not so clearly marked, though they certainly did still take
place. It is a case of fever with nervous symptoms. On the seventh a sediment
appeared in the urine, some drops of blood fell from the nose; and the
abatement of fever was very evident; yet it did not last long. The disease
recurred again on the eighth, and continued to increase in violence till the
fourteenth. A sediment then appeared in the urine, some drops of blood fell
from the nose as before, there were two or three evacuations by stool, which
had been unusual in the preceding course of the disease; and from the whole
appearances I could not help entertaining some saint hopes of crisis. There was
indeed an evident alleviation of the sufferings; but it lasted but for a short
time. Next day every symptom was aggravated, and the powers of life seemed to
suffer a gradual diminution till the twentieth, when the patient died. I do not
recollect any instance of fever, where the revolutions were more obscure than
in the present case; yet they were still capable of being traced. The next
example I shall mention is much clearer. It is an instance of a bad fever, of
no discernible type in the beginning, in a man who was considerably advanced in
years. On the evening of the seventh there was some obscure tendency to crisis.
The patient was not only easier in his own feelings; but the eye and
countenance, which had been confused and clouded, brightened up, and a small
sediment appeared in the urine. Yet these favorable circumstances were only of
short duration. In the course of the day following, all the symptoms recurred,
and the disease acquired force till the evening of the thirteenth. The pulse
then began to rise, and continued rising till the morning of the fourteenth,
when a profuse sweat was followed by a very distinct crisis. But still this
crisis was not final. The malignity of the disease, however, departed, and the
complaint that remained, assuming a remitting form, totally disappeared after
another period of seven days. I shall only beg leave to relate another instance
of fever, which occured to me lately, and which affords a very curious proof of
septenary revolutions in febrile diseases of long continuance. A young man had
been ill of a fever about a fortnight before I was called to him. At the time I
first saw him, the symptoms were very violent; but having abated considerably
in the course of a day or two, I began to entertain hopes of a speedy recovery.
The complaint was almost entirely gone, when a new train of symptoms
unexpectedly making its appearance, raged with violence for a day or two, and
then declined gradually as the other had done. I again looked for signs of
crisis, when another accession on the seventh from the former attack, brought
matters into still greater danger. These symptoms, though of a different nature
from the former, were violent in the beginning; but they soon began to abate,
and had almost disappeared, when the attack was once more renewed on the
following seventh. In this manner the disease went through nine septenary
revolutions; and it is somewhat remarkable, that the symptoms, which marked the
new accession, were always different from those of the accession immediately
preceding. In one, the distinguishing symptoms were a morose and stern
sullenness, in another, delirium, tremors and subsultus tendinum, -- and in the
third, copious liver-coloured stools. These were three times severally
repeated. It deserves, however, to be remarked, that the period of the
accessions was shortened before the termination of the disease. After it had
continued nine weeks in the manner I have described above, there were two
accessions of five days each; after which all traces of fever disappeared.

It is sufficiently plain from the facts which I have mentioned in the
preceding pages, that the more usual irregularities in the order of the
critical days, proceed generally from overlooking the type in periodical
fevers, or from neglecting to attend to septenary, and other revolutions, in
such as approach more nearly to a continued form. These are the general causes
of apparent irregularity; yet besides these, there are still some others, which
must not be passed over without notice, as they occasionally have the effect of
producing apparent deviations. Thus it often happens, that a disease, which
appears to be continued in the beginning, changes to remitting after a certain
duration. The change is usually on an odd day, and on the day following the
first paroxysm of the remitting form makes its appearance, the termination of
which may be expected on an even day, if we date from the beginning of the
illness, though still on an odd day, if we date, (as perhaps we ought to do)
from the time this change in the circumstances of the disease took place. To
this we may add, that those complicating fevers, which, happening at various
distances of time, sometimes terminate sooner, sometimes continue longer than
the original complaint, frequently disturb in appearance the general regularity
of the critical periods of nature. It happens, perhaps, from a similar cause,
that a paroxysm of an unusual kind sometimes terminates the disease, and
apparently disturbs the regular periods of crisis This has occurred to me
several times in practice; and it happened twice in my own person. The ordinary
paroxysm declined after the usual duration; a new one succeeded of uncommon
violence, and very different in its nature from the former. Its course was of
long continuance, and it finally terminated the disease.

The above facts enable us to explain satisfactorily every circumstance, which
relates to critical days in fevers, where the crisis is clear and decided; yet
I must still own, that as I have sometimes met with fevers where marks of
crisis were scarcely perceptible so it would be rashness, in such cases, to
speak positively of the order of the critical days. The patient might, in some
measure, be said to wade through the disease; the changes from day to day being
so very small, that it required more discernment than I can boast of to mark
them with precision.

The observations I have related, and the rules I have attempted to establish,
for the better explanation of the doctrine of critical days in fevers, were
formed at a time when I had no knowledge of the opinions of preceding authors.
They may therefore better claim exemption from bias in favor of one set of
writers, or prejudice against another. They are indeed no more than an analysis
of facts, which were collected with every possible care, which are sufficiently
circumstantial, and which speak best for themselves. They contain, (if I do not
view them with a partial eye,) such information, as may lead to a satisfactory
explanation of this mysterious and long disputed doctrine. -- I must only beg
leave to add, that though I have everywhere mentioned the preeminence of
particular days in terminating fevers, yet it must not be understood, that this
power depends on a particular quality of the days, merely as such. It depends
more evidently on a certain number of revolutions of the disease, in
consequence of which, the fever from something we do not in the least
understand, seems disposed to terminate finally, or to suffer a change in its
mode of action. This therefore brings us to the conclusion, that the critical
periods are improper calculated by the natural day. The doctrine, in short, can
only be rendered consistent by attending to the periods of the disease, by
simplifying complicated types, and by marking those septenary or other
revolutions, which happening at different distances of time, occasion an
appearance of irregularity which does not exist in reality.

Having related the result of my own observations on critical days in fevers, I
shall now endeavor to bring under one point of view, the substance of what has
been written on the subject, by some of the most celebrated of the ancient, as
well as modern physicians. That certain days, or that portions of time
comprehended in a certain number of days, had obviously a power of producing
changes on the human frame, appears to be an observation of high antiquity; but
as a medical doctrine, we are unable to trace it farther than the days of
Hippocrates. Hippocrates has treated very fully of the critical periods of
fevers, in various parts of his works; and upon the whole, has amassed a
considerable body of information; though with less precision, perhaps, than has
been generally imagined. The cases of the Epidemics, which we naturally
consider as the materials from which he formed his general doctrine, have some
obvious and great defects. The date is seldom clearly ascertained, and the mode
of calculating the time, does not seem to be fixed. If a fever, for instance,
begins in the evening, or in the course of the night, the day following is
generally reckoned the first day of the disease, by this author. -- But this is
not all. -- Some of the cases are plainly related from memory; and others are
only parts of cases, related by different persons. This want of accuracy, where
it is scarcely possible to be too circumstantial, necessarily breeds confusion,
and produces an appearance of irregularity, which does not actually exist.
Hence we find inconsistency in the general doctrine, as delivered in different
parts of the works, which have been ascribed to Hippocrates; at the same time,
that there is a want of that circumstantial detail in the particular parts,
from which only we can be enabled to form an opinion. I have read over with
much attention the cases of fevers, recorded in the Epidemics; but I frequently
found myself unable to trace the disease in its progress. Though evidently
subject to periodical movements, it was not always in my power to lay hold of
the type; yet wherever it was possible to attain this exactness, I have the
satisfaction to add, that I constantly found the movements of nature to be
uniform. They were the same in the islands of the Archipelago, as in the island
of Jamaica. -- If they appeared in some instances to be different, it was
perhaps principally owing to this, that the Greek physician had left some part
of the disease undescribed.

From what I have just now said, we can have no hesitation in concluding, that
the opinion of Hippocrates, on the subject of critical days, is neither precise
in any one part, nor consistent in the whole. The doctrine, however, in its
best digested form, is the following: viz. That odd days have a remarkable
power in terminating fevers; but more particularly, that the great critical
revolutions happen at quaternary periods. Thus the most eminent critical days,
are the fourth, the seventh, the eleventh, the fourteenth, the seventeenth and
the twentieth. This is the general form of this Hippocratic doctrine; yet in
this form, it bears contradiction to observations that are found in various
parts of that ancient author's works. The fifth and ninth are excluded by this
arrangement, from the number of the critical days; though there are numerous
examples of their great power, in terminating febrile diseases.

The doctrine of critical days, which appeared first in a regular form, in the
writings of Hippocrates, found numerous and respectable advocates among the
ancient physicians. Diocles of Carystus, Philotimus, Heraclides of Tarentum,
etc. all bore testimony to the general truth of the observation; but their
writings being unfortunately lost, we are now ignorant of the particular facts
and arguments, by which they attempted to support their opinions. Indeed, from
the time of the Persian invasion of Greece, till the Roman arms penetrated into
Afia, a period of near four hundred years, we know of no opposition to to this
fundamental doctrine of the Coan Sage: But in the time of Pompey the Great, an
author arose, who endeavored to establish his own fame on the ruins of this
favorite system of his predecessors. Asclepiades, who was a man of a bold and
daring genius, not only rejected this apparently well founded doctrine of the
ancients, but treated the idea of it with ridicule. His arguments are ingenious
and acute; but they fall short of the truth. The paroxysms or exacerbations, as
he justly observes, sometimes change to the even days, and consequently the
crisis: yet this, if properly understood, does not destroy the generality of
the rules; -- if the method of calculating the time, by the periods and
revolutions of the disease, be adopted, the difficulty is perfectly removed.
But though this fact in reality, was not unknown to Asclepiades; yet it does
not appear, that he understood the application of it. I may add, that he has
precipiately rejected the doctrine, from the very circumstance which
establishes its reality.

We do not meet with any thing very material, on the present subject, between
the time of Asclepiades, and the days of Galen. There appears, indeed, to have
been many, who adopting the opinion, and copying the arguments of the eloquent
Bethynian, denied altogether the existence of critical periods in fevers;
whilst others, recurring to the doctrine of Hippocrates, maintained their
reality with no less obstinacy. But we are now in a great measure ignorant, if
those writers attempted to support their opinions by any new facts, or new
arguments. Among other misfortunes, we must regret particularly, that the
treatise of Aretaeus on fevers is lost. From what we know of this author's
industry we might have reasonably expected original information on the subject
in question.

Galen, whose fertile and exuberant genius left no path in physic unexplored,
has written fully on this celebrated doctrine. He has professedly adopted the
opinion of Hippocrates, and labored much to explain and confirm it; but
unfortunately, he has oftener overwhelmed the subject with diffuse and tedious
reasonings, than illustrated it by proofs from experience and actual
observation. Upon the whole, however, amidst much superfluous and unmeaning
matter, we find not only useful information, but a more systematic arrangement
of facts, than is any where to be met with. He has attempted to fix with more
precision the date of invasion; he has estimated with more accuracy the
critical power of the different days; and further, has hinted obscurely, that
the time will be calculated most conveniently by the paroxysms or revolutions
of the disease. In short, this author, no less than Asclepiades, was
sufficiently acquainted with the principal truths, which give consistency to
this doctrine; but it is evident, that he did not understand the full extent of
their application. He was constantly biassed by the theory of a quaternary
period; as without this predilection, it is not easy to conceive, how he should
have considered the fourteenth, as critical of tertians, where the paroxysms
happen on the odd days, and where the termination, as he acknowledges,
constantly follows the solution of a paroxysm. The latitude likewise which he
assumes, in explaining the apparent irregularities, is much too great. If we
are permitted to reckon either the beginning or the termination of a paroxysm,
as the critical period, according as it shall best suit our theory, it is easy
to elude the most positive testimonies of experience. Yet, notwithstanding
these defects, the different tracts of Galen on this subject, deserve to be
carefully read. The facts they contain, though sometimes misapplied, are often
important; and though we are not always satisfied with the reasonings of the
author, we are astonished at the amazing mass of learning and knowledge found
in his works.

There is little new information, on the subject of critical days, to be met
with in the writings of those Greek physicians, who were posterior to the time
of Galen. AEtius Amidenus, indeed, brings into narrower compass the substance
of the doctrines of his predecessors. He mentions likewise, the most material
of those circumstances, which influence the deviations from the regular crisis;
but it is evident, that he has not sufficiently understood their application.
Alexander Frallianus, who was an excellent practitioner, and a man of long
experience, passes over this subject without particular notice; and though
Paulus of AEgina has detailed the opinions of Galen in a more compressed form,
than they are found in the original author; yet he has not added any new
observations of his own. From the manner, indeed, in which he speaks, of the
peculiar virtue of the seventh and fourteenth, we should be apt to believe,
that he is not altogether free from prepossession in favor of the Pythagorean
numbers.

It was reasonable to have expected information, on the subject of critical
days, from the writings of the Arabian physicians. The Arabians inhabit a
country, were the periodical movements of nature are perhaps more clearly
marked, than in our northern latitudes. Some districts of their country
likewise were famous for the sciences at an early period, though it does not
indeed appear that much of this knowledge descended in a direct channel to the
Arabians of the present times. The Arabian physicians, in many instances,
enriched medical practice with new forms of remedies; but they have for the
most part only adopted the theoretical doctrines of the Greeks, particularly of
Galen. Avicenna, the most famous among their physicians, and undoubtedly a
great man, has Galen constantly in his eye: in short, he has done little more
on the subject of critical days, at least, than merely translate the opinions
and arguments of the celebrated Greek. He attempts, indeed, to be more explicit
in ascertaining the date of invasion; but he does not in fact, go much beyond
his predecessors; -- hinting only obscurely, that the critical days ought to be
calculated from the proper formation of the type, or the distinct invasion of
the fever. He has added, however, that the odd days, are properly the critical
days of the single tertian, and that the eleventh of course, obtains rank of
the fourteenth in this disease.

There are many authors, who have written on this subject, since the arrival of
science in Europe; but there are few that I have met with, who have thrown
light on it from their own observations. The most of them have borrowed the
opinion from Hippocrates; and accordingly have attempted to establish the truth
of it, on the facts which are found in the writings of that author; facts,
which, on enquiry, will scarcely be found to be accurate enough to be made the
basis of a general doctrine. It would be time ill spent, to enter into a detail
of the arguments of this numerous list of writers; who, in reality, have
oftener attempted to support their opinions by the authority of Galen and the
ancients, than by the facts which might have been found in their own
experience. From writers, however, of this description, it would be unjust, not
to separate Hoffman, an author, who has related with candor the result of his
own observations, in a practice of forty years and upwards. The facts which
Hoffman mentions, throw considerable light on the subject; yet still they do
not remove all the difficulty. They neither enable us to form an estimate of
the power of the different critical days; neither do they at all assist us in
comprehending the cause of the deviations. There are probably other modern
authors besides Hoffman, who have treated of the power of critical days in
fevers; but, except Dr. Cullen, I have not met with any one, who has left any
observations which deserve much notice. This celebrated physician is a warm
advocate of the ancient doctrine of critical days. He subscribes professedly to
the arrangements of Hippocrates; though he adds likewise the result of his own
observation, in the various kinds of fevers of this country.

The most eminent of the ancient and the most systematic of the modern
physicians, all agree in ascribing to certain days a particular power in
terminating; yet they do not so perfectly coincide in the arrangement they have
given of those days, or in the causes they have assigned for the particular
pre-eminence. The inconsistency of Hippocrates has, perhaps, been in some
measure the source of this diversity of opinion. In one place, this author has
ranked the twentieth as the proper critical day in fevers; in some others, this
power is attributed to the twenty-first. That the twenty-first is properly the
day of crisis, was the opinion of Archegen^s and Diocles; that it should be so,
is not inconsistent with the general principle of the Hippocratic doctrine;
viz. the movements of a quaternary period. So far is clear; but as it was
observed by Hippocrates, as well as by other authors, that the twentieth was
still more frequently a day of crisis than the twenty-first, a (...) on the
fourteenth, was introduced to account for this apparent deviation from the
general rule. This idea of (...), or accumulation of one period on another,
which is mentioned in the writings of Hippocrates, originated perhaps in the
doctrine of Pythagoras. It is adopted by Galen, and it appears in reality to be
occasionally true; yet it can never be considered as an established principle
in the movements of febrile diseases. By means of such accumulation, however,
Galen has attempted to establish the pre-eminence of the twentieth, which he
considers as the real critical day of Hippocrates. That the twentieth -- (not
the twenty-first) is actually the critical day of Hippocrates, is likewise
decidedly the opinion of Dr. Cullen, who, going a step farther than his
predecessors, endeavors to support his assertion by some arguments, which are
entirely new. This ingenious author hazards the bold conjecture, that the
appearance of the twenty-first, in the writings of Hippocrates, has arisen
wholly from accidental error in the original manuscript: but with all due
deference to such respectable authority, I must beg leave to suggest, that the
twenty-first occurs too frequently in those writings, which have been ascribed
to the Coan Sage, to give countenance to the opinion, that it owes its place,
as a critical day, to careless error. The other argument is more ingenious; but
perhaps not better founded. This writer has ventured to maintain, that the type
of febrile diseases changes to quartan after the eleventh; but I can see no
good reason for the supposition. Medical writers have repeatedly noticed
instances of crisis, on the thirteenth, and fifteenth; even my own experience,
narrow as it has been, furnishes me with sufficient evidence, that crisis
actually do happen at the abovementioned periods.

As those days, which have been chiefly considered as critical, are now
supposed to be sufficiently known, it will not be superfluous in the next
place, to take a short view of the causes, on which the particular pre-eminence
has been thought immediately to depend. The quaternary period, which in reality
is a period of four, and a period of three days succeeding each other
alternately, is the general principle assumed by ancient physicians, to explain
this arrangement. But if we continue to pursue the undisturbed movements of a
quaternary period, we shall bring the eighteenth and twenty-first into the
order of critical days, rather than the seventeenth, and twentieth. The
contrary is in fact the case. To obviate therefore this difficulty, or to
reconcile observation with theory, a (...) has been supposed to take place on
the fourteenth. That a (...), or as it may be translated, the accumulation of
the beginning of one period on the extremity of another, frequently takes
place, cannot be denied; but its appearance is not determined by a fixed law.
It is observed on the seventh, on the fourteenth; in short, on any day
whatever. The quaternary period, with (...) on the fourteenth, is the only
principle employed by the ancients for explaining the usual arrangement of the
critical days; yet I must observe, that it is capable of doing this, only in a
very imperfect manner; it totally excludes some days of very considerable
power. Dr. Cullen, sensible, perhaps, of this defect, suggested that there was
a chance from the tertian to the quartan type on the eleventh. This change, it
must be confessed, explains with perfect plausibility the pre-eminence of the
fourteenth, seventeenth and twentieth; but there is the strongest reason to
believe, that it does not in fact take place. I mentioned before, that
instances are recorded by medical writers of crisis, which have happened on the
thirteenth, fifteenth, and the other days, which are not included in the
quartan period; and I can add from my own experience, that where the disease
was of such a kind, that a type could be clearly traced; no such change, as
this author has suggested, was ever seen.

Having ventured to declare, that the causes, which have been hitherto assigned
for the pre-eminence of certain critical days in fevers, are extremely
defective; the facts, which I have mentioned before, it is presumed, may enable
us, if they are properly understood, to give a more satisfactory explanation of
this singular phenomenon. There are few people of experience and observation,
who do not know that the tertian is the most prevailing type in febrile
diseases. This, at first sight, gives a general pre-eminence to the odd days;
but though the tertian period prevails very generally in fevers, yet it must
also be remembered, that these revolutions are sometimes completed in a shorter
space of time than the regular period; whilst the types are frequently found to
be doubled, or even more variously combined. In consequence of these accidents,
apparent irregularities are often produced in the order of the critical days;
though they may be all satisfactorily accounted for, by calculating the time by
the periods of the disease, or by simplifying those types which are more
evidently complicated. By attending to the circumstances I have mentioned, all
the difficulties may be easily removed in periodical fevers; but as numerous
instances of fevers occur, where no type can be clearly traced; so it is
necessary in such cases to seek for some other principle, which may be capable
of explaining apparent irregularities. There very seldom perhaps happens an
instance of fever of long continuance, where the symptoms do not undergo some
change in the course of the disease. Those changes or revolutions are generally
at considerable intervals, frequently at an interval of seven days. The
circumstances by which those changes are indicated, are not by any means
obscure; and, perhaps, there would not be great error, if we considered them as
the commencement of a new complaint; at least by considering them as such, the
general principle of the critical days is preserved consistent and uniform
throughout. I shall mention such explanations as have occurred most frequently
in my own practice. It often happened, that the symptoms of the disease
underwent a material change on the fifth. It terminated on the ninth, or
perhaps only put on a new appearance on the ninth, its final termination not
happening till after another period of five days. In the same manner, a change
of symptoms on the seventh, was followed by a crisis on the thirteenth; or if
the change of symptoms was not observed till the ninth, the crisis probably did
not make its appearance till the seventeenth. Such change of symptoms on the
odd days, (where we may say with propriety enough, that one disease was
accumulated upon another), there being seldom any previous marks of crisis, was
by no means uncommon; yet it happened still oftener, that the paroxysm of the
odd day declined; the original disease terminated imperfectly, whilst a new one
began the day following, which was an even day. By such accidents the order of
the days of crisis was changed. And from the last mentioned cause the
fourteenth, as a second seventh, becomes remarkable among the critical periods
of fevers. This idea of a second seventh occurred to me many years ago, and
long before I was acquainted with the opinions of Hippocrates or of Galen. It
now receives information from the testimony of these careful observers. There
are many, I make no doubt, who will be disposed to treat it with ridicule; but
I shall combat their opinion with no other argument than a request, that they
write down carefully the history of a tedious fever, and afterward review its
course without prejudice or partiality.

I now only beg leave to add, that the facts which I have mentioned in the
preceding pages are circumstantial, and give room to conclude, that by
simplifying complicated types, by calculating the time by the revolutions of
the disease, or by beginning to date a second time from those great and
remarkable changes, which happen at more distant periods, a doctrine is formed,
perfectly uniform and consistent with itself. It is confirmed by every
observation which I have been hitherto able to make. It is no more indeed, than
an analysis of those several cases, which have occurred in my own practice;
which in periodical fevers at least, has been tolerably extensive.

But though the prevalence of a tertian type, explains satisfactorily the
general critical power of the odd days; and those other circumstances, which I
have likewise taken notice of, account no less clearly for all the deviations,
which are observed to take place; yet if we attempt to seek for a cause of this
type, or of those changes, which happen at more distant, particularly at the
septenary periods, our progress is soon stopped. Galen, who seldom hesitates in
explaining the phenomena of nature, acknowledges here that he was unwillingly
drawn to a discussion of the subject. The question undoubtedly is a difficult
one; and, it is to be feared, must remain for ever unknown. In the East, where
the powers of the human mind were not only earlier developed; but where men,
from climate and modes of life, were led more early to observe the motions of
nature, stated and periodical movements were soon discovered in the economy of
the sublunary system. Egypt, there is reason to believe, is one of the
countries where these revolutions were first taken notice of; at least it was
on the banks of the Nile, that the Greek philosophers first gathered the seeds
of natural science. Among the knowledge or opinions, which these sages carried
back to their native country, we may reckon the doctrine of the power of
numbers; which though disfigured perhaps by the metaphysical genius of the
philosopher of Samos, has observation in some degree for its basis. It does not
concern us at present to enter into a particular discussion of this opinion;
but as far as relates to the subject in question, we cannot refuse
acknowledging, that the frame of man is liable to regular changes, at
particular periods, comprehended in a certain number of days and hours. But
though this general truth is indisputable, yet there is no argument which leads
us to suppose, that those changes are, in any degree, influenced by an harmonic
proportion in the simple number of the days. Ill founded however as this
doctrine obviously is, it was in high fashion with the Greeks in the time of
Hippocrates; and seems evidently to have had some influence on the opinions of
this author. Without such a prepossession, indeed, it is not easy to conceive,
how he could have fabricated the system which he has given to the world; as it
by no means results from the facts which are found in his writings. Galen in
this, as in most subjects, follows the footsteps of Hippocrates. He disclaims,
I must confess, the power of numbers, simply as numbers having any effect upon
the most usual days of crisis; but he maintains the influence of a quaternary
period, which appears very plainly to be a remnant of the doctrine of
Pythagoras. However, after exhausting himself, and fatiguing his readers with a
detail of useless conjectures, he at last ventures to conclude, that the
business of crisis is to be referred ultimately to the course and different
aspects of the moon. The opinion, like many others recorded by the Greek
physicians, draw its origin from Egypt. It is not, perhaps, altogether without
appearance of plausibility; yet I must add, that if the moon has in reality any
influence in this business, the laws which regulate its effects are obscure; --
indeed, not in the least understood. The conjecture however, fanciful as it
appears to be, met with the general assent of medical writers, till about the
middle of the sixteenth century, when Fracastorious, a man of ingenuity and
elegant genius, attempted to substitute another in its place; though
unfortunately, not a more probable one than that of his predecessors. This
author, after a display of much learning and general knowledge, at last
ventures to conclude, that the power of the different days of crisis, depends
on peculiarities in the laws of motion of the different humors, which give
rise to the different species of the disease: but with regard to this
hypothesis, it is only necessary to remark, that while the very existence of
the humors is doubted with reason, there can be no certainty in determining
the laws of their motions. But though the opinion of Galen, and this of
Fracastorius, are only vague and very questionable conjectures; yet they are
the only ones, so far as I know, which have been offered to the public. The
subject is too intricate, perhaps, ever to be explained. For though we clearly
perceive that fevers are usually of a stated duration; yet we are unable to
perceive, whether this duration depends on something inexplicable in the
peculiar nature of the cause, which ceases to act, or changes its mode of
action at a certain period; or to some imperceptible revolution in the human
frame, which destroys in a given space of time, that particular aptitude
between the state of the body and the morbid cause, in which the disease may be
said to consist. This only we know with certainty, that where the febrile
motions are violent and continual, the disease hastens to a termination; where
they are languid and feeble, or suffer long interruptions, its duration is
often drawn out to an undetermined length of time. Thus continued fevers, with
inflammatory diathesis and much viscular excitement, for the most part
terminate decidedly in seven or nine days; while those with low and languid
motions, with long and distinct intermissions, as the quartan, and even
sometime the tertian, continue for months, and decline at last by slow and
almost imperceptible degrees.

It may seem that I have treated very fully of the critical days of fevers; yet
before leaving the subject altogether, there is one thing still which requires
to be mentioned; -- I mean the great proportion of fatal terminations, which
happen on the even days. The even days were observed to be fatal in the
proportion of three to one, in those fevers, which came under my care during
the time that I lived in Jamaica. The fact, which is curious and hitherto I
believe unnoticed, was discovered in the following manner. That I might the
better trace the progress of nature through the whole course of the fever, a
subject which then engrossed my chief attention, I visited often, and spent
much of my time in the apartments of the sick. Among other things, I discovered
the manner in which death more usually approached. The natural course of the
paroxysm appeared generally to be finished, or the action of the febrile cause
seemed actually to have ceased. The lightning before death, as it is termed,
which has been generally attributed to the last efforts of dying nature was
frequently seen to take place. This was even sometimes so remarkable, as to
give flattering hopes of a favorable crisis; yet in a short space of time, the
powers of life begun to fail, and at last were gradually extinguished, like an
expiring taper. -- The crisis, strictly speaking, happened on the odd days,
equally the same in those who died, as in those who recovered; only I had
inaccurately, accustomed myself to refer the critical period to that moment,
were the signs of crisis were first perceived; in the other, I had considered
it as happening at the hour of actual death. Thus it was observed in those
fevers which terminated fatally on the even days, that the powers of life,
though irrecoverably exhausted, were not totally extinguished by the paroxysm
of the odd day. This paroxysm, in short, seemed to decline after the usual
duration. It left the body, in some measure, free from disease; but so
completely deranged in the vital functions, that the action of living, though
it often went on for a few hours, could not be continued long. In this manner,
the hour of death was frequently protracted to the even day; yet death happened
sometimes on the even days, from another cause. The decline of the paroxysm,
which in many cases was hardly perceptible, in others was very plain. The
disease terminated; but a new one recurring, after a short interval, speedily
put a period to existence. In the mild fever of Jamaica, death usually
approached in the gradual manner I have just described; yet in cases of much
violence and malignity, the fatal termination was frequently on an odd day. In
such cases the patient died in the height of the paroxysm, carried off by
convulsions, apoplexy, or other accident.

Those authors, who, since the time of Asclepiades, have denied the power of
critical days in fevers, are numerous; and many of them possess considerable
authority in the medical world. Their opinions, however, cannot be considered
as of great influence in the present case, though they may assert, that they
never have observed the pre-eminence of any particular days in terminating
febrile diseases; such an assertion means but little; unless its author
convinces us, that he has adopted a method of investigation by which those
regular movements, if they actually existed, could not fail to be discovered.
Truth in the present case, can only be known from minute and careful
observation; but a train of minute observation is not likely to be the work of
a busy physician; and one, who is little employed, has not sufficient materials
in his practice to engage his attention to a continued pursuit. I consider it
as my own good fortune, to have been placed between the two extremes of
idleness and too much business. In the country where I resided for some time,
the movements of nature were generally so distinct, as to be observed without
much difficulty; my practice likewise was sufficient to employ my mind, and not
more than it could comprehend easily; so that I had sufficient leisure to write
down, and to digest the observations which I have related above. They afford,
if I mistake not, some facts which are precise and pointed; and which supersede
a multitude of arguments. I will not venture to say, that they remove all the
mystery from this dark subject; but I cannot help flattering myself, that they
point out a road by which we may continue our investigations with success. The
subject of critical days is of such importance, as to demand every attention. A
knowledge of it gives credibility to our art; whilst ignorance in this respect
^s the source of perpetual mistake and disappointment. There are many
physicians of the present day, who treat the idea of critical days with
ridicule; but their assertions only afford an argument of their own
precipitancy, and superficial observation. The man in reality, who pretends to
cure a fever, without a knowledge of the critical periods of nature, is no less
presumptuous, than the mariner, who undertakes to conduct a vessel through the
ocean, without being instructed in the manner of calculating her course.

CHAP. IV. OF THE GENERAL REMOTE CAUSES OF INTERMITTING AND REMITTING FEVERS.
THE general remote causes of intermitting and remitting fevers have been so
fully investigated by several eminent writers, particularly by the industrious
and learned Lancisi, that little remains to be added: nor perhaps should I have
thought it necessary, even to have mentioned the subject, were it not to take
notice of some opinions of the late Sir John Pringle, which appear to have been
formed too precipitately; and which, I can affirm from experience, have been
pernicious to the health of thousands. It would be a very needless ostentation
to adduce the authority of the ancients, to prove the general source of the
disease which is the subject of the present treatise. The historians, no less
than the physicians of every age, do not entertain a doubt, that fevers of the
intermitting and remitting kind, owe their origin to exhalations from swampy
and moist grounds. Daily experience still proves it; and there are few men
whose observations are so circumscribed, as not to know, that it is in the
neighborhood of swamps, and near the banks of fresh water rivers, that those
disorders chiefly prevail. But though it is only in the above situations, that
intermitting and remitting fevers are more peculiarly epidemic; yet it likewise
deserves to be remarked, that, independent of the particular circumstances of
soil and local situation, the endemic of champaign countries is subject, in a
greater or less degree, to an appearance of periodical revolution. Mud and
stagnant water, in every climate, possess the materials of the cause of this
species of disease; but a combination of other circumstances is required to
give them activity. Among the principal of those circumstances, which call
forth this action, we may reckon the influence of a powerful sun. Hence, (as is
commonly known), some situations, which, in the colder months of winter, are
distinguished for no particular disease, in the hot months of summer and
autumn, are observed to be most malignantly unhealthful.

The nature of this exhalation or cause of fever, though it has long been a
subject of enquiry, remains still unknown. We plainly perceive it to be of
various degrees of force, and in various states of concentration; and we can
easily conceive it to be variously modified and combined; -- but we go no
farther. It has been said, to possess a septic principle; but this alone will
scarcely be thought sufficient, to account for the very peculiar manner in
which it affects the human race. Some other quality is necessarily joined with
it, which our senses cannot lay hold of. But though the ingenuity of man has
not hitherto been able to penetrate the intimate nature of this cause of fever,
we still have it in our power, in some degree, to trace its effects on the
human constitution. We plainly perceive that an habitual exposure to it, is
peculiarly unfriendly to the principle of life, and in a very remarkable manner
shortens the period of existence. In proof of this I mention from good
authority, that white females, born and constantly residing in the lower
districts of the province of Georgia in America, have seldom been observed to
live beyond the age of forty. Males, sometimes approach near to fifty; while
Europeans, who had arrived at manhood before they came to the country, often
attain a good old age. The fact is curious, and shows, in a strong point of
view, the deleterious quality of the air of those climates. But though the
general nature of the country, which I have just now mentioned, is unhealthy in
a high degree; yet there are situations, in the Carolinas and Virginia, which
are destructive of life in a still more remarkable manner. There is not on
record, I am credibly informed, an instance of a person born at Petersborough
in Virginia, and constantly residing in the same place, who has lived to the
age of twenty-one. When the British army marched through this province, in the
year 1781, I had the opportunity of seeing a native of this town, who was then
in his twentieth year; but he was said to be the first, who had ever attained
so advanced an age. He was decrepid, as if from the defects of time, and it did
not appear that he could survive many months. Yet it is not a little curious,
that this man had never been much confined with sickness. The residing
constantly in the same pernicious air, seemed alone to have been sufficient so
remarkably to accelerate decrepitude. But though the instances I have
mentioned, afford sufficient proof, that this miasma is unfriendly to the
principle of life; yet we are by no means instructed, as to the manner, by
which it becomes so. This seems to be one of the arcana of nature; and it will
profit little to prosecute it farther by conjecture. It will, however be an
object of utility to mark the soils and situations in which the exhalation most
abounds, and to trace the causes which heighten or lower its activity.

The history of the remote causes of intermitting and remitting fevers, with
all the circumstances connected with them, having been, as I said before, so
fully investigated by others, I shall only add a few cursory remarks, where the
information does not seem to be sufficiently precise, or where the conclusions,
which have been made, are not justifiable by experience. It is an opinion,
which, though it did not originate with Sylvius de le Boe, evidently gained
weight from his authority -- that a mixture of salt with fresh water, as
corrupting more easily, affords a more noxious exhalation than fresh water
alone. Lancisi has mentioned the observation; and Sir John Pringle considers it
as an established fact; but the evidence, by which he attempts to support his
opinion, is not decisive. It would be in vain to deny, that the neighborhood
of lakes or rivers, with a mixture of salt water, is often highly unhealthful;
yet we may affirm with confidence, that it is seldom more so, than where the
lakes and rivers are perfectly unmixed. In proof of this assertion, I might
adduce the example of Savanna la Mar in Jamaica, or draw instances from the
numerous islands on the coast of the Carolinas; where sea and river water are
often blended together in various proportions; to which might be added, the
more particular evidence of the relative healthiness of the banks of rivers. So
far as I have observed, the usual endemic was less frequent, and less
formidable on the banks of rivers, after their waters became mixed with those
of the sea, than before this happened; unless the circumstances were in other
respects more favorable for the production of the disease. Hence there is but
little reason for supposing, that there actually exists any degree of mixture
of salt with fresh water, at least of running water, which absolutely heightens
the noxious quality of the exhalation. The above is an opinion of sufficient
consequence to demand investigation: but there is another advanced by this
celebrated author, worse founded, and of still greater concern, which I shall
likewise mention. From an idea that a free circulation of air, is of all things
the most essential to the preservation of health, Sir John Pringle enjoins in a
very positive manner, not only that open ground, but that the banks of large
rivers should be chosen, in preference to other situations, for the encampment
of troops. This author's opportutunities of information were good; his opinion
has therefore gained weight, and his advice, I am afraid, has been often
fatally followed. It would be no difficult task to produce testimonies, from
both ancient and modern history, of the unhealthiness of those situations,
which Sir John Pringle has thought proper to recommend; but at present I shall
confine myself to that, which has more immediately fallen under my own
observation. The instance I shall mention, is only a single one; but it proves
so clearly the danger of encamping on the banks of fresh water rivers, as to
render all others superfluous. In June 1780, the first battalion of the 71st
regiment was detached to the Cheraws, where it encamped on open ground, within
five hundred paces of the river Pedee. The people of the country, taught by
experience, suggested the propriety of drawing back the encampment into what is
called the Pi^^-barren, assigning as the cause of their advice, that the
distance, as well as the cover of the wood, might be a security against the
damps of the river, which were observed to be extremely noxious in that
climate. A position in wood, accessible on all sides, would not perhaps have
been military; so that no alteration was made. The other battalion of the
regiment joined in July. It arrived in perfect health, and encamped likewise on
open ground; but still nearer the river. In a fortnight the intermitting fever
began to make its appearance; and in less than three weeks, more than two
thirds of the men were ill; whilst scarcely one of the officers had escaped.
The officers, it must be remarked, encamped in the rear of the men, and
immediately on the bank of the river, the course of which was uncommonly slow
at this place; while its banks, though high, were oozy and foul. There are few
instances on record perhaps, where a degree of sickness, greater than the
present, has been observed in so short a space of time. The first battalion,
however, did not suffer in the same proportion. The ground of encampment was
not only at a greater distance from the river; but being also nearer to a wood,
many of those, who were not confined by their duty to a particular spot, found
a convenient shelter in its shade, from the powerful heat of the sun. These I
must not omit to mention, were the least sickly of the whole encampment. The
above is an important fact. It proves clearly, that no ideal circulation of air
can counterbalance the noxious exhalations from rivers; and it likewise affords
a presumption, that instead of danger, there is safety in the shelter of wood.
But with regard to this, no absolute rule can be given. It must generally be
decided by local circumstances, whether wood, or open ground are to be
preferred for the encampment of troops. Upon the whole, however, there are many
reasons to induce us to believe, that as an encampment is not only more
military in the body of a wood, than in open ground surrounded by woods; so it
is likewise more safe with respect to health; particularly if within the reach
of effluvia from swamps or rivers. The reason which offers is obvious. The wood
not only stops the progress of noxious vapors carried from a distance; but it
also covers the earth from the immediate action of the sun -- the powerful
cause of exhalation; in doing which, it perhaps, does more than counterbalance
the less free circulation of air, or the greater dampness of the ground. But
lest the authority I have mentioned, should not be thought sufficient, the
opinion receives farther confirmation from the testimony of the ancients.
Histories abound with examples of destructive epidemics, which have followed
the cutting down of groves, which covered morasses, or which intercepted the
progress of marsh exhalation. America also furnishes daily instances of a
similar truth. In this country the unhealthiness of a place is often obviously
increased, by cutting down the woods of the neighboring swamps: hence no rule
is more liable to exceptions, than that which has been so generally enforced;
viz. that clearing a country of its woods invariably renders it healthy: unless
the grounds be drained and cultivated, as well as cleared, the effect is likely
to be the reverse.

It would be curious and useful, could we trace this miasma or cause of fever
in its progress. I do not deny that the noxious exhalation may be accidentally
enveloped in fogs; but it is not necessarily so; and I add, that the dews of
night, unless as an exciting cause, are less pernicious than has generally been
imagined. Low grounds, in the same manner, are not always unhealthy; as high
and dry situations sometimes afford no protection against the ravages of this
disease. The situation of the encampment which the 71st regiment occupied at
King's-bridge, in the year 1778, affords a curious and direct proof of the
truth of this opinion. About two hundred paces to the right of the spot, on
which the tents were pitched, was a tract of low and swampy ground; but the
immediate situation was dry, and of considerable elevavation. The right was
particularly so; yet it was principally on the right, where the disease raged
with violence. The left, though on low ground, over which fogs frequently hung
till late in the day, suffered in a much smaller proportion. From this we might
infer, that a dry and elevated situation is by no means exempted from
intermitting and remitting fevers: but the great degree of sickness, which
happened to those people, who not being confined by the nature of their duty to
one particular spot, pitched their tents on a hill in the rear of the
encampment, proves it clearly. The ground, which those persons made choice of
was directly in the tract of air, which blew over the swamp. It was dry and
scarcely ever covered with fogs; yet there was not an individual among them who
encamped upon it, who did not suffer from this raging epidemic. The present
instance, with many others which I might adduce, leaves little room to doubt,
that instead of exposing encampments to streams of air, which blow from rivers
or swamps, it ought to be our principal business to guard against those noxious
effluvia, by the interposition of woods or rising grounds. Exhalations which
are the causes of fevers are subtle, and seem to be pernicious, chiefly in
their ascent: -- visible damps or night dews are comparatively innocent.

So great is the importance of preserving the health of an army in the field,
that the choice of encampments ought to be made a subject of particular
enquiry. The opinion of Sir John Pringle on this head, (which, in fact, is an
opinion of theory rather than observation), has been followed too long without
examination. The directions of this author are influenced wholly by the dread
he entertained of a contagious or hospital fever; but a contagious fever, is
seldom a disease of the field; and has, perhaps, scarcely ever been known to
make its appearance in a moving camp. Diseases of the field are often epidemic,
sometimes malignant, but rarely contagious. I even doubt if the dysentery,
whilst a camp-disease, is so in any remarkable degree. It was not so at least
in America, in those campaigns, where I had the opportunity of knowing the
state of the army.

The general remote cause of intermitting and remitting fevers, consists, as
was mentioned before, in invisible exhalations floating in the air. These are
(...) copious in some situations than in others; and appear to be rendered more
or less active by a great variety of causes. Among the number of those causes
which have been accused of exciting fever, it has been usual to reckon excess
in drinking. It cannot be denied, that this cause, in several cases, has
brought forth the disease, when it probably would not have otherwise appeared;
yet it has been likewise observed that a debauch of wine has sometimes restored
the body to health, when languishing under the influence of this disorder in an
obscure or irregular form. The moderate use of wine, however, has been
generally recommended as a preservative in times of great heat, and epidemic
sickness: -- and under limitations it undoubtedly is of use. In a time of very
pressing calamity, the oracle of Delphi gave its sanction to the prescription,
and history bears testimony to its success. But besides excess in drinking,
cold and fatigue have likewise been considered among exciting cause of fever.
In short, whatever exhausts or diminishes the activity of the powers of life,
may be justly viewed in this light. Yet still I must observe that neither cold,
fatigue, nor any of the causes of this train, give occasion to a proper
intermitting or remitting fever, unless the predisposition to the disease be
particularly strong. As a proof of this, I must beg leave to mention a fact,
which fell under my own observation. In an expedition into South Carolina, in
the year 1779, a part of the army was near five hours in passing Purisburg
swamp. The men were always up to the middle, sometimes up to the neck in water.
The cold and fatigue were both very great, and a fit of intermitting fever was
the consequence in a great number of the soldiers: yet it was only in a few
instances that the disease went through a regular course, though there was even
a general pre-disposition to it, in the habits of almost all the men who
composed the detachment. The most of them had suffered from it severely the
preceding autumn; and a temporary return of it, was generally observed to
follow any extraordinary exertion, or the application of a debilitating cause.
The above causes are generally reckoned exciting causes of fever; but besides
these there are several others of considerable power, which as being commonly
known, I shall not now spend time in enumerating. There however still remains
one, which, though very universal, and perhaps more powerful than any other,
has hitherto been little attended to. The approach to the new and full moon, in
some degree, perhaps in every part of the globe, but particularly in the
West Indies, appears to be connected with the invasion and relapse of fevers,
in a very remarkable manner. This observation has been hinted obscurely by one
or two authors; the idea has been treated with ridicule by others: and it must
be confessed, that the facts, which have hitherto been produced in support of
the opinion, are extremely ^ague and equivocal. I shall therefore enter a
little more minutely into the subject, and state circumstantially the evidence,
from which I have been led to consider the approach to new and full moon, as a
powerful exciting cause of fever.

That the moon exerts some influence on the human frame, and that her different
appearances are more or less connected with the progress and issue of diseases,
does not seem to have altogether escaped the notice of the ancients. In a
fragment of Hippocrates, in the edition of Vander Linden, we find a detail of
the different aspects of the moon and planets, with their combined influence on
the fate of diseases; but the style and manner of this little tract are so
perplexed, that I do not pretend to understand its meaning. Galen had likewise
some obscure ideas on the subject; but he has left us nothing clear and
explicit. The Arabian writers are also confused and inaccurate, so that the
first circumstantial evidence of the influence, or connection of the moon with
the human body, is found in the works of Ballonius, a French physician of the
sixteenth century. The fact which this author records, though not altogether in
point, is curious. A Parisian lady of quality appears by the account of
Ballonius, to have been very singularly affected during an eclipse of the sun.
Her complaint threatened nothing dangerous, and her physicians were amusing
themselves with observing the progress of the eclipse, when they were suddenly
summoned to her assistance. In the moment when the eclipse was deepest, she had
the appearance of dying; but these threatening symptoms decreased with the
decrease of the eclipse; so that she at last returned to her former state. This
is only a solitary instance, and perhaps might be reckoned accidental. We may
however add to it the general testimony of Ramazzini, who lived at Modena in
the beginning of the present century. This author's observations, indeed, are
by no means precise; yet he was convinced by them, that the course of Epidemics
was considerably influenced by the particular state of the moon. It is almost
needless to mention Dr. Mead, who wrote a treatise expressly on the moon's
power on the human body. The facts which this writer has collected, afford a
reasonable presumption, that this planet is not without some influence in
several diseases to which man is liable; but we find not any thing in the work,
which particularly relates to fevers. I shall mention a fact recorded by Dr.
Grainger. It is the most circumstantial I have yet met with; and the strongest
to be found perhaps in the writings of any European physician. Dr. Grainger,
who was a surgeon of the army, served in the Netherlands about the years 1746
and 47, and wrote a treatise on the intermitting fevers of that country. Among
other observations he takes notice of a circumstance which occurred to him at
that time, and which he then considered as singularly curious; viz. that twenty
of the men of the regiment, of which he had the charge, were seized with this
fever, which was then epidemic, on the day of a solar eclipse. He has not made
any application of the fact. It furnishes however a very substantial evidence,
of the influence or connection of this planet with the invasion of febrile
diseases.

It appears to have been long known in India, that fevers have a tendency to
relapse about the new and full moon, and particularly at the time of eclipses
but Dr. Lind of Windsor is the first, who brought the knowledge of the fact to
Europe. In an inaugural dissertation, published at Edinburgh (I do not exactly
recollect the year), this author observes, that this opinion prevailed very
generally in the East. He adds likewise, that some instances occurred in his
own practice, which gave him cause to believe that the fact was well founded.
Dr. Lind continued of this way of thinking for several years after his return
to England. He does not indeed at present deny the fact. He only suggests that
it may admit of a different explanation, from that which he had given in his
first publication. The spring tides, as they overflow the low grounds,
according to his present opinion, afford a more probable cause of the uncommon
increase of fevers about the new and full moon, than the direct influence of
the planet itself. I will take the liberty however to add, that this opinion
has been offered to the public, from a very imperfect view of the subject. I
can affirm, even from the confined circle of my own experience, that a
connection, between the moon and the invasion of fevers, certainly takes place
in districts remote from the sea; and I believe it is generally known, that a
fever, or the paroxysm of fever, is not commonly the instantaneous consequence
of exposure to its remote cause; which ought to be the case, if this author's
reasoning were just.

The next, and indeed the only author who has written professedly on the
influence of the moon in fevers, is Dr. Balfour; a gentleman who resided
several years in India, and who practiced with reputation in the service of the
Company. This author pretends to have investigated the subject with care and
attention; but there appears in reality, to be more theory and general
assertion in the treatise than circumstantial fact. The result of his
observations he informs us, amounts to this: viz. that the three days which
precede, and the three days which follow new and full moon, are remarkable for
the invasion and relapse of fevers; that the day of the full moon, and the day
of the change of the moon, are the most remarkable of all: and farther, that
the days which follow, are, in general, more remarkable than those which
precede.

I have now brought together the substance of what is found in the writings of
those authors who have mentioned cursorily, or treated professedly of this
subject. There is not in any part of it, if we except the instance recorded by
Dr. Grainger, any thing accurate and precise enough to enable us to form an
opinion. What has fallen under my own observation, I would flatter myself, is
less ambiguous; and though it may not be so explicit, perhaps, as to establish
the doctrine completely, it may at least assist us, I hope, in approaching
nearer to the truth. -- I shall relate it in a few words.

When I arrived in Jamaica, in the year 1774, I had no other knowledge of the
influence of the moon in fevers, than what I retained from a cursory reading of
Dr. Lind's dissertation. I remember, however, to have mentioned the
circumstance to several practitioners, who had lived many years in the island.
As I conceived there was a similarity between the climates of Jamiaca and
Bengal, I thought it not improbable, that some of the practitioners of the
country in which I then was, might supply me with satisfactory information on
the subject. There were none of them, however, who acknowledged that they had
ever observed any connection between the moon and febrile diseases; neither
were there many of them, who seemed disposed to give credit to its existence.
Twelve months or more elapsed without my having paid any further regard to the
fact, when an accidental relapse of fever, happening near the time of full
moon, recalled Dr. Lind's observation to my memory. It likewise brought to mind
a circumstance, which till then I had overlooked. I had seen frequently, though
without attending to it particularly, that three or four of the soldiers of a
company of the 60th regiment, who were quartered at Savanna la Mar, and of whom
I had the care, were attacked with fever on the same day; whilst it seldom
happened, that any other febrile illness made its appearance in the garrison,
for the ensuing fortnight. This having been observed oftener than once, at the
time the moon was near full, a hint suggested itself, that the cause, which was
said to influence relapses in India, might here have an effect on the original
invasion. But in order to ascertain the truth of this conjecture, which I
considered as a matter of some importance, I provided myself with the almanac
of the year 1776, and marked, in the blank leaf of it, the precise date of
attack, of all those fevers which came under my care. In looking over those
memoranda at the end of the year, I found I had put down thirty cases of proper
remitting fever, the invasion of twenty-eight of which was on one or other of
the seven days, immediately preceding new or full moon; that is in the second
and last quarters. The same plan of observation was continued through the
following year, and the result, though not exactly the same, was similar. Of
twenty-eight cases, which where found in the almanac, twenty-two were in the
periods abovementioned: that is in the second and last quarters of the moon.
It deserves however to be remarked, that three of those six cases, which were
not in the common period of invasion, happened actually on the day of new moon;
-- a few hours after the change had taken place. But besides those cases of
proper remitting fever which I have mentioned, there were likewise found in the
almanac many days fevers and slight feverish disorders, the invasion of the
greatest number of which was likewise in the usual period.

The above is a literal state of the case as it stood in the almanac: -- some
remarks and observations, however, were added, of which the following are the
principal: viz. That, though the whole of the second and last quarters of the
moon is included in this period of invasion; yet the four days immediately
preceding new and full moon, were more particularly distinguished for those
febrile attacks: that in the dry season, which is reckoned the most healthy,
the time of invasion was more closely connected with the new and full moon,
than in the wet and sickly months, particularly when the sickness was epidemic,
or of a bad kind: and lastly, that this influence, or connection was more
apparent in the soldiers of the garrison, who were exposed to few occasions of
disease, excess in drinking excepted, than in the inhabitants of the town and
country, whose occupations carried them oftener to places of unhealthy
situation; or whose modes of life obliged them to submit to more various
hardships or to greater fatigues than fell to the lot of a soldier in times of
peace.

I shall further beg leave to add, that I went to join the army in America, in
the year 1778; and that I continued in that country, the train of observation
on this subject, which I had begun in the West Indies. The regiment, in which I
served, was encamped during the months of June and July on a healthy part of
York-island. Fevers were rare; and the time of invasion, of such as did appear,
was chiefly confined to the second and last quarters of the moon. In the
beginning of August, the encampment was removed to King's-bridge, where it
occupied a very unhealthy situation. The intermitting fever soon made its
appearance. It extended in some degree to the whole battalion; but raged with
particular violence on the right, which bordered on low and swampy ground. The
approach to new and full moon never failed, even in this climate, to increase
the number of the sick; yet it deserves to be remarked, that this increase was
always smaller in proportion, in that part of the battalion, which lay
contiguous to the swamp, where the disease was highly epidemic, than in the
other extremity of the encampment, where it prevailed in a less degree. But
still upon the whole, when the regiment moved from their ground, in the
beginning of November, of a hundred cases of intermitting fever, which were
marked in the almanac, eighty were found to have commenced in the usual period
of invasion; that is, in the second and last quarters of the moon. It is
somewhat remarkable, that relapses were in a smaller proportion. This regiment,
some parts of the medical history of which I describe, embarked on an
expedition for the southward in November, and arrived at its destination in
Georgia, in the latter end of the year. It remained in the southern provinces,
and served every campaign till the capitulation at York-town. The same train of
observation was continued during this intervening space, and the same influence
of the moon seemed in general to prevail; but the notes having been lost, I
cannot now exactly ascertain the degree in which this influence took place. Of
this, however, I am certain, that even in times of the greatest epidemic
sickness, when the connection was evidently weakest, the number of the sick was
generally doubled in the periods approaching to new or full moon.

We cannot avoid concluding, from the facts which I have stated above, that the
approach to new and full moon, or something connected with that approach, may
be justly considered as a powerful exciting cause of fever. The circumstances,
indeed, which I have mentioned, are so clear and unequivocal as to leave little
room for doubt: nor did I entertain any, till I found that the observations of
Dr. Balfour, on this subject, were so strikingly different from mine. Bengal
and Jamaica are distant from each other; yet few people will be disposed to
believe, that so great modification of a general cause has arisen solely from
this diversity of climate. Dr. Balfour must speak for himself. For my own part,
I can only say, that what I saw I have related with truth. As I have told the
manner in which the idea arose, with the manner in which the investigation was
conducted, I leave the conclusion to be formed by the reader.

CHAP. V. THE PROXIMATE CAUSE OF FEVER.
THEORIES of the proximate cause of fevers, or more properly modifications of
theories, are so numerous, that a whole volume would scarcely be sufficient to
give any tolerable account of them. It is a task indeed which I shall not
undertake; yet I hope it will not be altogether superfluous, to give a cursory
view of the principles, which have directed the conjectures on this subject in
different ages. The principles are, in fact, fewer in number than at first
sight they appear to be. Physicians, ambitious of raising their name and
reputation, have shown great industry in multiplying and modifying opinions;
yet it does not appear, that they have produced any great variety of theories,
which are fundamentally distinct.

The ancients, who were little acquainted with chemical principles, or with the
qualities and properties of the nervous system, placed the proximate cause of
fevers in some signal symptom of the disease, such as increased heat, or
abounding bile; or entering still farther into the fields of speculation,
ventured to attribute it to derangements in the permeable canals of the body,
or to affections of the humors, or circulating mass of fluids. Hence
obstruction of pores, plethora, error loci, lentor and viscidity, or
putrefaction of the humors, have all severally, at different times, or by
different authors, been considered as the immediate or proximate causes of this
disease. The theories, which prevailed in the schools till the beginning of the
sixteenth century, did not often extend farther than to the causes which I have
mentioned: but after that period, the discoveries of the famous Paracelsus
opened a road to innovation in medical reasoning. The followers of this author,
if not numerous, were enthusiastic and vociferous. They indulged in the wildest
extravagance of conjecture; and their opinions, for a considerable time, were
combated with the authority of Galen, rather than with solid argument and
accurate reasoning. At last the disputes between Chemists and Galenists
beginning to subside, the chemical theories became incorporated with the
doctrines of the mechanic philosophy, which were revived more than a century
ago, and which still maintain some influence in the common systems of physic.
In the mean time happened the important discovery of the circulation of the
blood; but no immediate change, in the manner of accounting for fevers, ensued
immediately in consequence of it. Yet as from this period the researches of
phycians began to be conducted on a more extended plan, some parts of the
system were brought into view, which had been formerly little attended to. The
nervous system, which had been in a manner overlooked for many ages, was now
found to be of importance in the economy of the animal machine; and authors
soon began to consider it, as affording a probable seat for the proximate cause
of fevers. Among the first of those authors, who viewed it in this light, we
reckon Borelli and Dr. Cole; the one of whom in Italy, the other in England,
proposed much about the same time, new and different opinions about the
proximate cause of fevers. Their conjectures, I must confess, are far from
being probable; -- (that of the Italian is scarcely ingenious) yet they deserve
to be mentioned in this place, as being among the first attempts to bring into
view a part of the system, which is very essential in enabling us to account
for many appearances in febrile diseases. It is commonly believed, that the
nervous system was not discovered to be a part of material importance; either
in the functions of health, or in the affections of sickness, till the last
century. This, in fact was generally the case; yet I must not omit to mention,
that we meet with an expression in the writings of Hippocrates, viz. (...),
which might incline us to be of opinion that this physician was not altogether
ignorant of the influence of the nervous power; and that he actually considered
this principle of the constitution to be of much importance in the management
and cure of diseases. After Hippocrates, Van Helmont, under the whimsical
appellation of Archeus, asserted more directly the dominion of the sentient
principle. He has indeed applied its operations more particularly to assist him
in explaining the theory of fevers; but it has been a misfortune that the
opinions of this author have been generally less attended to, than perhaps they
deserve: so that it has been customary to consider, the celebrated Hoffman as
the first, who suggested the idea, that the proximate cause of fever depends on
a derangement or affection of the nervous system; at least he is the first, who
delivered a system on the subject, which can in any degree be considered as
rational and consistent.

It will not be an easy task, to give a clear and distinct view of that, which
has been considered by the ancients, as the proximate or immediate cause of
fevers. The language of the earliest writers is not by any means precise in
this respect; and we shall frequently, perhaps, have difficulty from the
ambiguity of expression, to distinguish from each other the definition, the
remote and occasional, or the immediate and proximate cause of the disease. The
proximate cause of a disease, it must be remembered, is a cause which
constantly and uniformly produces its respective complaint; and without which
this complaint cannot even for a moment exist. It is, in short, the first
essential derangement, which the action of this cause produces in the frame of
the sufferer: but though we know this to be certainly true, yet we have made no
progress in discovering the nature of this derangement. The first action of the
cause of fever is obscure, and some part of the derangement which it occasions,
has hitherto probably passed over unnoticed, even by the most accurate
observers.

If we attempt to give a view of the successive conjectures, which, at
different times, have been offered to the public concerning the proximate cause
of fevers, it will be necessary to begin with Hippocrates. We may collect very
clearly from the writings of this author, that an increase of the heat of the
body had afforded, to the still more ancient physicians, the first idea of the
essence or immediate cause of fevers. This seems to have been the idea of the
most ancient professors of medicine. Hippocrates in some degree subscribed to
it; yet this author seems likewise to doubt, if the simple increase of heat
alone is sufficient to constitute a proper fever, or that it can with propriety
be considered as the essential proximate cause of the disease. But though
Hippocrates raises this objection to the common opinion concerning heat, yet he
still leaves us in doubt with regard to the opinion which we ought to adopt.
His ideas are fluctuating and uncertain. We find in the different parts of his
works, obstruction, plethora, miasmata or bile, all separately considered, as
immediate causes of fever. But such causes, I may add, where they do take
place, are in fact only more remote or distant causes. Neither miasmata, bile,
nor obstruction, are circumstances on which the existence of fever invariably
and necessarily depends; at least such causes require to be in a certain state
of modification, which is yet undefined, before they are capable of actually
producing the disease. Bile bears a very conspicuous part in the Hippocratic
doctrine of fevers. The fabric, indeed, which our author raises on this
principle, is fanciful, and in many respects, ill founded; yet, as modified by
the fertile genius of Galen, it passed on through a succession of many ages:
nor is it, even now, altogether banished from the language of practitioners.

Such are the hints concerning the causes of fevers, which I have been able to
collect from the writings of Hippocrates. The expressions are often obscure or
equivocal; and we can scarcely say, that an opinion can be formed from them
which deserves the name of a theory. The successors of this great physician
were, perhaps, too sensible of this defect; and therefore attempted to
fabricate other opinions, which might be more explicit and distinct. Among the
first of those attempts, we may reckon the hypothesis of Diocles of Carystus, a
physician who lived at an early period, and who was highly esteemed by his
contemporaries. Fever, according to this author, is not so much a primary
disease, as a symptom of some other affection. Wounds, tumors, and many other
accidental causes, have certainly been observed to give rise to symptoms which
have been usually denominated fever; yet neither wounds nor inflammations have
been generally observed to give rise to a proper fever. I will not however
deny, that wounds, or inflammations, occasionally prove exciting causes of
proper fever, where there is a strong disposition (...) the disease, existing
in the constitution, at the time those accidents have happened. It does not
appear that this theory of Diocles gained much ground with succeeding writers;
yet it was, perhaps, the cause of introducing the distinction of primary and
symptomatic into the history of fevers; a distinction, which is frequently of
consequence in practice. But I must further add, that though the opinion of
Diocles is not admissible in its literal meaning; yet, in a modified sense, it
is not altogether without foundation. The symptoms of fevers are undoubtedly
indications of a derangement of the body from its healthy state; but when we
have said this, we can say no more. -- The nature of the derangement, which in
its first beginnings is not obvious to the senses, neither the ancients, nor
the writers of the present age have, as yet, been able to ascertain.

Not very long after Diocles, Erasistratus, a native of the island of Cea, and
physician at the court of Antigonus, furnished a conjecture concerning the
cause of fevers, which is mentioned both by Celsus and Galen, and which appears
to have originated in his anatomical researches. As Erasistratus directed his
pursuits particularly to the sanguiferous system: so impressed, perhaps, with
an idea of the importance of that part of the body on which his thoughts had
been chiefly employed, he ventures to hazard the opinion, That the immediate
cause of fever depends on a certain error loci, or transfusion of the red blood
into the arterial channels: and this, he moreover adds, proceeds from
repletion, -- The opinion originates from an anatomical error, and on that
account need not detain us any longer.

The next author, of whose opinion on this subject any distinct traces have
been transmitted to us, is Asclepiades, the Bythinian, a man who seldom treats
the doctrines of his predecessors with respect. In his rage for innovation,
Asclepiades attempted to change or modify the theories of those who had gone
before him, in such manner, as to hope to impose a conjecture on the world,
which might, at least possess some exterior claims of novelty. He allows with
the most ancient physicians, that the inseparable sign of fever, or its
essential part, consists in an excess of heat; but having adopted the doctrine
of atoms, which was conveyed to the Greeks by Democritus of Abdera, he pretends
to account for the difference of types by a difference in the size of the
corpuscles, which he supposes to be formed by a combination of indivisible
atoms. Thus we see that obstruction in the permeable canals of the body, in
this writer's opinion, constitutes the theory of the proximate cause of fever:
on which principle we may likewise conclude, that the modern doctrine of lentor
and viscidity has built its foundation.

The author, whom I have last mentioned, may actually be considered as the
original founder of the methodic sect. The principal tenets of this sect of
physicians have been transmitted to us by Celsus, Caelius Aurelianus, or Galen;
but the doctrines, which they promulgated, have not been very fully and
perfectly explained. The great division of Themison, into strictum et laxum,
furnishes a very simple view of diseases. Fevers are included in the first
order of derangement; and in this respect, may be considered as depending on a
cause similar to the obstruction obscurely hinted by Hippocrates, or more
explicitly described by Asclepiades. There is this difference, however, between
these respective opinions, that the earliest writers seem to have referred the
obstruction to some change in the humors or circulating mass; while the
methodics appear to have attributed it more directly, to a change in the
capacity of the containing vessels. Hence we may infer, without any improper
latitude of interpretation, that the strictum of Themison and Thessalus
comprehends the spasmodic construction of capillaries, which has lately made so
conspicuous a part in the theory of febrile diseases. This theory of the
methodics, where the nervous and fibrous system have been more regarded than
the humors, or circulating mass of fluids, was principally followed at Rome,
for more than a hundred years. At last Galen, who was a very unqualified
admirer of Hippocrates, exerted himself so successfully in reviving the humoral
doctrine of his master, that the methodic sect began to sink rapidly into
decay; and after a short time its traces were totally obliterated.

The frequent blanks, in medical history, make it no easy task to give a
connected view of the fluctuating systems of the ancient physicians. The works
of every writer of the methodic sect have perished, except those of Caelius
Aurelianus: neither have we been able to discover any new opinion, or
modification of opinion, concerning the proximate cause of fevers, between the
time of Asclepiades or Themison, and the great commentator of Hippocrates,
except that of Athenaeus. Athenaeus, who was the head of the sect of
Pneumatics, stood high in esteem among his contemporaries and successors. This
author ventured to suggest a new hypothesis, or more properly perhaps, only
extended, and more fully explained a doctrine, of which the obscure traces may
be discovered at an earlier date. The general cause of fever, in this writer's
opinion, consists in a putrefaction, or putrescent state of the humors.
Hippocrates seems to have entertained some indistinct idea of the same kind;
and those, who have been inclined to this way of thinking, both in ancient and
in modern times, have neither been few in numbers, nor contemptible in
authority.

Galen, who has written on most parts of medical science more learnedly than
his predecessors, has discussed very fully the subject of the proximate cause
of fevers. Amidst the luxuriance of this author's coloring, it is sometimes
difficult to lay hold of the precise idea; at the same time, that it is oftener
tedious than instructing to follow him through the maze of his fanciful and
inconclusive reasonings. I shall not therefore enter into a minute detail of
his arguments; but still I conceive it may be useful, particularly to those who
have not the opportunity of consulting his voluminous, and in some respects ill
digested works, if I compress into narrow compass the leading principles of his
general doctrines. In the first place, the opinion, hinted by Hippocrates and
adopted by most of his successors, that the essence of fever consists in a
certain derangement of heat, is expressly maintained by Galen, who explains
more elaborately than his predecessors the various circumstances, which
influence or modify this general cause of the disease. Galen assumes, indeed,
as a fundamental position, that heat any how, or any where excited,
communicated to the heart, and from the heart to the rest of the body,
constitutes a fever; yet he afterward adds more explicitly, that a
preternatural heat does not constitute a fever, unless it is communicated to
the heart; which is consequently to be considered as the principal seat and
residence of the febrile affection. Having, as he imagines, established this
fundamental principle, he proceeds to investigate, more particularly, the parts
of the body where the heat resides, and the causes by which it is generated,
propagated, or so modified, as to produce the disease in its different forms.
But, that he may the better explain his meaning clearly, he divides fevers into
three different kinds: viz. the hectic, or habitual, the humoural, and the
ephemeral. The first he supposes to arise from an affection of the solids, or
containing parts; the second from some derangement of the fluids, or contained
parts; and the third from some disturbance of the spirits, or that part of the
frame which we, perhaps, now distinguish by the name of nervous system. He adds
in the next place, that putrefaction is the medium, by which fever is excited,
where the fluids or humors are the subject of the disease, contiguity and
continuity, where the illness affects the habit or solid parts; and where the
effects are transitory and fleeting, he attributes the cause principally ^o the
rapid movements of the spirits, or nervous in^^uence. And lastly, he attempts
to complete his ^^^ory, by explaining the different types of humoural fevers,
on the supposition of a state of putrefaction in the different humors, from
which he supposes the disease to arise. On this subject he has deviated very
materially from his master Hippocrates, though he probably drew his ideas from
the hints, which are found in that author's works. Hippocrates explains, or
attempts to explain the various types of fevers, by a simple difference in the
quantity of the bile. Galen, on the contrary, as we have said just now,
endeavors to account for this phenomenon, by a supposition of putrefaction in
the phlegmatic and bilious humors, which bear so conspicuous a part in his
theoretical system. Thus Galen supposes, that a putrescent tendency in the
blood gives rise to a continued fever; a similar disposition in the phlegm
disposes the disease to appear in a quotidian form: putrefaction of the yellow
bile determines the type to be of the tertian kind; whilst a like tendency, in
the black bile, regulates the movements of the quartan period. -- It is
unnecessary to make any remarks on the baseless fabric, which this author has
offered to the world, concerning the proximate cause of fevers. -- Its
inconsistency and insufficiency are perfectly obvious.

After the time of Galen there does not appear to have been any material
change, in the manner of accounting for fevers, for many ages. Aetius Amidenus
indeed suggested some restrictions and explanations in certain species of
fever, which do not seem to have been so explicitly marked by the commentator
of Hippocrates. Instead of considering putrefaction as the sole means of
exciting heat in every species of humoural fever, Aetius ventures to insinuate,
that there is no state of actual putrefaction in the (...), or that species of
disease which is purely inflammatory, the cause of which appears to be simply
an inordinate fermentation or ebullition of the blood. But except in this
instance, the succeeding Greek physicians do not seem to have departed, in the
least, from the direct footsteps of Galen. The Arabians likewise, among the
principal of whom we may reckon Avicenna, adopted his general doctrines, and
modes of reasoning, only Avicenna defines more expressly than others had done
before him, that fevers of all denominations arise immediately from a
preternatural heat of the heart; in doing which, he seems to have extended the
influence and power of that quality which preceding authors in looser terms had
considered as the general cause of febrile diseases.

The doctrines of Galen, with some immaterial innovations of the Arabian
physicians, wholly occupied the schools of medicine, till the beginning of the
sixteenth century, about which time Aureolus Philippus Theophrastus, commonly
known by the name of Paracelsus, effected a revolution of opinions, which marks
an important period in the history of the medical art. Paracelsus, who was a
man of a singular turn of mind, spent the earlier part of his life in
traveling among the nations of Asia; where he probably acquired some knowledge
of chemistry, in which science the Arabians appear, even at that time, to have
made considerable progress. The knowledge, which Paracelsus carried home to his
native country, was not generally known in Europe. This author applied it with
success in the cure of some desperate diseases; and acquired uncommon fame from
his new and unheard of remedies. He was an empiric in the theory, no less than
in the practice of the art; and I may add, that his attempts to overturn the
doctrines of the ancients, give an indication of more effrontery than genius or
knowledge. The wonderful cures of obstinate diseases, which he was said to
perform; and still more, perhaps, the mysteriousness of his language, which
caught the notice of the vulgar, who often imagine that knowledge is concealed
under terms, which they do not understand, brought followers to his standard.
Theories of the proximate cause of fevers, were fabricated without difficulty,
by the help of those principles, which Paracelsus had introduced to the
acquaintance of the world; yet it does not appear, that any theory arose,
during this period, which had probability, or even ingenuity for its support.
The period indeed, during which chemical reasonings so universally prevailed,
may be styled justly enough a period of medical romance: and I should consider
it as a trespass on the patience and good sense of the reader, to spend time in
refuting the absurd and incongruous doctrines of sulphur, ^itre or mercury;
acid and alkali, or the various modes of fermentations, which for a time filled
the writings of physicians. The mechanical mode of reasoning, which succeeded,
or rather which became incorporated with the doctrines of the chemists, seemed
at first to promise greater advantages: but though theories of fevers were
formed by many eminent men, both of the last and present century, on the
principles of the mechanical or chemico-mechanical philosophy; yet there are
not any of them, which seem to have afforded a satisfactory explanation of the
subject. -- The so-much celebrated doctrine of lentor and viscidity was assumed
without evidence of its existence, and persisted in, without being sufficient
to account for the phenomena of the disease.

Those conjectures concerning the proximate cause of fevers, which I have
mentioned hitherto, can seldom be said to extend farther than to a particular
state of the humors, or circulating mass of fluids, which, according to the
prevailing philosophy of different ages, have been supposed to be changed from
their natural and healthy state, by chemical or mechanical derangement. I
observed before, that it might appear, from an accidental expression in the
writings of Hippocrates, that this author was not altogether ignorant of the
influence or effects of a ^^^vous power, or sentient principle. The methodic
sect likewise, may seem to have comprehended in the idea which they have given
of diseases, that there is some derangement of the fibrous system; or perhaps
that a spasmodic stricture of capillaries is actually the immediate cause of
fever; whilst Galen every where celebrates the powers of nature or vires
naturae medicatrices, which bear in his opinion, a very active part in the cure
of febrile diseases. To those vague ideas of the ancients, we may add the more
modern and explicit doctrine of Van Helmont, who was a man of genius, learning
and observation. Van Helmont adopted the sentient principle of Hippocrates; but
he also applied it in a bolder light than had been done by its original author,
and employed its assertions more particularly toward the explanation of the
cause and phenomena of fevers. The enthusiasm of this writer disgusts the
philosophic spirit of the present age, and we must acknowledge, that his ideas
are often unphilosophical and absurd; yet we must likewise do him the justice
to add, that the principle of his doctrine in some degree is well founded, and
that his views, in many respects, are important in practice. I must further
observe, that the efforts of nature, so celebrated by Campanella and Sydenham,
and even, perhaps, the (...), of Stahl and his followers, can only be
considered as modifications of the furious Archeus. -- But though the authors I
have mentioned, seem evidently to have possessed some vague idea of the powers
or influence of the nervous system; yet there are not any of them, who have
attempted to explain its operations by a philosophical and consistent mode of
reasoning. The period of this improvement is not very remote.

As soon as the circulation of the blood was known and fully established, the
heart lost some part of its former importance; whilst the brain and nerves,
which for many ages had been little regarded, rose into primary and essential
consequence. But though the brain and nerves were discovered, soon after this
period, to be the instruments of life and motion; yet the laws of this part of
the system were at first only imperfectly understood; and the attempts to
explain its operations were, for a while, whimsical and absurd. Willis deserves
some credit, as being one of the first who brought the general importance of
the nervous system into view: but Borelli, an Italian mathematician, actually
appears to be the first who ventured to ascribe the proximate cause of fever,
to a particular derangement of this part of the frame. The immediate cause of
fever, in this author's opinion, depends on some unusual acrimony of the
nervous fluid; but it is only necessary to observe with regard to this
doctrine, that a supposition of acrimonious fluids, where a fluid cannot be
proved to exist, is so perfectly visionary, as only to deserve to be mentioned,
from its being the first attempt to bring this part into view, in accounting
for febrile disease. This hypothesis, however, though obviously ill founded,
enjoyed its day of fame. It was soon followed by another conjecture, more
ingenious indeed, but which was not so generally attended to, as the preceding.
Dr. Cole of Worcester, toward the end of last century, suggested an idea, that
the proximate cause of intermitting fevers depends on a laxity or debility of
the brain and origin of the nerves. The supposition is not so improbable; but
the superstructure, which the author has raised, is absurd, and unsupported
either by fact or probability. Yet, if we expect Mundy, an author who offered a
conjecture of a similar kind, in a work entitled (...), Borelli and Cole are
the only writers prior to the time of Hoffman, who considered the nervous
system, as directly affording a seat for the proximate cause of fevers.
Hoffman, whom I have just mentioned, was a celebrated professor at Halle in
Saxony. He flourished in the earlier part of the present century, published
many volumes, and certainly possesses the merit of having enlarged our views on
the subject of fevers. His theory of the proximate cause is not only more
ingenious, but certainly has more appearance of truth, than any other, which
had been offered to the public at the time it appeared. The cure of fever
consists, in his opinion, in a spasmodic affection of the nervous system. It is
a truth which few people will attempt to deny, that a spasmodic stricture of
the surface of the body generally takes place in ordinary cases of fever; yet
we must perhaps also acknowledge with Dr. Cullen, that a spasmodic stricture is
not certainly and uniformly the first essential part of a febrile disease. Some
other thing is frequently observed to precede the spasm, which, in the opinion
of the last mentioned celebrated professor, has a right to be considered as a
proximate and essential cause. But as the theory of the proximate cause,
assigned by Dr. Cullen, is not only more plausible and complete than any
preceding one; but still increasing in popularity and fame, it will not be
superfluous, if we stop to examine it with more attention. The remote causes of
fever, according to this author, are sedative powers, applied to the nervous
system, which diminishing the energy of the brain, thereby produce a debility
in the whole of the functions, and particularly in the action of the extreme
vessels. Such, however, is at the same time the nature of the animal economy,
that this debility proves an indirect stimulus to the sanguiferous system;
whence by the intervention of the cold stage and spasm connected with it, the
action of the heart and larger arteries is increased, and continues to be so,
till it has had the effect of restoring the energy of the brain, of exciting
this energy to the extreme vessels, of restoring therefore their action; and
thereby specially overcoming the spasm affecting them: upon the removing of
which, the excretion of sweat, and other marks of relaxation of excretories
take place. This theory of fever holds out an appearance of great simplicity,
and of perfect connection. I wish we could say that it had an equal claim to
truth: but I am afraid it will be found, on a careful examination, to be no
more in reality than an ingenious hypothesis, the leading principles of which
can scarcely be proved even to exist. I do not pretend to enter deeply into the
discussion of the subject; yet I cannot avoid representing, in a few words,
some circumstances of difficulty in this author's theory, which are not easily
reconcilable, either with reason or observation. It might be doubted, in the
first place, if the remote causes of fever are actually of a simple sedative
nature; but at present I shall admit that the first principle, which is assumed
by the professor, is in reality a fact, and proceed to enquire, if the rest of
the doctrine is capable of being defended, even on this foundation. It
constitutes the sum of Dr. Cullen's theory, as was mentioned before, that the
remote causes of fever occasion debility, or diminished energy of the brain and
nervous system; that this debility necessarily gives rise to spasm, and
increased action of the heart and arteries; which continuing for a certain
length of time, finally removes the disease. Thus the different stages of fever
appear to follow each other as cause and effect; and debility in the first
instance, is supposed necessarily to give rise to reaction. Such a supposition
is not very obvious to reason, and has not much support from the analogy of
facts. It would be easy to mention examples, where the application of
debilitating causes as is not observed to be followed by obvious reaction of
the system; but at present I shall content myself with the familiar one of the
application of cold. It is perfectly well known, that cold, when constantly and
uniformly applied to the body, even goes so far as absolutely to extinguish the
powers of life, in a part, or in the whole, without our being able to perceive
any efforts on the part of nature to stop the progress of this destructive
tendency. From this we may fairly infer, that common debilitating causes, at
least while they continue to be applied in the same constant and uniform
manner, do not necessarily excite the reaction of the system: but I will even
go farther, and venture to affirm, that spasm and reaction do not necessarily
follow very great degrees of debility, which appear to proceed from the
presence of a febrile cause. During the time I remained in America, I had
frequent opportunities of witnessing the truth of this assertion. In the
southern provinces of that country, particularly in the summer and autumnal
months, the intermitting fever was generally epidemic in a high degree; but its
general cause, which was then so abounding in the atmosphere, often injured the
actions of life, without producing a regular train of operation; that is, one
part of the disease appeared without that mode of action, which is supposed, by
our author, to be its necessary effect. Thus, I have seen the most extreme
degrees of debility, and langour in all the functions, continue even for eight
or ten days, without our being able to discover the smallest marks of spasm, or
obvious reaction. This inactivity and langour sometimes vanished suddenly; and
the body resumed its ordinary health and vigor, frequently without an evident
cause. On the next day, however, or perhaps the day following it, the patient
was surprised with a regular paroxysm of fever. From this it appears very
plainly, that if the immediate cause of fever actually consists in debility,
this debility necessarily undergoes a peculiar, but hitherto undefined species
of modification, before it can be considered as the cause of the subsequent
parts of the disease; a concession which leaves us perfectly in our former
state of uncertainty and ignorance.

As it may be concluded from the facts, which I have mentioned, that spasm and
reaction are not the necessary consequences of the application of debilitating
causes, either common or febrile; so if we pursue our author's train of
reasoning farther, we shall not find his inductions to be very consistent, or
very convincing. If we are disposed to grant, that the remote causes of fever
actually diminish the energy of the brain, it is not an obvious inference, that
the circumstances of this diminished energy have the certain effect of exciting
the reaction of the system. It appears, in short, like ascribing rest and
motion to the same power. But to smooth the prominent features of this apparent
inconsistency, the ingenious author has thought fit to assume a principle, the
existence of which is very ambiguous in its enlarged sense, and very
insufficient in its limited one. Dr. Cullen does not admit of the Italian
principle of (...); he however ascribes effects to the vis naturae medicatrix,
which are not capable of being explained mechanically. I mentioned before, that
no efforts of nature are perceived to arise, under the uniform and constant
application of a debilitating cause; but though this is true, I must likewise
observe, that when these debilitating powers, from any cause whatever, actually
cease to act, abate materially in the intensity of their action, or suffer
change in its mode, before the vital principle is irrecoverably destroyed,
nature, which persists in continuing life, and even struggles in attempting to
maintain it, may then be said to raise efforts, which have a tendency to
restore the body to its ordinary health. This power, which to a certain degree,
resists causes of a destructive tendency and which endeavors to restore to
their original state the derangements of the system which have actually taken
place, is only a limited degree of the vis naturae medicatrix. It is in short,
no more than an effort to continue the action of living; yet it is all, which
we shall, at any time, perhaps, be able to perceive.

I have thus mentioned briefly some objections, to this celebrated theory of
Dr. Cullen. The ingenuity of the author is acknowledged to be great; the pains
and labor, which he h^^ bestowed in completing his favorite doctrine appear
likewise to be considerable; yet I cannot help remarking, that its defects are
still so obvious, that we are unavoidably obliged to be satisfied with one of
these conclusions: viz. either that the debility, which is supposed to be the
cause of fever, is of a peculiar but unknown kind; that it ceases to act, or
changes its mode of action from an accidental cause, or from something in its
own nature; or that a reaction arises in the system, from a principle of
consciousness of the destructive tendency of this debilitating power. It is not
consonant with the common laws of the animal economy; that reaction should
arise in that part of the system, where the debilitating influence has been
primarily and principally exerted. Suppositions of this nature, are only
subterfuges, and no more in reality than mysterious ways of acknowledging
ignorance.

The opinions I have enumerated above are the principal ones, which have been
advanced by medical writers, on the subject of the proximate cause of fevers.
Though numerous, they are all reducible to two general classes; viz. either to
conjectures, which are totally without foundation; or to circumstances, which
are in fact only symptoms or parts of the disease, some of which are more,
others less essential. The proximate cause of fever, is a certain peculiar
state of the body, on which the disease, or the subsequent parts of the
disease, necessarily depend. It is, in short, the first essential action of the
febrile cause; but this action is so intricate and difficult to be discovered,
that physicians have fought for it in vain for more than two thousand years.
The ancients were satisfied with the idea of preternatural heat, excited in the
heart, and communicated, by means of the blood and spirits, to the rest of the
body. Hoffman, making a bolder step, introduces a spasmodic affection of the
moving fibers; and Dr. Cullen, going still farther, lays the principal stress
upon languor and debility, or weakened action of the nervous energy. Increased
heat, spasmodic stricture and marks of debility, are generally present, in
various degrees, in the different stages of fever; but debility for the most
part precedes the others; and on this account, if equally essential, has a
preferable right to be considered as the first part of the disease. There is
still reason to doubt if it actually is the first. I have myself attended
carefully to the manner in which intermitting fevers approach. The first thing
which I observed in others, or what is still more to be depended upon, the
first thing I felt in myself, was usually a disagreeable, but a peculiar
affection of the stomach. The precise nature of this affection I am unable to
define in words; but I knew it so well by experience, that I always considered
it as a warning, (and it was sometimes the only warning, which I had,) of the
approach of the paroxysm. It was often accompanied by flatulence, and it
sometimes preceded the first feelings of the languor and debility, nearly the
space of an hour. The observation of this fact has occured to me frequently;
and I cannot avoid concluding, that it gives room to believe, that the
debility, which is so commonly the forerunner of fever, instead of being the
first and principal mode of action of the febrile cause, is only a part of that
action, -- perhaps not the most essential. As Hippocrates appears at a very
early period to have been perfectly sensible, that something besides a simple
increase of heat was necessary to constitute a fever; so we may now perhaps
conclude, with equal reason, that debility has some other circumstances
combined with it, which we have not been able to discern very clearly.

Having said that there are not any of the numerous theories, which have as yet
been offered to the public on this important subject, in any degree
satisfactory, it might be expected, perhaps, that I had something of my own to
bring forward, which might be more perfect, at least in my own opinion: but I
willingly acknowledge, that I have no such pretensions. After fourteen or
fifteen years of careful observation, and daily reflection on the phenomena of
fevers, I am obliged to confess, that my opinion still remains to be formed.
The proximate cause of this disease, is a subject of a dark nature. It is such,
perhaps, as our limited capacities will never develope. But though we despair
of ever attaining clear ideas of its specific nature, there are still some
useful circumstances connected with it, which we comprehend with clearness. We
know, that the more general remote causes of fevers, are certain invisible
exhalations, sometimes more evidently arising from marshy grounds, sometimes
more obscurely diffused in the air, and sometimes obviously proceeding from the
bodies of our fellow creatures. We know, likewise, that these causes which are
unfriendly to the human constitution, are variously modified and combined, and
of various degrees of force or in various states of concentration; but we
proceed no farther with certainty. We are not able to ascertain the nature of
these effluvia, and it is only by conjecture that we trace them in the channels
by which they enter the body. The changes which they operate on the solids,
fluids, or nervous system, before their action becomes obvious, are totally
unknown to us. We know, though the body lie exposed to exhalation, even in a
concentrated state, that an appearance of disease is not, generally, the
instantaneous consequence. A space of time intervenes, various indeed according
to circumstances, but always such as gives room to believe, that the cause
requires, and actually undergoes a modification, before it is capable of
producing a fever, or the paroxysm of a fever. The circumstances connected with
the approach of fevers, particularly intermitting fevers, afford an
illustration of my meaning. The cause of the disease, so far from producing the
fever immediately when applied to the body, often lurks for a considerable time
in the constitution, without perceptibly injuring the ordinary actions of life.
Sometimes it gives rise to affections, which are apparently very different from
their real nature. Thus a person often languishes for days, weeks, or even
longer. The indisposition suddenly and unexpectedly vanishes: and the apparent
recovery of health is soon followed by a paroxysm of regular fever. In other
cases again, the attack of the disease is sudden; and its formation from the
beginning distinct. This fact affords a presumption, that, in consequence of a
particular modification, which is only accomplished in a certain space of time,
but the nature of which we do not in the least comprehend, an aptitude is
regenerated between the remote cause of the disease, and the relative state of
the body. When the state of the body, and the remote cause approach to, or
arrive at a state of mutual correspondence, the disease is produced. When this
state, which I call an aptitude, is changed or destroyed, the disease vanishes,
or suffers a change of form. This is a fact, which cannot be disputed; and it
seems to be the extent of our knowledge, on the important subject of the
proximate cause of fevers.

CHAP. VI. OF THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE FEVER OF JAMAICA.
IT will not be improper to remark, before I begin to describe the history of
this fever, that though the endemic which prevailed at Savanna la Mar,
notwithstanding much variety of forms and symptoms, is considered as only one
and the same disease, yet it may also be observed, that the variety of these
appearances is sometimes so great and remarkable as to occasion considerable
perplexity to the practitioner. The symptoms and form of this endemic appeared,
on a superficial view to be constantly varying; yet by attending more closely
to the course, progress, and changes of the disease, these apparent
irregularities vanished gradually, the varieties being in fact only accidental,
and often depending on very trivial causes. The analysis of the different cases
of fever, which came under my care, during the time that I lived in Jamaica,
furnished me with this information. I formerly mentioned the manner in which my
observations were conducted: I have only now to add, that I trust the method,
which I adopted, has enabled me to give a more accurate history of the fever of
Jamaica, and to explain more satisfactorily than has been done hitherto the
various sources of the many irregularities which are observed to occur. I am
perfectly sensible that my experience has been too limited, to give me hopes of
rendering the present work complete; yet I would flatter myself, that it will
not be altogether useless: I totally disclaim theoretical opinions, and content
myself with a plain narrative of facts; neither do I aspire to any higher
praise, than care in observing the appearances of the disease, and truth in
relating the appearances which I have seen.

Before proceeding to give a particular history of the different varieties of
the endemic fever of Jamaica, it will not be improper to mention the more
general symptoms, which distinguish the disease, and to trace an outline of the
course, which it has been commonly observed to pursue: and I may remark in the
first place, that though debility is usually considered as the first sign of an
approaching fever; yet, if we attend minutely to all the circumstances of
invasion, it will not generally be difficult to perceive, that a disagreeable,
though undescribable affection of the stomach, takes place previous to the
smallest perceptions of languor or debility, which are commonly only immediate
forerunners of coldness and shivering. This coldness, which was observed to be
various in duration, as well as in degree of force in the fevers of this
country, was succeeded by flushings of heat alternating with the cold, and
increasing gradually till the heat at last prevailed. The hot fit, which was
likewise of various duration and of various force, had many new symptoms joined
with it, the principal of which were such as showed an increased circulation,
or an irregular determination of the blood to the different parts of the body.
This hot fit, and the disturbances connected with it, according to
circumstances, continued for a longer or shorter space of time; at last sweat
breaking out on the head and breast, extended itself gradually to the
extremities, and accomplished after a certain continuance, either a total
remission of the fever, or a considerable abatement of the violence of the
symptoms. It is almost unnecessary to mention, that this remission or abatement
of symptoms was of longer or shorter duration, and more or less complete in
fevers of different forms. An aggravation of symptoms succeeded to the
remission; but it was usually observed to begin without preceding coldness, and
frequently without marks of preceding languor or debility. The hot fit now ran
high, and all the symptoms were frequently more violent than they had been
observed to be in the first paroxysm. Sweat at last made its appearance,
followed in most cases by a remission, less perfect indeed, than the preceding
one, but still distinct enough to be clearly traced. In this manner things went
on for a longer or shorter space of time, the paroxysms usually increasing in
violence, and the remissions becoming sometimes more, though in general less
perfect, as the disease advanced in its progress. I may further observe, that
there was occasionally a change of the type, sometimes a change of the nature
of the symptoms in the course of the illness; and that, where either of these
were the case, the disease was usually of longer continuance; at the same time,
that the order of the critical days was disturbed in consequence of these
changes.

The resemblances, which I have mentioned above, were found in all the
different species of the remitting fever of Jamaica; but from causes, which
were not always perceived, and which sometimes appeared to be very accidental,
the disease was distinguished in a part, or in the whole of its course, by the
prevalence of a train of symptoms of such a particular nature, as gave occasion
to the distinctions of inflammatory, nervous, malignant, putrid or bilious; the
separate histories of which I shall now relate more circumstantially.

SECTION I. OF FEVER DISTINGUISHED BY SYMPTOMS OF INFLAMMATORY DIATHESIS.
THE variety of fever, which I shall describe first, is that, where the
inflammatory diathesis prevailed in different degrees. Where this diathesis was
moderate, the disease was usually of the least complicated form, as well as of
the least dangerous nature, of any of the fevers of Jamaica. The paroxysms were
generally regular, and complete in all their parts, and terminated, for the
most part, by a copious sweat, in a perfect remission: the pulse was full,
strong, and regular; without uncommon hardness or tension; whilst the heat of
the skin, though sometimes great in degree, was generally free from that
burning pungency, so common in some other species of fever. It was less
removed, in short, from a simple increase of the natural warmth. I may further
remark, where this moderate degree of inflammatory diathesis characterized the
genius of the disease, that the danger was seldom great; and that the
termination or crisis was generally regular and final. But though this degree
of the inflammatory diathesis was frequently observed to be a sign of safety,
and of regular crisis: yet it also often happened, where the diathesis
prevailed in excess, that the symptoms of excitement ran unusually high, and
that a serious danger threatened life. The pulse, in such cases, was not only
frequent during the paroxysm, but it was likewise, quick, hard, and vibrating;
the heat was often intense; the internal functions and the various secretions,
were considerably disordered; at the same time, that a very obstinate spasmodic
stricture prevailed on the surface of the body. The remission which followed,
for the most part, was obscure; the pulse frequently retaining a preternatural
quickness and hardness; whilst there was generally a considerable degree of
febrile heat on the skin.

The symptoms, which I have just now mentioned indicate different degrees of
the real inflammatory diathesis; but besides actual symptoms of real
inflammatory diathesis, there were likewise found fevers, with the appearances
of a similar disposition, though the real genius of the disease was in reality
of a different nature. It is of importance in practice to distinguish those
ambiguous appearances; but it is not always easy to do it with certainty. We
may remark, however, that the apparent inflammatory diathesis was usually
accompanied with marks of great irritability, and sometimes with marks of
violent excitement during the paroxysins; while languor and great depression of
spirit were frequently perceived to attend the remissions. The pulse, which at
one time was hard, irregular, and quick, at another was frequent and low, and
sunk under a small degree of pressure. The heat of the body was not always
great, yet it was pungent, -- and left a disagreeable sensation on the hand:
the secretions were often irregular; the countenance was confused, clouded and
overcast, the eye was sad, and sometimes appeared as if it were inflamed; the
feelings were unpleasant to the patient himself: there was great irritability
of temper; and the state of the skin impressed us with the idea, that there was
a strong spasmodic stricture prevailing on the surface of the body. -- The
above are the principal circumstances, which were usually present in the
different states of inflammatory fevers; yet these circumstances were sometimes
so variously complicated and combined with others, that the accurate
discrimination of them must be left, in most eases, to the observation of the
individual himself.

Those different states and degrees of the inflammatory diathesis, which I have
described above, were sometimes general throughout the whole of the body, not
affecting one member more remarkably than another; sometimes they were partial
or seemed to be connected with a principal affection of a particular part: and
where this was the case, the local affection, and the general diathesis of the
system, usually had a mutual correspondence with each other. Thus, where the
inflammation affected the substance of the liver or lungs, the general
inflammatory diathesis was usually in a moderate degree; while the highest
excess of general vascular excitement often accompanied inflammations of the
membranes of those organs. But though inflammation of membranes was often
accompanied with a high degree of general inflammatory diathesis; yet there
were likewise some kinds of those local inflammations which communicated only a
low, or an ambiguous degree of their diathesis to the general system: such are
some of those inflammations, which occasionally affect the surface of the
alimentary canal, and which appear, in general, to be of the erysipelatic kind.

SECTION II. OF FEVER WITH SYMPTOMS OF NERVOUS AFFECTION.
THE endemic fever of Jamaica, was not oftener distinguished by symptoms of
general inflammatory diathesis, than by circumstances of nervous affection. The
beginning of this form of the disease, was often characterized by a high degree
of that disagreeable affection of the stomach, as also by much of that languor
and debility, which are commonly forerunners of fevers in general. To these
symptoms succeeded a slight degree of chilliness, followed by a hot fit, which
often continued long, but seldom ran high. The pulse was small, frequent, and
easily compressed. It varied with change of posture; -- and sometimes was so
much affected when the patient was raised upright, as totally to disappear; the
heat of the body was seldom great; the secretions and exertions were generally
irregular, and the internal functions were much disordered. The mind was
usually affected, affected however in various degrees, and in various ways.
Sometimes there was a lively delirium, sometimes the delirium was low and
desponding; and, as the one or other of these was the case, the appearance of
the eye and countenance was cheerful or sad. The tongue was sometimes moist,
sometimes dry, but seldom very soul; thirst was irregular, nausea was frequent,
and the state of the stomach was generally very irritable. There was likewise,
in most cases, deep and heavy sighing, and, unless in times of preternatural
excitement, a very uncommon degree of despondency. The above were the principal
symptoms of the nervous fever of Jamaica. The paroxysms in this disease seldom
exceeded twelve hours in duration; while the termination or abatement, was
usually distinguished by sweating, though seldom by such sweatings as extended
completely to every part of the body. The remissions were not by any means
perfect: the headache, and other disagreeable feelings usually abated; but
signs of languor still continued, and marks of spasmodic stricture for the most
part remained on the surface of the skin. I may further observe, that as the
paroxysms generally increased in violence, in the progress of the fever; so it
was very seldom that the remissions put on an appearance of greater
distinctness, as the disease approached to its termination.

Such is the general history and the progress of the disease, which might be
distinguished by the name of the nervous fever of Jamaica: but besides those
circumstances, which I have mentioned above, others were sometimes found
attending it, which, though less regular and constant, deserve still to be
taken notice of. Thus the first stage of the paroxysm, instead of the more
usual appearances, was occasionally distinguished by fits, which appeared to be
of the epileptic kind. These fits in some cases were succeeded by a lively
delirium, in others by stupor or insensibility. The delirium, which was a
common symptom of this disease, ran high in several instances; though it more
generally amounted only to an absence of thought, or difficulty of
recollection. It is a circumstance of some curiosity likewise, that instead of
a paroxysm, consisting of different parts in a certain order of succession,
there was sometimes a total stupor and insensibility, which continued for a
determinate space of time, without even being succeeded by obvious marks of
fever: whilst the time of the paroxysm, in other cases, was distinguished by
such a degree of tremor and mobility, as nearly approached to the disease known
by the name of St. Vitus's dance. And further, besides these strange and
irregular appearances, spasms and excruciating pains in different parts of the
body, in many instances, were the leading, indeed almost the only symptoms of
the disease.

It is not only curious, but it is indispensably necessary in the conduct of
our practice, to observe with attention the various modes of action of the
cause of fevers, and to estimate with precision the various combinations. The
cause of fevers, in exerting its principal action on the nervous system,
sometimes produces excitement, sometimes occasions depression; effects opposite
to each other in their nature. Excitement and depression are two general and
opposite modes of action; yet besides these we often observe others, which do
not belong wholly to the one or the other, but which seem to be compounded of
both, in a manner we do not very well comprehend. This cause of fever likewise,
which acts in directly opposite ways, appears also to exert its action more
powerfully at different times on one part of the system than on another; that
is, it acts sometimes more immediately on the brain, or reasoning faculty,
sometimes more directly on the nerves, or moving powers of the body. It may
even be observed further, that all these modes of action, which are preserved
distinct at one time, are combined in various degrees at another. Thus, where
the cause of fever acts by producing excitement, lively delirium in various
degrees is the consequence; while languor, stupor, and insensibility naturally
follow the opposite mode of action. Low delirium, tremors, startings, etc. are
probably owing to a compound effect. Both modes of action succeed each other
rapidly; or perhaps both modes are actually present at the same time, though
probably in different degrees, in the different portions of the brain. This
fact at least is certain, that obvious depression is often combined with signs
of great irritability. It is a remark likewise of considerable importance, that
the natural functions are less disordered, where the cause of the disease acts
upon the nervous system internally, or principally disturbs the intellectual
powers, than where this action is obviously external: the pulse is then more
regular, though often obscure; the disposition to faint is not so great;
muscular mobility is less remarkable, and local pains are felt less acutely. On
the contrary, where this cause acts externally, or chiefly affects the moving
powers, the disposition to faint in changing posture is more remarkable;
tremors, startings, etc. are more common; appearances, in short, are more
fluctuating and often more alarming.

It is a matter not less useful than curious to distinguish the different
species of delirium in fevers, to trace the different combinations, and to mark
the apparently trivial causes, which excite, or which sometimes remove those
derangements of the reasoning faculty. It is a remark, which has been often
made, that while one delirious person in fever appears only to be in better
spirits than usual, another, or perhaps the same person in another paroxysm of
the same disease, is outrageous or perfectly furious. A third is low and
languid, absent and inattentive, or, with a fixed look of vacancy, does not
seem to be otherwise deranged, than by requiring greater time to recollect
himself. To which we may add, that there are some, who talk coolly on things in
general; but who cannot bear mention of some particular subjects.

SECTION III. OF FEVER IN WHICH ARE DISCOVERED SIGNS OF MALIGNITY.
THE fever of Jamaica, as distinguished by signs of inflammatory diathesis, or
by circumstances of nervous affection, prevailed principally at Savanna la Mar;
yet besides the above forms of the disease, th^re sometimes likewise occurred
others, which showed marks of peculiar malignity. It is difficult to define
precisely in words the character of the disease, which I now attempt to
discribe; its discriminating marks, not consisting so much in one or two
symptoms, as in a certain assemblage of circumstances residing chiefly in the
state of the eye and countenance of the patient, and conveyed with difficulty
in verbal description. I may remark, in the first place, that there was seldom
any thing very particular in the manner of invasion of this species of disease.
The cold fit was rarely violent in degree, though it was often of long
continuance: neither did the hot fit usually run high, in the common
acceptance of the word, though it was sometimes attended with circumstances
peculiarly disagreeable. The pulse varied remarkably. It was obscure, or
scarcely to be felt in some; in others it was strong, though unequally so; the
artery, in many instances, being hard and contracted, with a peculiar vibration
in the stroke. After these symptoms and others, which are usual in this stage
of fever, had continued for a longer or shorter time, sweat began to make its
appearance on the head and breast, which extending itself gradually to every
part of the body, was at last followed by a remission, tolerably perfect for
the most part, though there still remained some strange and unpleasant
sensations. It does not appear that there is any thing very uncommon in the
symptoms, which I have hitherto taken notice of: those which follow are more
characteristic. The state of the eye and countenance, afford the surest signs
of the malignity of the disease; but there is difficulty in discriminating
those appearances. The face is not unusually flushed in fevers; but, in the
present case, the countenance exhibits something else besides an appearance of
simple flushing. It is likewise grim, dark and overcast, with such marks of
confusion and distress, as if the patient were agitated by some resentful
passion. The eye is sad and desponding; and the whole appearance, in short,
indicates such a state of mind, as we should be disposed to style malignant. It
is in such a state of the countenance as I have described, that the character
of this species of fever chiefly resides; yet besides this, some other
circumstances frequently attend the disease, which are less usual in ordinary
fevers. The paroxysm for instance returned, for the most part, much sooner than
the regular period, always with greater violence, and sometimes with new and
alarming symptoms. It declined in twelve or fourteen hours; but the remission
was less perfect than the preceding one; the next return of fever, which was
likewise much earlier than the stated hour, was often ushered in by
convulsions, and the time of it occupied by stupor or coma. The tongue was
likewise irregularly moist or dry. If dry, it was generally covered with a
black scurf; if moist, with a thin glutinous coat, through which the red
surface shining obscurely, presented an appearance of a leaden color. In this
case the mouth abounded with a ropy saliva. But besides the above symptoms,
there were also violent twitchings in the stomach and bowels, sudden
squeamishness, faintness, anxiety, restlessness, frightful dreams, distressing
apprehensions, and frequently after the second paroxysm, a particular crowded
eruption (not unlike iron-burnt blisters,) on the upper lip, which for the most
part spread toward the nose. The type of this fever, it may be further
remarked, was usually of the single tertian kind, generally anticipating by
long anticipations. In most instances this malignant disposition was
discoverable at the very beginning; yet in others, no symptoms of a doubtful
nature made their appearance till after the third revolution.

SECTION IV. OF FEVERS IN WHICH ARE OBSERVED SYMPTOMS OF A PUTRESCENT TENDENCY.
WE meet with the term putrid fever, or fever with putrescent tendency, in the
writings of almost every author who has treated of the diseases of hot
climates: but though this expression is so much the common language of
practitioners, I cannot held observing, that a remitting fever, with symptoms
of a specific putrefaction, did not once occur to my observation in the island
of Jamaica, during the time that I lived in that country. I must however add,
that though a remitting fever specifically putrid is actually a rare disease;
yet I do not attempt to deny, that a putrescent tendency is frequently present
in the primae viae, in a very considerable degree; and that marks of it are
sometimes discoverable, even in the general system, at a late period of the
illness, when the vigor of life has abated, and the powers of circulation have
begun to fail. This however is so accidental and unessential, that it is only
in compliance with the general language of medical people, that I think it
necessary to describe a disease, where these symptoms are observed to prevail.
The tendency to putrefaction, which was observed in the fever of Jamaica,
sometimes begins in the primae viae; and from the primae viae was communicated
to the rest of the system; sometimes it remained confined to the limits of the
intestinal canal, throughout the whole duration of the disorder; in which case
flatulence, ructus, anxiety, nausea and thirst were the symptoms which were
chiefly troublesome: the belly likewise was generally loose, at the same time
that the stools were dark and fetid. But where this tendency was communicated
from the primae viae to the rest of the body, or othewise made its appearance
in the general system, a form of disease arose distinguished by the following
symptoms. If the tendency to putrefaction appeared at an early period, the heat
of the skin made a more disagreeable impression on the hand, than was usual in
some other fevers; the skin itself was likewise for the most part, dry and
constricted; the thirst was irregular, sometimes intense, sometimes from local
affection of the sauces, apparently little increased. -- The appearance of the
eye was often sad; sometimes it glistened with unusual brilliancy; sometimes it
seemed to be inflamed. The countenance was generally flushed, often
particularly confused, and of a grim and clouded aspect. I have however
frequently observed, where symptoms of putrescency discovered themselves at a
late period of a fever, the preceding course of which had been distinguished by
circumstances of nervous affection, that the bloom of the complexion was
uncommonly fine and delicate. To the above symptoms might be added, great
irritability of temper, general uneasiness of sensation, and disorder in all
the functions of the body. When the fever assumed this appearance, paroxysms
and remissions were generally obscure and irregular. The fever indeed often
subsided in a small degree; but the future remissions generally became less
distinct, as the disease proceeded in its course. The tongue assumed different
appearances, at different periods and in different persons. In some it was
moist, in others parched and dry. It was not universally foul, at least it
frequently happened, that the edges were clear and beautifully red in their
color. The lips likewise were sometimes smooth, and of a cherry-like
appearance; at the same time that the gums were inflamed and spongy, as they
usually are in scurvy: the pulse likewise was small for the most part; but it
was irregularly so. I say nothing of the disposition to faint in erect posture,
which though generally enumerated among the signs of putrid fevers by authors,
does not in fact appear to constitute a criterion of the disease.

SECTION V. OF FEVERS ACCOMPANIED WITH AN INCREASED SECRETION OF BILE.
THOSE species of fevers, which I have mentioned above, seem to affect the
general system, or every part of the body nearly alike; but besides these, we
sometimes meet with others, which are distinguished by local affections, or
increased determinations to particular parts in a degree so remarkable, as to
personate very exactly a peripneumony, a hepatitis, or inflammation of the
bowels; the accompanying fever being at the same time so slight, as scarcely to
be considered as a primary affection. As an accident similar to these local
affections of the liver or lungs, we may reckon an increased secretion of bile.
The cause of fever, from circumstances which we do not always perceive,
sometimes acts with particular violence on the biliary system, in consequence
of which the secretion of bile being preternaturally increased, a disease
arises, which without much impropriety may be called bilious. But though this
irregular action of the morbid cause, on the biliary system, frequently gives
rise to bilious appearances in the fevers of Jamaica; yet these appearances are
in fact often owing to causes more accidental, and more remote than even this.
Nausea and vomiting are among the common symptoms of fevers in every country;
but they are particularly frequent in those of the West Indies. It is well
known that a continuance of nausea, or that a repetition of the action of
vomiting, increases the determination, not only to the stomach, but likewise to
the parts which are near to it. Hence the secretion of bile is preternaturally
increased secondarily by the ordinary effect of vomiting, and bilious
appearances become a necessary consequence of this accidental symptom of the
disease. In those two manners, viz. in consequence of the irregular action of
the morbid cause on the immediately biliary system, or from a secondary effect
in consequence of its action on the stomach, the the bilious fever may, in some
respects, be considered as a disease of nature; but besides this, it often
originates from our own treatment, viz. from the repeated use of emetics, or of
cathartics, which are violent in their operation. The accidental appearance of
bilious vomitings, in the fevers of hot climates, furnished medical authors
with a pretense of forming a new theory, and of directing the mode of practice
to a particular view. Influenced by this appearance, they assume it as a fact,
that a vitiated quality, or a redundant quantity of bile constitutes the
essential cause of the disease; and on this foundation adopt the plan of
repeated evacuating, both upwards and downwards; a practice which evidently
increases the secretion of the bile. Hence, a disease, or the symptom of a
disease, arises wholly from this mode of treatment; and the removal or cure of
it is afterward attempted by a perseverance in the means, which originally
gave rise to it: -- of this I have seen numerous examples.

I have now described the remitting fever of Jamaica, as characterised by
symptoms of a different appearance. I may further remark, that where these
symptoms were unmixed with each other, there was little difficulty in the
distinction, and little embarrassment in planning or executing the indications
of cure: but it sometimes also happened, that the different species, which I
have described separately, was so perplexed and complicated, that it appeared
uncertain to which kind the disease properly belonged; or to which view the
practice ought to be principally directed. Symptoms of putrescency, for
instance, were often combined with symptoms of apparent inflammatory diathesis;
as fevers with nervous affection, or putrescent tendency, were sometimes
accompanied with marks of peculiar malignity. It happened often likewise, that
the nature of the disease suffered a total change after a certain duration; or
that a fever with one train of symptoms ceased, whilst another with a different
train began.

It would be a matter of no small importance, were we able to ascertain the
various causes, which influence the various appearances of the same disease;
but this knowledge is not easily attained: -- much of it indeed lies beyond the
reach of our comprehension. We may however remark, that the season of the year
usually has some effect on the diathesis of the system, and often on the type
and form of the fever. Thus, in the dry season, though the remissions are not
always more perfect, the type is commonly more simple, and the general
diathesis is oftener inflammatory. In the rainy months, on the contrary,
remissions are more perceivable, but the type is more complicated, and the
general diathesis of the system has a stronger tendency to putrescency, often
with a mixture of symptoms of nervous affection, sometimes with symptoms of a
malignant nature. The stomach, bowels, and biliary system likewise suffer more
in this season than in the drier months of the year. But besides this
difference, which arises from season, we also find very constant effects from
local situation. Thus in hilly countries there is generally more of the
inflammatory diathesis, with more frequent determination to the head and lungs,
and less obvious remissions, than in flat and champaign countries, where the
stomach and biliary system suffer in a more peculiar manner.

CHAP. VII. OF PROGNOSTIC IN THE FEVERS OF JAMAICA.
TO be able to perceive at a distance, the approach of danger or returning
health, is a knowledge highly satisfactory and useful to the physician; but it
is a knowledge which is not easily attained: for to judge with certainty of the
event of fevers, requires not only long and attentive observation, but a
discrimination of complicated and ambiguous appearances, which does not depend
always upon attention alone. The sagacious Hippocrates is generally considered
as the first, who laid the foundation of the science of prognostic; and we
certainly must allow, that he has left us many important and valuable
observations on the subject; yet we may also add, that his decisions in many
instances, are precipitate. Hippocrates seems generally to have placed too
great confidence in signs separately considered, and to have formed his
conclusions too often on the authority of single facts. Thus he has sometimes
considered as fatal in themselves those signs, which in reality are only
dangerous. The absolutely fatal signs in fevers are actually few in number. I
am able to affirm, from my own experience, that people are sometimes restored
to health after many of the usually reputed forerunners of death are present.
We have, in fact, as yet only an imperfect knowledge of prognostic in fevers;
but the field is still open, and careful observation, it is to be hoped, may
enable us in time to supply the defects. I dare not venture to assert, that I
have advanced beyond others in this necessary and difficult science; but I am
disposed to flatter myself, that the following attempt to appreciate the marks
of danger or safety in the fevers of Jamaica, may be found in some degree
useful. It contains the result of my own observations in that country; and
though I am perfectly conscious that the rules are often defective, yet I
likewise know, that I have suggested some hints which have not been commonly
observed, and which may help to direct those, who have not had much experience
of their own.

Prognostic is such, as applies to fevers in general, or more particularly to
the different species of the disease. The type or form, the general course and
tenor of the disorders, and the general nature of the paroxysms often afford
useful information. From the type alone, we do not often obtain much that is to
be depended upon. Long and distinct intermissions are commonly accounted signs
of safety; yet we frequently see instances of the single tertian proving fatal,
while types of greater complication are often void of danger: in general,
however, complicated types are (...) and perhaps more commonly fatal than
others. But though a knowledge of the type of the fever abstractedly
considered, does not commonly afford any material indication of danger or
safety, yet the time of the return of the paroxysm is a subject, from which
more may be learned. An anticipation of an hour or two, is seldom much to be
regarded; yet an anticipation of ten or twelve is always suspicious. It either
indicates a latent malignity, or a tendency in the disease to change to a
continued form. The complication of another fever, or the doubling of type is
by no means favorable; yet it is much less to be dreaded, than a long and an
irregular anticipation. Anticipations have been generally considered as signs
of the increasing force of the fever; so the type which postpones, is usually
believed to indicate a disease, which is hastening to a favorable termination:
the effect however is sometimes the contrary. I have myself seen some
instances, where, in consequence perhaps of weakness and impaired sensibility,
the return of the fatal paroxysm, though it probably ha^ commenced sooner, was
not clearly perceived till after the usual hour of attack. But besides those
indications of danger or safety, which may be drawn from the nature of the
simple type, or from the hour of return of the paroxysm, the state of the
paroxysms and remissions deserves likewise to be attended to. It was generally
observed where the paroxysms were regular, and assumed a completer form in the
progress of the disease, that there was not generally much reason to dread an
unfavourable event. Hopes of safety might likewise be entertained with still
greater confidence, where the paroxysms, though more violent in degree, became
more regular and distinct after the use of bark, wine and stimulants. On the
contrary, it was always an indication of danger, where they became longer or
lost the distinctness and regularity of their form, as the disease advanced in
its progress. Changes from bad to good, in the course of the fever, also
indicated more safety as the opposite changes indicated more danger, than if
circumstances equally unfavourable had continued from the beginning.

In enumerating those particular signs or symptoms, from which we are led to
form a judgment of the event of the remitting fever of Jamaica, I shall
consider in the first place the state of the pulse. The pulse is so differently
affected by the same causes in different people, and individually subject to so
many peculiarities, that conclusions formed solely upon this basis must ever be
fallacious. Hippocrates, who has treated very fully of the other signs of
prognostic, is totally silent on the subject of the pulse. He has mentioned the
term, indeed, in several parts of his works; but it does not appear, that he
had a perfect knowledge of the nature and indications of the pulsations of the
arteries. The subject was somewhat better understood before the time of Celsus:
yet this author does not believe, that any information could be drawn from the
state of the pulse alone, which was in any great degree to be depended upon.
Galen, who is generally diffuse on every subject, has treated very fully of the
nature of the pulse. He has indeed multiplied distinctions to an amazing
extent, and suggested combinations of endless variety; yet notwithstanding this
apparent minuteness, there are still several important observations with
respect to it, which have escaped him altogether. It is not many years ago,
that Dr. Solano, a Spanish physician who practiced at Antequiera, opened some
new and curious views concerning the pulse, and its various indications.

The detail of facts with which this writer has furnished us, is really
wonderful, and the candor with which he has related them, independent of the
testimony of several respectable authorities, engages us to give him credit. I
had not heard of Solano's discoveries at the time I lived in Jamaica, and I do
not find that I had ever taken notice of observations similar to those he has
mentioned. I was able indeed, for the most part, to foretell from the nature of
the pulse, even in the beginning of the disease, whether the fever would be of
a continued or remitting form; but I did not discover any signs from it, which
led me to form a judgment of the future mode of termination. I may add, that I
met not with any instances of crisis by haemorrhage; neither did I ever take
notice of the rebounding pulse. The intermitting pulse occurred frequently,
sometimes as a forerunner of death, sometimes as an attendant of favorable
crisis: but I cannot say, that I observed that it ever presaged a future
diarrhea. I shall however pass over the observations of others without further
comment for the present, and content myself with relating those circumstances
of pulse connected with danger or safety, as they occurred to my own
observation in the remitting fever of the West Indies. I must remark in the
first place, that independent of peculiarities of constitution, a weak, a
feeble and easily compressed pulse was generally a bad one: a pulse which was
indistinct and small, or small and hard, particularly at a late period of the
disease, or together with delirium or clammy sweats, indicated for the most
part, the most extreme degree of danger. That species of pulse moreover, where
the stroke was obscure, or felt with difficulty, was suspicious at all times;
but it was particularly dangerous where accompanied with a wavering, a
tremulous, a constantly creeping or vermicular motion in the artery. I am not
certain that my meaning will be clearly understood; yet I believe that those
who have once observed this tremulous and creeping pulse, will not easily
forget the danger which it indicates. It often attended a fever of a malignant
kind, where the nervous influence appeared in some degree, to be suspended. --
But to proceed: it is an observation so well known as to render any mention of
it almost superfluous, that a frequent, an irregular, a fluttering and
intermitting pulse commonly indicates danger, sometimes approaching death: yet
I must add, that an intermitting pulse sometimes attended the favorable crisis
of a peculiar species of fever. It was observed, however, in such cases, that
the pulse was not otherwise irregular, than by failing in its stroke at the end
of every third or fourth pulsation, neither was it generally found to be
uncommonly frequent. Some instances of this singular appearance occurred to me
during the time that I remained in Jamaica: so that I was in some degree
disposed to rank the intermitting pulse among the signs of favorable crisis,
in a species of fever, the preceding course of which had been distinguished by
symptoms of a peculiar nervous affection. When I became acquainted afterward
with the observations of Dr. Solano, I began to doubt whether the intermission
of pulse, which I had met with in the fevers of Jamaica, might not have been a
sign of approaching diarrhea, which had not occurred to my notice, rather than
a sign of proper crisis, as I had formerly imagined. I remained in this
uncertainty till lately, that some instances of this symptom happening at the
termination of fevers in this country, have helped to confirm me in the opinion
which I entertained before. I found in those cases to which I allude, that the
pulse intermitted after every third or fourth stroke on the day, on which I
expected the crisis. The intermission of the pulse was not of such a nature as
indicated approaching death; I therefore looked watchfully for a diarrhea, but
no diarrhea ensued. It must be confessed, indeed, that one of the patients
seemed to be much distressed with gripes and flatus; but being deprived of the
power of speech we could not obtain any accurate idea of his feelings: and no
evacuation actually took place, till the day following, before which time the
intermission had disappeared altogether. -- Besides the above, there are some
other signs of pulse which have their particular indications; but they are so
generally known, that it will not be necessary to enlarge on the subject. I
shall therefore only observe further, that changes from better to worse in the
state of the pulse, as the disease advances in its progress, are bad, while the
opposite changes are favorable: yet I must likewise add, that in those cases
of favorable change, it will be necessary to distinguish carefully the pulse
of coma, from the pulse of returning health. -- The difference is sometimes
scarcely to be known, except from the attending symptoms.

Next to the state of the pulse, I shall mention those appearances of the
tongue, which, together with other concomitant circumstances, frequently afford
signs of the mildness or malignity of the disease. Though we do not expect that
the tongue should be of a healthy aspect, during the continuance of a fever;
yet where it is dry only in a moderate degree, or where it is covered with a
smooth and whitish coat, the disease for the most part, is void of malignity,
though not always of danger. On the contrary, where it is immoderately dry, or
dry and black, the indications of danger are great, and I may add, still
greater where a white slimy and glutinous substance covers its surface. This
slimy state of the tongue was often seen at an early period, and as far as my
experience goes, constantly indicated malignity. To the above we may add, a
sodden or parboiled appearance of the tongue, which was not of less dangerous
import than the preceding. But besides those obviously unhealthy aspects of the
tongue, its appearance in some instances was not different from its natural
state, except in a certain lividness of color. This was constantly suspicious,
and if not fatal, was always extremely dangerous. The danger indicated by the
tongue, when it is intensely dry, rough, cracked, or ulcerated is generally
known; but I must not omit to mention, that when from a dry and unhealthy
state, it turns moist suddenly, or assumes its natural appearance, whilst the
other signs of favorable crisis did not show themselves at the same time, a
change of the mode of action of the febrile cause is indicated, -- and
generally a dangerous one. -- I say nothing of paleness and tremor, as these
symptoms only indicate certain states of general or particular debility of the
nervous system.

Vomiting is another of the alarming, and sometimes of the dangerous symptoms
of the fevers of the West Indies. If this symptom continues during the
remission of the fever, without material abatement, there is reason to dread
its consequences; but if it vanishes or abates in a very material degree at the
decline of the paroxysm, it does not deserve to be so particularly regarded.
The practice however to which it leads is often serious. Vomiting is supposed
by most practitioners to indicate emetics; but the indication is fallacious,
and the practice is often pernicious. During the time that I lived in Jamaica,
I had frequent opportunities of seeing vomitings rendered continual by the
repeated use of emetics, which before this treatment, appeared to be only
accidental symptoms during the paroxysm of the disease. I therefore at last
became cautious of pursuing this view, and have reason to believe, that if I
did not oftener do good than others, I seldomer increased the danger. But
besides the degree and frequency of the vomiting, the nature of the matters
thrown up may likewise furnish indications of the danger or safety of the
fever. The various kinds of bilious vomitings have been fully explained, and
the danger of each has been so particularly pointed out by many writers,
especially by Hippocrates, that I pass over the subject without further notice,
considering it unnecessary to repeat the observations of others. I must however
remark a more uncommon kind of vomiting, which sometimes happened in the fevers
of Jamaica, and which I believe has hitherto escaped the notice of observers.
The vomiting to which I allude in this place, is a vomiting of a clear and ropy
liquor, in which are often found swimming flakes of a darker colored mucus.
This appearance was chiefly observed, where the remissions were indistinct, and
the sweats partial and incomplete. It constantly afforded an indication of
danger, and I seldom found that the usual remedies were effectual in
restraining it. Vomitings of black and vitiated matters are commonly known to
be of the most dangerous import, -- succeeded by obscure hickupings, they are
often forerunners of death. Yet though this is generally true, I must not at
the same time omit (...) mention, that I have seen several instances of
recovery where black vomiting had prevailed for some time; and other cases
which give me room to conclude, that hickupings are not constantly fatal. I
take the present opportunity to remark, that hickup was sometimes only a
distinguishing symptom of the disease, which increased or declined with the
paroxysm; and that in other instances it attended the favorable crisis of
fevers, the preceding course of which had been characterised by symptoms of
nervous affection. This species of hickup was generally alarming in degree, and
equally inexplicable with the intermitting pulse, which I mentioned above as
sometimes attending a favorable termination. It often continued the space of
twenty-four hours, in spite of all that could be done by ^^dicine.

Next to the indications of vomiting, I shall enumerate such as may be drawn
from the presence or absence of thirst. Immoderate and unquenchable thirst has
always been reckoned an unfavourable symptom in fevers. It is so undoubtedly,
yet I have frequently seen very extraordinary degrees of it continuing for a
length of time, without particular danger. Besides the desire for liquid in
general, there is often an unconquerable longing for drinks of a particular
kind; -- a feeling which ought always to be attended to, and frequently
complied with. -- The desire for cold water is sometimes ravenous. -- I have
known it not only satiated with safety, but even with good effects. But though
this immoderate thirst is justly reckoned a bad symptom in fevers; yet an
indifference for liquid, with a dry tongue, and other marks of internal heat,
is still worse. It has indeed been generally considered as fatal; but here we
ought to distinguish, whether it proceeds from local affection of the tongue
and fauces, or from a general failure of the powers of life. In the one case it
is a mortal sign, in the other it can only be said to be dangerous.

The ancients, particularly Hippocrates and his commentator Galen, have treated
so fully of the indications of evacuations downwards, that I should be able to
do little more than to copy their observations. There is one species of
evacuation, however, which they do not appear to have described very
explicitly, and which I have often observed to be attended with great danger.
This is the frequent, small and ineffective excretion, and more particularly
copious stools, which resemble dirty water, especially if accompanied with
tension of the hypochondria and abdomen.

Medical writers have been long accustomed to form a prognostic of the event of
fevers, from pustular or scabby eruptions about the mouth: but the sign is
ambiguous, and cannot be depended upon, without many limitations. I shall
however relate that which has occurred to my own observation, without troubling
myself about the opinions of others. And I remark in the first place, that an
eruption about the corners of the mouth, and near the lips, which comes forth
freely, and soon turns into a scab, particularly if it does not appear till
after the third revolution of the disease, affords a general sign of safety, at
least it affords a sign that the complaint has attained the height of its
violence. On the contrary, an eruption which shows itself at an earlier period,
which is crowded, and makes its way with difficulty, or which resembles
iron-burnt blisters rather than pustules properly so called, particularly if it
is on the upper lip, and spreads toward the nose, affords a general indication
of danger and malignancy. -- Small and imperfect eruptions likewise are
frequently a sign of a tedious disease.

The state of animal heat is another of those circumstances, which may be
considered as affording an indication of the nature and event of fevers. Where
the heat of the body, in the remitting fever of Jamaica, was equally diffused
to the extremities, or not differing from an increased degree of natural
warmth, the disease was usually mild, without particular danger or malignity;
but where acrid, fiery and pungent, though perhaps not much increased in
degree, danger was apprehended with reason, particularly if the warmth was not
extended equally to every part of the body. In the remissions of those fevers,
which were distinguished by symptoms of nervous affection, or, as is more
commonly believed, putrescent tendency, the heat of the body was often several
degrees below the standard of health. The symptom was alarming, but it was not
in fact of much consequence. This diminution of the heat of the body, during
the remission, was not by any means a rare occurrence; but besides this, there
was sometimes observed a degree of coldness, during the favorable crisis of
nervous fevers, of a very singular and extraordinary kind. In some instances
this coldness was not inferior in degree to that of a person dying, or actually
dead; yet a distinction was perceived without difficulty. It was not
accompanied with marks of stricture on the surface of the body, at the same
time that the pulse was generally soft, regular and full.

Next to the state of animal heat it will not be improper to consider the
indications of the various kinds of sweats. The signs of a favorable sweat are
commonly known. Where that excretion was fluid, warm and universal,
particularly where accompanied with a soft, full and expanding pulse, calm and
easy respiration, general relief from symptoms of distress, with a cheerful eye
and countenance, we might in general presume on safety of the disease, often on
its favorable termination. On the contrary, where the sweat was cold, clammy
and partial, particularly where the pulse became or continued frequent, small
and tense, with anxiety, restlessness and disturbed respiration, a
circumscribed flushing, a greasy hue of the countenance, or a wild and dejected
appearance of the eye, the situation was then alarming: -- death, in short, was
seldom far off. There is, however, an observation with regard to this subject,
which I must not omit to mention. Authors, with one consent, have considered
cold sweats as certain mortal signs in fevers; but there appear to be
exceptions to this general rule. I met with several instances, while I remained
in Jamaica, where universal fluid sweats, of an extraordinary degree of
coldness, accompanied the crisis of the disease. I was much alarmed when this
appearance first occurred to me, but my fears soon vanished, as I found that
the pulse became slower and fuller, that the respiration became calm and easy,
and particularly that the eye and countenance acquired such a cheerfulness and
serenity, as are usual at the favorable termination of fevers.

To the signs of prognostic, which I have mentioned above, I shall add those
which are indicated by the general state of the vital powers, or by the more
particular affection of parts, which are of immediate importance to life. Among
the first of the affections of the vital organs, we shall consider such
indications as arise from a disturbed state of respiration. A frequent, a
hurried and unequal respiration, (I do not speak of that which depends on
primary affection of the lungs), is justly considered as a sign of a bad
disease. This is more certainly the case, where accompanied with deep and heavy
sighing. Frequent sighing was a common symptom in the fevers of Jamaica, where
the powers of life were depressed; and though not absolutely a mortal sign, it
constantly indicated danger.

Next to the state of respiration, I shall mention the state of the intellect,
or reasoning faculty, which often afforded some prognostic of the event of the
fever. Delirium, I observed before, was a common symptom in the remitting fever
of Jamaica. Where it vanished or abated as the paroxysm declined, it was seldom
found to be of material consequence. On the contrary, where it continued during
the remission undiminished in degree, it was a symptom of the most serious
nature. I mentioned in a former part of this treatise, that the cause of fever
appeared to act on the brain and nervous system, in two general and opposite
ways; that is, by occasioning excitement or depression. Of these two modes of
action, depression was the most dangerous; unless where the excitement ran
uncommonly high. But though I observed, that there are only two general modes
of operation, viz. excitement and depression; yet I must also add, that the
modifications are numerous, and very variously combined. Among the most
dangerous and alarming species of the derangements of the intellect, we might
reckon a stern sullenness, an unmanageable furiousness, picking the bed
clothes, tracing figures on the wall, and such other instances of perverted
judgment. Stupor and suspension of the nervous influence, as we might term it,
were likewise greatly to be dreaded: unless they showed themselves only during
the time of the paroxysm, they were generally fatal, more certainly so, if they
followed convulsions.

As nearly connected with delirium, we shall now consider other disturbed
states of the functions of the brain, viz. the states of rest and watching. We
do not expect that sleep should be sound and undisturbed in fevers; yet we have
been accustomed to think favorably of the disease, where the patient is
refreshed by it. On the contrary, total want of rest, or unrefreshing slumbers,
constantly indicate danger. There is, however, an astonishing diversity of
constitution in this respect, that must always be taken into the account in
forming an opinion. Want of sleep was observed to give rise to delirium in some
persons very speedily; others supported it for a great length of time, without
any appearance of delirium or spasmodic affection. An appearance of sleeping,
without actually enjoying the comforts of sleep is well known to be a dangerous
symptom; yet it is not by any means a mortal one. Anxiety and restlessness, are
often referred to the stomach; but restlessness, and jactitation, as depending
on the state of the nervous system, were likewise frequent, and generally
dangerous symptoms. Tremors of the tongue and of the hands were common
appearances in fevers, with marks of nervous affection; but I have likewise met
with instances, where the whole body shook, when any motion was attempted, not
otherwise than it does in paralysis or chorea sanctiviti. Startings and
subsultus tendinum were not uncommon; and they were justly considered as
indications of danger; sometimes as forerunners of convulsion. A disposition to
faint, even actual fainting, was frequent in the fevers of this country. It was
always dangerous, though perhaps less so, than other symptoms which were less
alarming, particularly if it suffered increase and diminution with the
paroxysms and remissions of the disease. But besides these symptoms, which
indicate diminished energies, or irregular action of the nervous influence, we
may likewise observe, that the sphincter muscles frequently lose their power of
contracting, particularly in the advanced periods of fevers. Thus persons
sometimes can only lie upon their back, the eyes and mouth are half open, the
powers of speech and swallowing are impaired or lost, and urine and stools pass
off without consciousness or against their will. It is unnecessary to remark,
that these are all symptoms of the most extreme danger. If they proceed from a
general and uniform diminution of the powers of life, we may justly consider
them as fatal, if they are only produced by a certain mode of action of the
febrile cause, and are remarkably increased during the paroxysm, or aggravated
by peculiar circumstances of constitution, we shall find many instances of
recovery. Thus, I have often seen people recover, who could neither speak nor
swallow; who did not appear even to distinguish objects, and who were unable to
retain their urine and stools; or who were not conscious when they passed; yet
I do not pretend to have met with any of these fortunate events, where these
alarming symptoms were the consequence of uniform diminution, or general
extinction of the vital principle.

From the signs which I have enumerated, separately and collectively
considered, we may in general be able to form some prognostic of the nature and
event of the fevers of Jamaica. If to these we add those indications, which may
be taken from the state of the eye and countenance, we may attain a still more
satisfactory knowledge. It is an observation which I have constantly found to
be true, that where the eye and countenance were serene and cheerful, the
disease was void of any latent malignity, though it might be otherwise of a
dangerous nature. On the contrary, where the appearance of the eye was sad,
watery, inflamed, or uncommonly glistening; where the countenance was of a
dreary hue, downcast, dark and clouded; and sometimes where it was of a
beautiful blooming color, which was not natural to the patient, there was
always reason to suspect danger. But though a serene and cheerful eye and
countenance are generally indications of safety, I must not at the same time
omit to mention, that it sometimes happens in beginning mortifications, or in
imperfect or unfavourable crisis, that the eye and countenance assume, for a
short time, this flattering appearance of serenity and composure, though the
hour of death is actually approaching fast. The indications from the eye and
countenance are of the greatest importance, in enabling us to form a judgment
of the event of fevers; but little of this knowledge is, in fact, communicable
in words. It must be drawn, in a great measure, from our own observations.

I do not pretend that the signs of prognostic, which I have enumerated in the
preceding pages, are by any means complete, if referred to fevers in general;
but I at the same time believe, that they are less defective, if applied more
directly to the remitting fever of Jamaica. They were collected at a time when
I was not much acquainted with books: and, on that account, I am induced to
offer them to the public with more confidence; particularly, as I find that the
indications, to which I have principally trusted, appeared in the same light to
some authors, who are universally considered as careful observers, and who
practiced in climates, in many respects, similar to that of the West Indies. I
have discriminated, as far as was in my power, between the doubtful and more
certain appearances of danger or safety; and I hope I have no where advanced
any thing, which has a tendency to mislead the uninformed. I may add, that
general knowledge in prognostic goes no farther than a very rude outline, which
individuals must fill up from their own experience. There are, in fact, few
signs in fevers, which are absolutely decisive in themselves; and as these
signs are often variously combined, so they must be separately and collectively
estimated. It is only from considering accurately the result of the whole, that
we can be enabled to speak with confidence.

CHAP. VIII. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A CRISIS AND SIMPLE REMISSION.
IT is certainly a matter of some importance, to be able to distinguish between
actual crisis and the simple remission of the fever of Jamaica; but it is a
matter about which the practitioners of that country did not seem much to
concern themselves. A difference undoubtedly exists, and the marks of it
appeared to me clear and unequivocal in most instances. It was otherwise in the
intermitting fever of America. In the pure intermitting fever of that country,
I sometimes guessed luckily; but I cannot say positively, that I ever
discovered signs on which I could depend with absolute certainty, that the
fever was gone, not to return again, till the hour of return was past. In this
disease, on the contrary, I should not expect to be deceived once in a hundred
times. Much of this information, however, is too minute to be intelligibly
explained in words, and therefore can only be acquired by actual observation.

I shall attempt to enumerate the principal of those signs, from which we may
be enabled to attain some knowledge of the difference between actual crisis and
temporary remission: and in the first place I remark, that the tongue was
usually rough and dry, even during the most perfect remissions of the endemic
fever of Jamaica. If it therefore happened, that it assumed a smooth and moist
appearance at the end of a paroxysm, there generally was reason to believe that
the fever was gone, not to return again. This presumption was still stronger,
where its edges acquired the cherry-like color of health; and particularly
where the coat, with which it was usually covered, showed a disposition to
loosen and separate. It must however be remarked, that though these appearances
of the tongue afforded a common mark of the termination of fevers, they did not
by any means afford a decisive one. Instead of crisis, they sometimes only
indicated a change in the mode of action of the febrile cause; they were, in
short, in some cases only forerunners of symptoms of nervous affection, or
marks of a change from a continued to a remitting or intermitting form. Such
are the presumptions of actual crisis, which might be drawn from the
appearances of the tongue, where the tongue happened to be remarkably changed
from its natural appearance in the preceding course of the disease. But it also
sometimes happened in cases of the single tertian, where the paroxysms were
slight, and the remissions long and perfect, that the tongue was so little
altered by the presence of the fever, as not to afford any certain criterion
between the remission and actual crisis. In some fevers likewise of a malignant
kind, the tongue was sometimes smooth and moist, even red and clear on the
edges, whilst the disease was advancing rapidly. This, however, so far as I
have seen was constantly connected with a particular state of the stomach, viz.
with nausea, or with vomitting of a viscous liquor.

Signs of crisis taken from the pulse alone, were not in general much to be
depended upon in the fevers of Jamaica; yet, together with other circumstances,
the state of the pulse might often help us to decide in doubtful situations.
Changes from bad to better, if no symptoms of comatose affection appeared at
the same time, were generally considered as indicating crisis, or tendency to
crisis, yet it will be less expected, perhaps, that I should rank the
intermitting pulse among the signs, which indicate a favorable termination of
the disease. Some instances of this have occured to me, both in the West Indies
and in England; but though I mention the fact, I confess myself unable to offer
an explanation of it.

The state of the skin affords marks more decisive of the total or temporary
absence of fever, than the ordinary state of the pulse. When the sweat, which
in the preceding remissions had been partial and imperfect, became copious,
fluid, universal and of long continuance, there was generally a presumption of
crisis. But independent of the nature of the sweat, there is something in the
state of the skin, something in the impression which it makes on the hand which
feels it, very different when the fever has only remitted, and when it has
terminated finally. Though it may be difficult, perhaps impossible, to mark
this distinction precisely in words; yet it is easily known to those, who
accustom themselves to observe minute circumstances with attention. There was,
in fact, no indication of that spasmodic stricture on the surface, which had
been observable in the former remissions, and we might say, that the body was
perspirable, even in the extreme parts. It is a circumstance likewise not a
little curious, that the heat of the body, during a crisis, particularly in
those fevers, which had principally affected the nervous system, was sometimes
so much below what it usually is in health, as to be really alarming. In some
instances, I have found the extremities to be not less cold, than if the
patient had been actually dead; yet this coldness was of such a nature, as to
be distinguished without much difficulty from that which precedes death.

The above is only a very imperfect history of those signs, which actually
distinguish the crisis of fever from a simple remission. There are still some
others, not less to be depended upon, perhaps, but which cannot be so easily
reduced to distinct description. -- Among these, we may reckon unusual
evacuations upwards or downwards, sound and refreshing sleep, where
watchfulness had prevailed through the preceding course of the disease, return
of natural appetites, decrease of thirst, loosening of scabby eruptions, and
above all, a certain expression of cheerfulness in the eye and countenance,
which though not to be defined in words, conveys to the mind of the observer, a
strong conviction of what is going forward. This brightness of the eye was well
known to Hippocrates, as a salutary sign in fevers; but though it generally
affords a very decided indication of a favorable event; yet we must be careful
to distinguish from it that clear and glassy appearance, which the eye
sometimes acquires previous to death.

CHAP. IX. THE GENERAL CURE OF FEVER.
BEFORE I attempt to offer rules for the treatment of the remitting fever of
Jamaica, it will be proper to consider in the first place, how far the cure of
the disease is the work of nature, and how far it already has been, or
hereafter may be accomplished by the exertions of art. The question is
important, and till its limits are defined, we cannot hope to establish rules
of practice on a firm basis, or to conduct a mode of treatment on a consistent
plan. It will be necessary however, before entering farther into this subject,
to consider the power of the vis medicatrix naturae: -- a principle, which
under one name or other, has influenced the views of medical men from the
earliest records of physic, till the present times.

SECTION I. OF THE VIS MEDICATRIX NATURAE.
IT is an opinion, which seems either to have been expressly avowed, or tacitly
acknowledged in every age of the world, that a fever is a combat or effort of
nature, to remove from the system the derangements of a morbid cause; or in
other words, to restore a diseased body to its ordinary health. It was long
believed, that the powers of the constitution made an attempt to concoct the
crude and undigested humors; -- and finally to expel them from the body. But
this mode of reasoning is found to be unsatisfactory: and some late authors
have adopted the idea, that nature directs her efforts toward effecting a
solution of spasm, on the presence and obstinacy of which the disease has been
thought, in some measure, to depend. It will be a hard task to reconcile this
difference of opinion, or to say which is the right one. There are plausible
arguments on both sides of the question; and neither supposition, perhaps, is
accurately true. The coction of humors (as it may be called) is often
apparently connected with evident approaches toward a relaxation of spasmodic
stricture; and increased discharges by the different excretories, are obviously
attendants of its actual solution. Yet though this is certainly true, it still
is not clear, that either the coction of the humors, or the solution of the
spasm, is the real effect of a regular mechanic operation of the powers of
nature, attempting by this means to overcome the destructive tendency of the
disease. It is even more probable, that the coction of the humors, or solution
of the spasm are only circumstances of accident, occasionally connected with
certain states of action of the morbid cause; but which do not arise from the
regular design of nature to accomplish this purpose. I just now observed, that
there is a difference of opinion about the mode of operation, which nature
employs to combat the effects of the disease; but I may add, that no body, as
far as I know, attempts to deny the existence of such a principle in the
constitution of the frame, as disposes it to restore its own health by a
certain train of regular efforts. On the first view of the subject, indeed,
there are many circumstances which give countenance to the opinion. The relief
which often follows hemorrhage, sweat and other evacuations in unusual
quantity; and still more, the relief, which attends the eruption of the small
pox, or the appearance of gout on the extremities, undoubtedly affords a strong
presumptive argument, that nature raises some active and generally well
directed efforts, which remove from the body a cause that disturbs the ordinary
functions of health. But though the above circumstances are commonly known, and
may be supposed to afford an argument in support of this opinion; yet the fact
may perhaps admit of another explanation, while there are other appearances,
connected with the subject, which render the existence of this regular design
of nature very questionable. When I say, that I cannot readily allow the vis
m^dicatrix naturae, (in the sense in which it is generally understood), to be
an established principle in the constitution of the frame, I am aware, that I
incur an imputation of of presumption. An opinion, venerable from antiquity,
and supported by many plausible arguments, might be thought to be secure from
the attacks of a man, who has no professional reputation to boast of: yet as no
desire of novelty has induced me to fabricate a conjecture on a dark subject,
so I humbly hope I may be indulged in my attempt to explain an important truth.
The sanction of two thousand years, and the authority of the names who support
this doctrine, are formidable opponents; yet I trust I may be able to prove,
that the vis medicatrix naturae does not, as is commonly believed, restore the
health of the body by one general and uniform mode of operation; or that our
diseases are not removed in consequence of a regular design in the mechanism of
the frame. I shall relate the fact from which I have been led to form this
conclusion; for the refutation or confirmation of which, I require no other
indulgence than a candid enquiry.

I have just now declared, that fever, or the cause of fever, is not combated
and finally overcome by a regular train of active efforts, or a vis medicatrix
naturae; and I must observe in proof of it, that there were many of the fevers
of the West Indies, where the disease, or the paroxysm of the disease, vanished
or declined, without any exertion on the part of nature being perceiveable. The
powers of life, during this period, were in some degree suspended. The patient,
who could only be said not to be actually dead, was totally insensible to every
object that was near to him; and often did not feel the irritation of acrid
substances that were applied to him: yet after a certain continuance in this
state, he began to resume his powers of sensation and motion; and the disease
at last subsided or vanished, though the efforts of nature were not discovered;
nay, though the vital powers were sometimes in a state so weakened, as to be
apparently very little capable of effort. This fact, which the most superficial
observer could not easily overlook, furnishes sufficient reason for doubting of
the very existence of a vis medicatrix naturae; a doubt which is further
corroborated, by observing the manner in which death frequently approaches in
the fevers of Jamaica. It is known, that the sufferings of the patient are
sometimes alleviated for a short time before death. This alleviation, wherever
it does take place, happens constantly at the expected period of crisis. The
cause of it has generally been attributed to the vis medicatrix naturae; that
is, to a last effort of the powers of life; but I have weighed carefully all
the circumstances connected with the phenomenon, and cannot readily assent to
the opinion. To indulge in conjectures, is contrary to the principles I
profess; yet I must suggest, that a fever, or the paroxysm of a fever,
terminates, strictly speaking, from a hidden something in the nature of the
febrile cause, from something which ceases to act, or which changes its mode of
action after a certain duration. I do not pretend to explain the manner in
which this happens. I only add, that the fact is supported by probabilities. It
was frequently observed, in such cases of fever as terminated fatally, that
there was actually a period of time, generally the period immediately preceding
a decided fatal termination, where the real presence of disease was perceived
with difficulty. The patient, however, was unable to recover. Death happened in
a very few hours, and it seemed to ensue in such cases, from one of the
following causes, viz. either from the mechanism of a part of vital importance
being destroyed; from the powers of nature being too much exhausted to continue
life; or perhaps still oftener, from the recurrence of the disease, in another
form, speedily putting a period to existence, while the vital principle was in
this weakened state. But though the circumstances, which I have mentioned,
afford grounds for believing that a fever, or the paroxysm of a fever, is not
actually removed from the body, solely by the efforts of a vis medicatrix
naturae; yet if we choose to proceed further in the investigation, it will be
no difficult task to involve this opinion, which has hitherto been considered
almost as sacred, in still greater perplexity. If we admit of the existence of
a vis medicatrix naturae, it will not be easy to conceive, how a fever, which
has once been expelled from the body, should return again in a given time, or
how the alternate paroxysms of the double tertian, for instance, should be of
such different duration or of such different degrees of violence in the same
person; neither can we understand, how a fever of one kind should last only
seven days, another fourteen, and another twenty, or longer: -- circumstances
which happen daily, without the least apparent connection with the innate vigor
of constitution. We shall be equally puzzled likewise, if we attempt to explain
on the supposition of this principle, how a fever should continue, while the
powers of the constitution are vigorous and strong, and cease when they are
apparently exhausted. The above are well known facts, and do not leave any room
to doubt, that the termination of fever, or of the paroxysm of fever, depends
on some other principle besides the mere efforts of the vis medicatrix naturae.
Whether this resides, as was hinted before, in a hidden modification of the
nature of the cause, which ceases to act, or changes its mode of action after a
certain duration; or whether, combined with this, the constant but
imperceptible changes, which are continually going on in the system, destroy in
the frame of the individual, that particular state of aptitude to the febrile
cause, in which the disease consists, we cannot determine with certainty; yet
it would be obstinate to maintain any longer, that the cure of fever is owing
to general and well directed efforts of nature, expelling a morbific matter or
overcoming a prevailing spasm. It is true, that an obvious solution of
spasmodic stricture, or the appearance of a morbid matter on the less important
parts of the body, usually attend the favorable termination of fevers; yet
these circumstances are, in fact, attendants rather than causes of crisis. I do
not deny, that increased discharges by different outlets, sometimes moderate
the violence of fever during its continuance, as well as attend its final
solution; yet it has not, nor perhaps can it ever be demonstrated, that this
proceeds from a regular design of nature.

The hints which have been thrown out in the preceding pages, give room for
supposing that the vis medicatrix naturae, in the sense in which it is usually
understood by medical writers, is only a principle of doubtful existence in the
constitution of the frame; yet though this is certainly true, I do not pretend
to deny, that the animal machine is endued with a power, which resists, in some
measure, the derangements of a destroying cause, and which persists to a
certain degree in continuing the action of living. The general nature of the
cause of fever, or the nature of its various modifications is a mystery, which
we do not as yet know. We only know, that when present in a certain state of
vigor and activity, it deranges or disturbs the actions and functions of the
system; -- while we likewise know, that it does not always disturb every action
or every function in the same degree. It has occurred too often to have escaped
the most superficial observation, that where one part of the body suffers
particularly, the others are often relieved in proportion. We frequently in
this manner observe, that general fever is diminished by the appearance of
local pain; or, on the contrary, increased by its removal. It likewise often
happens from the same principle, that where the stomach and biliary system
suffer much, there is less disorder in the other parts: and on the other hand,
that where these sufferings are removed or mitigated, the general fever runs
higher, and often continues high, till the same, or other local affections, are
again produced. Thus, though we are totally ignorant of the intimate nature of
the cause of fever, we still perceive very plainly, that it either possesses
something in its own nature, or accidentally meets with something in the
constitution of the individual, which determines it to affect the different
parts of the body in an unequal degree. It usually exerts its greatest force
upon parts, which are preternaturally weakened by the general influence of
climate, season, situation, or other accidental ca^ses. Hence bilious
appearances are common in the hot months of hot climates, pneumonic affection
in cold and dry weather, greater degrees of vascular excitement among the
temperate and more active races of men; while symptoms of nervous affection
prevail among the luxurious and enfeebled. The above, with other species of the
increased action of the cause of fever on a particular part of the body, depend
wholly, perhaps, on circumstances of accident; yet it has so happened, that
those irregular determinations have unfortunately been considered as the
efforts, which nature employs to expel from the body a cause, which disturbs
the economy of health. I shall not, at present, go so far as to contend, that
these determinations are not, in fact, intentions of nature; but shall only beg
leave to suggest, if they actually are intentions, that it is mere chance which
determines whether they are salutary or fatal. It is a truth which nobody will
deny, where the force of the disease is accidentally directed to an organ of
excretion, or to a part of little importance to life, that the rest of the body
is often proportionally relieved, and even that a recovery of general health is
sometimes the consequence; yet the contrary is the effect, where the functions
of the part, upon which the force of the fever has been thus accidentally
diverted, are of immediate importance to the action of living. The Gout, a
disease, the cause of which bears no very remote analogy to the cause of fever,
may be adduced as affording an illustration of this truth. The proximate cause
of gout, is equally hid from us as the proximate cause of fever. We know,
however, that the one equally with the other, has a tendency to destroy life.
We likewise know, that there is a power or principle in the constitution, which
to a certain degree resists destruction. The nature of this power, however, is
unknown. We are not only in the dark with regard to its nature; but we can only
form conjectures about the part where it principally resides. -- We, however,
clearly perceive its force and activity to be different in different parts of
the body. We may next be allowed to remark, that where the cause of gout is in
a certain state of modification, tumults, (which properly enough may be termed
re-action), arise in the system, and go on to continue till this cause or
hurtful matter finds an outlet from the body, or a lodgment on one particular
part. The outlets from the body are numerous: the parts on which the gout seems
principally to fix its seat, are the extremities, where the power of resistance
is smallest. -- The vital principle, however, becomes weaker as man advances in
years; and the cause of the disorder seems then frequently to find
accommodations in parts, which are less remote from the sources of (...). This
more especially is the case, where tone and vigor have been preternaturally
weakened. Hence the stomach, the bowels, sometimes the brain, and even the
heart itself suffer from the immediate action of this disease, in the latter
periods of life. But though no person perhaps will deny, that the cause of gout
finds readiest accommodation, (if I may so apply the term) in those parts of
the body, where the vital powers are naturally weak, or have been accidentally
weakened from various causes; yet we may add, that it is likewise removed from
the parts, on which it has been thus fixed, by such applications as excite
their active powers; or, in other words, which call forth the local re-action
of the system. We may also observe, that tumults arise in the general system,
in consequence of this repression or repulsion of the morbid cause from a
particular part; and that they do not in general cease, till an outlet is
opened, or accommodation found in some other parts of the body. The above
appearances, occur daily in the history of gout. They seem to bear a strong
analogy to those irregular determinations, which frequently take place in
fevers, and their cause perhaps is the same. We do not perceive any other law
by which they can be explained, than the natural or adventitious state of
activity of the powers of life, which resist destruction with unequal force in
the different parts of the system: so that we shall be obliged to conclude,
that those sufferings, which have hitherto been styled the efforts of nature,
are in reality more of the passive, than of the active kind.

The circumstances which I have now mentioned, combat the very existence of the
opinion, which has been commonly received with regard to the vis medicatrix
naturae. I have hinted, that the extent and limits of that principle are
narrow, and that the salutary effects are accidental. I shall next endeavor to
show, that they cannot, without danger, be made the basis of the general plan
of cure in febrile diseases. The task is important, but the attempt may be
thought presumptuous, as an opinion, contrary to that which I advance, has
obtained almost the universal consent of mankind. I have no desire of changing
names, or of making distinctions, where there is in fact no difference. I
perfectly acquiesce in retaining the word vis medicatrix naturae, provided it
is limited to a certain mode of re-action, or to a power in the constitution
of resisting destruction unequally in its different parts, in consequence of
which, irregular determinations sometimes prove salutary by accident; yet I
must add, that if we mean to denote by this term a system of laws, which have
the best directed tendency to remove from the body a cause which destroys
health, and endangers life, the opinion has a very uncertain foundation. There
are few persons so ignorant, or so blindly devoted to the doctrines of (...) as
not to own, that the usually reputed efforts of nature, are often ill directed,
sometimes pernicious: in short, that they are obviously the causes of death.
The truth of this observation cannot be denied, and unfortunately it obliges
the advocates of the vis medicatrix naturae, to grant the conclusion, that the
laws of the principle are imperfect. The works of the author of nature, as far
as our limited knowledge can trace them, are universally without defect, if
examined according to the plan on which they have been originally formed. If
they appear otherwise, it becomes us to hesitate, before we decide. We may not
have comprehended the fundamental principle of the design; but we revolt from
the idea, that the execution would be left imperfect, had it been intended by
the Author of our being, that the mechanism of the frame would be such, as
should oppose and remove, in the most effectual manner, the derangements of the
morbid cause. Defect and imperfection can have no place in the works of the
Almighty. Had it actually been in the original design of our Creator, that the
human body should be provided with a system of the best concerted laws for
restoring its health, when deranged by the numerous causes of diseases, as it
is impious to suppose, that those laws could be defective; so we may reasonably
conclude, that the effects of fevers would not then have been fatal. We find
however, that fevers, as well as other diseases, are fatal to people of all
ages and descriptions: and that nature's intentions of cure, if they really are
intentions, are often destructive to herself. I need scarcely remind the reader
of examples of their pernicious tendency. Vomitting, sweating, increased
discharges by stool, etc. are generally considered as the salutary efforts of
nature: but instances are numerous, where the excess of those evacuations have
obviously proved the causes of death. In the same manner, abscesses, which in
the remote parts of the body, sometimes attend, and even sometimes perhaps
influence the favorable termination of fevers; in the brain, or in other
organs of importance, are no less certainly the cause which destroys life. In
both instances the design of nature, if it can be called a design, is the same.
The force of the disease being turned principally upon one part, the rest of
the body is in a great measure relieved from its sufferings; -- but the health
and structure of the part are hurt or destroyed by the change; and it depends
wholly upon the accidental importance of the organ, upon which this diversion
has been made, whether death or recovery is the consequence. Thus it often
happens, that the reputed indications of nature prove the immediate causes
which destroy the existence of the individual; a fact not reconcilable, with
the infinite power and wisdom of the Author of our being.

I have insinuated, that the efforts of nature are uncertain and precarious.
They depend on accidental determinations to different parts of the body; and I
may add, that if we endeavor to investigate the cause, which directs the
mechanism of the frame, to adopt one species of effort, or one mode of
determination in preference to another, we shall not perhaps be able to find
any other, than a difference in the states of the powers of life, which resist
destruction with unequal degrees of force in the different parts of the body.
Where there is the least resistance, either from the natural or accidental
circumstances of the constitution, there the disease most obviously exerts its
greatest force. Hence we are sufficiently warranted to conclude, that though
the structure of the human body is perfect with respect to every purpose for
which it is intended, being only endued with a principle, which resists
destruction, or persists in continuing life to a certain degree; yet that it is
extremely defective, if we consider it as a machine furnished with a system of
laws, which have an invariable and well directed tendency to restore health by
the most judicious and rational efforts. The restoration of health, in
consequence of this re-action, or irregular determination which takes place in
the system, is only a circumstance of accident. The skill of man sometimes
succeeds, where the efforts of nature have obviously failed.

SECTION II. OF THE GENERAL INDICATIONS OF CURE IN FEVERS.
THE vis medicatrix naturae, has been hitherto esteemed a principle of much
importance in the cure of febrile diseases. I have attempted to explain its
real limits and extent; but am afraid I may not have done it satisfactorily. A
tumult which, properly enough perhaps, may be termed a reaction of the system,
evidently takes place in consequence of the application of a morbid cause; but
there seems to be little reason for believing, that this reaction points out
the best method of cure, or wholly by itself accomplishes this important
business. But though the reputed efforts of nature are thus defective in
accomplishing the cure of fevers; yet I do not deny, that there is a general
tendency in fevers, or in the paroxysm of fevers, to terminate in a given time,
often by a fixed and regular mode of termination. We do not, however, by any
means comprehend the cause upon which this depends. From the similarity in the
progress and termination of epidemics, as well as from the steadiness with
which various sorts of fevers pursue their course, in spite of the most
opposite modes of treatment, we are led to conclude, that there is something
peculiar in the modification of the cause, which influences the duration of the
disease. This at present, is unknown; perhaps is a knowledge which we cannot
attain; yet if we take pains to observe the course of fevers with attention, we
may discover some rules of practical use. We know that one species of febrile
diseases, obstinately pursues its course, notwithstanding every endeavor to
oppose it; while another is so totally under our management, as to be stopped
short at pleasure with almost infallible certainty. It thus happens, that the
intermittent is perfectly under our control. Over the continued, and even over
the remitting fever of Jamaica, I am afraid, we shall be obliged to confess,
that we possess no very certain power. -- But I shall examine this subject more
particularly.

When I first arrived in Jamaica, in the year 1774, I found that the
practitioners of that country very generally believed, that the course of the
ordinary endemic fever was checked with great certainty by the powers of
Peruvian bark. This opinion, indeed, is found in every medical book, and it
appeared frequently, on the first view of the subject, to be well founded. No
great space of time, however, elapsed before some circumstances were observed,
which presented the matter in a different light. I found in many instances,
that bark was given in the first remission, or on the second day of the
disease; in others, it was not given till the third remission, or till the
sixth day from the beginning of the complaint; and in some again, the fever
disappeared altogether before a single grain of this remedy had been
administered. I was particularly exact in marking the time or the period of the
disease, at which the bark was begun to be given, as also the quantity which
was taken upon the whole. The result was not such as might have been expected.
Notwithstanding the most opposite modes of treatment, the disease appeared to
terminate or change about the same periods in almost every patient. This fact
was confirmed in numerous instances; and it seems to afford a very unequivocal
proof, that bark, in the quantity in which it is commonly prescribed in the
West Indies, has not the effects which are usually ascribed to it. I do not,
however, infer, that this remedy may not be capable, with more decisive modes
of management, of effecting all that has been expected from it. I had not,
during the time that I remained in Jamaica, any conception that the stomach
could have retained, or that it would have been safe to have ventured upon the
quantities of bark, which I afterward gave to others, or took myself in the
intermitting fever of America. Two scruples or a dram, every two hours, is in
fact only a small dose. To this under dose, during short remissions, we might
perhaps impute the failure of that remedy in the fevers of the West Indies.
That this actually is the case, is confirmed in some degree, by an instance
which I find recorded among my notes. A young man was seized with a fever,
about the middle of August, which showed marks of great violence from the
beginning. Bark was given early, and in larger quantity than customary. The
last paroxysm of the disease, was in some measure suspended, in consequence of
this proceeding; yet, except that the marks of external fever were obscure, the
patient remained, as usual, uneasy and distressed, till the period at which the
crisis was expected; when the marks of final termination showed themselves
distinctly. This is the only case I met with, where the paroxysms of the fever
of Jamaica were stopped, or suspended by the bark; or where external marks of
fever vanished without evident signs of crisis. It affords only a doubtful
proof of the power, which this remedy has been supposed to possess, of
absolutely cutting short the course of the endemic of that country. But though
the bark was seldom efficacious in abruptly cutting short the course of this
disease, it is no more than justice to remark, that it is a remedy which was
almost every where safe, and that it was ultimately useful in promoting the
cure. It imparted in most instances, where it was employed, a degree of tone
and vigor to the system -- a certain something to the constitution; in
consequence of which, the crisis, which we should have expected to be only
partial or imperfect, became decided and final. I have suggested those few
remarks, with regard to the virtues of Peruvian bark in the common endemic of
Jamaica; if its effects are so very doubtful in this disease, we have no reason
to expect, that they will be more certain in fevers of a more continued kind.

Besides bark, the power of which appears to be very precarious, other remedies
have been employed by physicians, with the view of cutting short the course of
fevers. -- Antimony, under one form or other, has been celebrated for this
intention, since its first introduction into medicine. James's Powder is the
most famous, and perhaps the most effectual antimonial preparation, which, as
yet, has been offered to the public. I am sorry to say, that I had not an
opportunity of making proper trial of it, in the fevers of the West Indies; but
I can add, that the emetic tartar was often found to be dangerous, scarcely
ever effectual in cutting short the course of the disease, unless given at an
early period, or before the fever had assumed a proper form. Its virtues, as a
febrifuge, were heightened by the addition of opium and camphire, I am sorry
also to remark, that I cannot speak with confidence of the virtues of James's
Powder, in the intermitting fever of America. Emetic tartar was frequently
employed, but it did not by any means answer the expectations which were
entertained of it. I acknowledge, that it might be so managed, as apparently to
prevent the return of a particular paroxysm; but the instances, where it
completely removed the disease, were so rare, that I do not consider it as
possessed of very eminent virtues. I have had frequent opportunities, since my
return to Britain, of trying James's Powder in the continued fevers of this
country; and the result of my experience inclines me to believe, that this
remedy, when given at an early period, has sometimes actually carried off the
disease. It appeared likewise, when exhibited near the critical periods, to
render the crisis more complete; but I have little cause for thinking, that it
ever cut short a fever in the midst of its course. Thus it appears, that these
two celebrated remedies, -- bark and the various preparations of antimony, are,
in fact, less effectual in cutting short the course of febrile diseases, than
has been commonly supposed; I cannot, however, abandon the idea that the
purpose, which has been expected from these remedies, may still be obtained by
other means. Galen mentions some instances, where he extinguished the fever by
copious evacuations: authors mention many, and I have myself seen some, where
drinking plentifully of the coldest water, produced the same effects. The
alternate use of warm and cold bathing occasions great changes in the state of
the constitution: and from the trials, which I have made of these applications,
I do not entertain a doubt, that they may be so managed, as to shorten very
materially the duration of fevers. I do not however promise, that they are
capable of being so conducted, as infallibly at once to stop the disease in its
progress. This can only be accomplished by those great and remarkable changes,
which destroy a certain aptitude, in the state of the system, to the morbid
cause, in which the disease is supposed to consist. But I must at the same time
confess, that as we neither know the nature of this aptitude, nor the
particular nature of remote causes, so every attempt of cure on this plan, as
it must be at random, cannot be adopted without danger. It is a view,
therefore, which will not be prosecuted with safety, while our knowledge of the
nature of morbid causes, and of the laws and structure of the human frame, is
so imperfect.

It is evident from the facts which I have related in the preceding pages, that
we cannot safely trust the cure of fevers to those tumults, or irregular
determinations in the system, which are usually styled the efforts of nature:
neither does it appear, that we can depend on the efficacy of any one remedy,
we are yet acquainted with, as possessed of the power of abruptly cutting short
their course. We still however perceive, that these diseases have a general
tendency to terminate in a given time and steadily to go through a regular
progress, in spite of the greatest exertions of art. If we review the practice
which medical people have followed in fevers, from the days of Hippocrates to
the present times, we meet with such contradictory methods of treatment, as
render it impossible to avoid pronouncing, that if one man had actually saved
life, another's endeavors seemed as if intended to destroy it: yet few authors
have ventured to offer the fruits of their labors to the public, without
previously boasting more successful methods of cure, than were known to their
predecessors. Hence, if we are not sometimes disposed to doubt their veracity,
we can hardly avoid concluding, that their practice had been feeble, and of
small effect. We lament, with reason, that medical facts are frequently of
little value: nay, that they oftener mislead, than guide us in the way to
truth. An overfondness for ourselves is, perhaps, more the cause of this, than
real want of candor; the natural propensity of the human mind to flatter
itself, disposing us to attribute cures to remedies, which were administered
near the critical periods of the disease; while twenty instances, where similar
treatment produced no apparent effect, are insensibly blotted from the memory.
This at least was ^he case with myself. I flattered myself in many instances,
that I had actually saved life: -- I now find, on maturer reflection, that I
had in reality done no material good. Thus it frequently happens, I believe,
that practitioners boast of cures, to which they have no right; at the same
time I am convinced, that they are frequently charged with deaths, of which
they are innocent. The life of man does not appear to depend upon so small a
matter, in febrile diseases, as is generally imagined; and is not often
preserved or endangered by the routine of common practice. It is not always
easy to know exactly the real effects of treatment; neither has the road, which
leads to this knowledge, been pursued with sufficient industry. Fevers occur
frequently, and on that very account, have been traced less minutely in their
course, than some other diseases. There are few practitioners, who write down
in the presence of the sick, a minute and accurate history of the various cases
of fevers, which come under their care; who observe carefully the changes which
happen from day to day; who note the particular methods of cure, and the
effects which arise in consequence of every alteration of treatment. Yet,
unless all these circumstances are attentively considered, we cannot hope to
form conclusions, which are in any degree to be depended upon. If we defer
making remarks till the patient recovers or dies, difficulties will be easily
got over, and such facts as contradict opinions, in which we have long
believed, will be more easily reconciled, as being less perfectly remembered.
Hence it is that a man may continue a very extensive practice, for a very long
life, without ever once getting a view of the real truth.

As from what has been said before, little doubt can remain of the
precariousness of trusting the cure of fevers to the simple efforts of nature;
or, if we except intermittents, to the efficacy of particular remedies which
cut off their course abruptly, it remains to look out for some other principle,
which may serve us as a guide in the conduct of our practice. It is a truth to
which we may accede without hesitation, that the cause of fever, as I have
mentioned before, whatever it is, or however modified, has a general tendency
to destroy the powers of life; while we likewise know, that there is a
principle in the mechanism of the frame, which resists destruction to a certain
degree. We also know, that the cause of the disease differs in degree of force;
and that it is differently modified according to various circumstances; as we
likewise observe, that the principle of life, or power of resistance, is
different in activity, in the different parts of the body. To these two powers,
viz. (...) force of the morbid cause and the powers of the constitution our
views in practice must be principally directed. Hence we may establish a
general rule, that wherever the force of the morbid cause is weak; at the same
time that the powers of life in the general system, and particularly in the
organs of vital importance, are strong and active, we have nothing more to do
than to look on. On the contrary, where the cause of the disease is of unusual
force, or where the powers of life are preternaturally weak, our interference
ought to be speedy, bold and decided. In other words, we leave the business
chiefly to nature, or take it entirely out of her hands. It is this which a
practitioner must first determine, when called upon to give his assistance to a
patient laboring under a fever. If the powers of the constitution appear to be
equal to the task, our interference would be officious, and perhaps might prove
hurtful. If assistance is necessary, it ought to be our principal aim to render
it complete; but in prosecuting this view, we meet with much difficulty and
impediment. We are not yet acquainted with any one remedy, which has a certain
and infallible power of cutting short fevers in the midst of their course. It
is not therefore absolutely in our power to take the business entirely out of
the hands of nature. We can, in fact, go no farther, than to oppose her
pernicious efforts; or to obviate the fatal tendencies of the disease. The
fatal tendencies of the disease, are variously modified, and the means by which
they must be obviated, are sometimes directly opposite. Two general modes,
however, of the fatal action of fevers may in most instances be discovered. The
cause of the disease, in one case, exerts its influence on the sources of life
and motion; in the other, the structure of an organ of less importance is
destroyed, and death happens only from a secondary effect. There is perhaps no
fundamental difference in these different modes of action; yet the indications
of cure, which arise from this view, are totally opposite. In the first
instance, it is necessary to excite, and to support the general powers of life:
an indication of very great extent. In the other, it is sometimes necessary to
diminish the general reaction of the system; to obviate irregular
determination, and to oppose with vigor the tumultuary efforts of nature.

CHAP. X. OF THE PARTICULAR CURE OF THE FEVER OF JAMAICA.
I SHALL begin this subject with observing, that the fever, which prevailed in
the district of Savanna la Mar, was naturally a disease of the remitting kind;
yet circumstances were sometimes connected with it, in such a manner as
prevented it from assuming its proper form. To remove those circumstances,
which thus masked or concealed the real genius of the disease, was considered
as the first step toward a cure. The accomplishment of this purpose, however,
was sometimes difficult; neither could it always be effected by the same means.
Thus it happened frequently in cases, where there was excess of excitement, or
a high degree of inflammatory diathesis, that the remissions where scarcely
perceptible; as it was likewise observed, that where there was a want of
reaction, the paroxysms were often languid and obscure. In the one case, the
remissions discovered themselves in consequence of bleeding, dilution and
copious evacuation; in the other, wine and cordials determined the disease to
assume its proper genuine form.

In the first place, evacuations were usually employed as the means of
procuring remission, where the inflammatory diathesis prevailed in excess; I
may add, that they were proper for the most part, and that they seldom failed
of producing the effect. Bleeding was frequently necessary, and generally of
service. Its efficacy, however, was often heightened by particular modes of
management. Thus relaxation of spasms, and removal of inflammatory diathesis,
more certainly followed bleeding, if the blood was drawn from a large orifice;
if the patient was placed in an erect posture, during the operation; and more
certainly still, if the lower extremities were at the same time immersed in
warm water. When bleeding had been premised, and repeated according to the
circumstances and urgency of the case, it was then customary to open the body
freely: for which purpose, I have not found any thing answer better, than a
thin solution of Glauber or Epsom Salts, with a small portion of emetic tartar.
The operation of this medicine was extensive. It might be so managed as to
occasion nausea, or moderate vomiting; to operate briskly downwards, or to
promote a gentle diaphoresis. Remissions were generally the consequence of this
method of proceeding, where there was no defect in the manner of conducting it.
But where it it so happened, that the circumstances of the patient forbad the
use of this laxative; or where it might not be proper to carry it to a
sufficient length, benefit was derived from a powder, composed of nitre,
camphire, emetic tartar and opium, given in pretty large doses, and repeated
frequently. Remission, at least a great abatement in the violence of symptoms,
was generally the consequence of this plan of treatment; particularly, if
assisted by the plentiful dilution of watery liquors, by warm bathing and by
large glysters of simple water. It is superfluous to mention the use of
blisters in cases of local affection; but it will be less expected, that this
remedy should be recommended in fevers, where there is an excess of the general
inflammatory diathesis. -- I can, however, bear testimony to its efficacy. The
manner by which blisters produce their effects, is not yet agreed upon among
authors; neither do I pretend to throw any new light upon the subject; but I
would beg leave to suggest, that the mode of affording relief in the present,
at least, did not seem to be much unlike the effect of local affections, in
consequence of which the violence of fevers is sometimes observed to subside.

I pursued the above method of procuring remission in those fevers, where there
was real inflammatory diathesis prevailing in excess; but it so happened, that
the signs of this diathesis were fallacious, appearing in some instances to be
present, though the real genius of the disease was actually of a different
nature; a circumstance, which occasioned a difference of management in
conducting the method of cure. Excessive evacuations were not only unsafe in
such cases, but in general had not any powerful effects in disposing the
disease to assume a remitting form. Bleeding, however, was often found to be
necessary, though it was seldom requisite to repeat the operation. The good
effects which were observed to follow the use of cathartics, were not in
general very remarkable; yet it was proper, in most instances, to open the body
freely; for which purpose, no form of medicine, with which I am acquainted,
answered better than a solution of salts with a small portion of emetic tartar,
and sometimes with the addition of laudanum. In cases of local pain, blisters
applied near the seat of affection were always of eminent service; and in cases
of general irritability, they were often equally useful, when applied to the
back part of the head and neck. A powder composed of nitre, camphire, emetic
tartar and opium, was likewise employed with success; but the liberal use of
warm bathing, was still more to be depended upon. No person, perhaps, will
refuse consent to the method of proceeding, which I have hitherto recommended;
but when I mention a free and bold use of cold bathing, even in an early stage
of this fever, I do not expect the same concession. To dash cold water on the
head and shoulders of a person in a fever, has an appearance of rashness and
hazard. I can, however, produce the testimony of repeated experience for the
safety of the practice, no less than for its success in procuring remission;
and shall therefore consider it a duty to recommend it warmly to the public.
Wherever it was employed, -- and the cases in which it was tried were numerous,
a calm and equable perspiration, additional tone and vigor, with great
abatement of irritability, were constantly observed to ensue.

The paroxysms and remissions were generally distinct in the beginning of
fevers, where the nervous system was principally affected; but often became
less so, as the disease advanced in its progress; a circumstance which did not
arise oftener from the nature of the complaint, than from the common method of
treatment. Bleeding was often dispensed with in the fevers of the West Indies;
but vomiting and purging were indulged in with freedom. The distinction of
paroxysm and remission was sometimes evidently rendered obscure by this
practice; while it was likewise obviously restored again, by the use of wine
and cordials, which excited the powers of life. In this species of disease,
evacuations were seldom necessary; seldom indeed admissible in a great extent.
Bleeding unless under particular circumstances, was totally improper.
Cathartics were sometimes dangerous, and antimonial vomits often sunk the
patient irrecoverably. Blistering, on the contrary, even at an early period,
was generally of service; as also were opiates, and a judicious use of the warm
bath; but cold bathing with salt water, was, of all others, the remedy of the
most powerful effect. I do not pretend to say, that it absolutely stopped the
course of the fever; but I can say with truth, that it generally restored the
distinction of paroxysm and remission, diminished irritability, and imparted a
degree of tone and vigor to the system, which was justly considered as a sign
of safety.

To procure remission in fever, distinguished by a prevalence of the putrescent
tendency, is not in every instance an easy task. A remitting fever, with marks
of specific putrefaction, is not a disease of common occurrence in Jamaica; but
a fever with signs of putrefactive tendency, mixed with symptoms of great
irritability, or a high degree of malignity, is not altogether rare. From the
complicated nature of the disorder, the indications of cure are often difficult
and perplexed. Bleeding is universally condemned; more, I believe, from theory
than from actual observation. It was, and perhaps still is, a fashionable mode
of reasoning, to impute the languors and other marks of debility, which are
common in the fevers of the West Indies, to a putrescent tendency in the
system. Such symptoms however are in fact more generally the attendants, or
distinguishing signs of fevers, where the nervous system is affected. In such
cases, bleeding is obviously hurtful; in the one of which we now treat, (where
such a disease actually exists,) it is not only a remedy of safety, but of very
eminent service, previous to the application of cold, particularly previous to
cold bathing, which may be used with freedom and boldness. Cold bathing,
indeed, is the remedy on which we must principally depend. There are others
which do good occasionally; but this is the only one I know, which has any very
considerable effect in changing the nature of the disease. There is a general
rule in the practice of medicine, which requires to be particularly remembered
in those complicated species of fever, viz. that as the indications of cure are
often embarrassed; so the appearances, which principally point to danger, are
first to be attended to; while the plan of cure, which we determine to be the
most proper, must be followed up with vigor and resolution. We ought always to
bear in mind, that in dangerous and difficult cases feeble remedies, or even
powerful ones timidly used, are of little avail. Cold bathing, employed with
timidity, failed of doing good in some instances. I met with no example, where
the boldest use of it did (...). It was seldom, I must again repeat, that it
did not succeed in obviating irritability, in checking the putrescent tendency,
and in imparting to the system that degree of tone and vigor, in which safety
is observed to consist.

The method of procuring remission, in those fevers which were distinguished by
local affections, or irregular determinations to particular parts, was nice,
and sometimes difficult. Bleeding was frequently proper, especially, if there
subsisted at the same time marks of a general inflammatory diathesis: but it
was seldom sufficient wholly to accomplish the business. However, together with
a judicious management of warm bathing, it greatly heightened the good effects
of blisters, the remedy on which the principal dependence was placed. In fevers
which were accompanied with uncommon pain of the head, I have sometimes found
it serviceable to apply cold to the part affected; the feet being at the same
time immersed in warm water, and blood flowing by a large orifice from the arm.
I also frequently observed, that the general fever ran higher, though it
likewise more certainly assumed its proper form, in consequence of bleeding,
blistering, and the removal of local pain. In those fevers, where bilious
appearances were the effect of accidental, irregular determination to the
stomach or liver, the remissions were often obscure: neither did the method of
treatment, which was generally adopted, seem to be well calculated to bring
forth the natural, genuine appearance of the disease. Bilious appearances, it
must be owned, sometimes vanished, while the type of the fever became more
distinct after the exhibition of an emetic or brisk cathartic; yet there is
cause to doubt if this depended on the evacuation of bile. It might be said,
with more truth, perhaps, that the action of the emetic, by exciting the powers
of the stomach and biliary system, effected a change in the irregular
determination, which had formerly taken place to those parts. It was generally
observed, where good effects did not follow the first exhibition of remedies of
this kind, that harm was usually the consequence of a second. Vomiting, in
short, was often rendered continual, and the distinction of paroxysm and
remission was apparently destroyed, in consequence of the operation of violent
emetics. Instructed by repeated examples of their hurtful effects, I at last
scarcely ever employed antimonial vomits; even the safest kinds were used with
caution. If it appeared, at any time, that the action of vomiting would be
serviceable, camomile tea, or at farthest a few grains of ipecacuana were
generally thought sufficient for the purpose. When this business was finished,
a draught of cordial stimulating liquor, which had a tendency to promote a
diaphoresis, was next administered. By this mode of treatment, especially if a
blister was applied at the same time to the region of the liver, I have the
satisfaction to add, that the bilious appearances for the most part vanished,
and, if care was taken to support a determination to the surface, seldom ever
returned during the continuance of the fever. Different seasons, and different
situations of country were particularly distinguished by corresponding
determinations. Thus a tendency to the bowels and biliary system was chiefly
remarkable in the autumnal months, and in low and champaign countries; the head
and breast were oftener affected in the winter months, and in hilly situations.

I observed before, that it is the first object in the cure of fevers, to
remove those circumstances, or accidental states of the body, which hinder the
disease from assuming its proper form. Thus, to procure remission, appeared
universally to be the first business in the cure of the fever of Jamaica; the
next, and a very important one, is to prevent the return of the paroxysm. If we
knew a remedy, which could be depended upon to accomplish this purpose with
certainty, the cure of the disease would be easy; but the Peruvian bark, which
almost infallibly stops the course of intermitting fevers in all countries,
does not seem so indisputably to possess the same power over the usual endemic
of the West Indies. I am sorry to own, that my knowledge on this subject, is
not altogether satisfactory. At the time I left Jamaica I did not entertain a
doubt, that the endemic of the district, where I resided, possessed something
in its own nature which decidedly determined its duration. It was usually
observed to terminate on a critical day, generally by very evident signs of
crisis, and without seeming to be materially effected in its course, by the
various and opposite modes of treatment which were sometimes pursued. But
though this was true for the most part, yet the superior efficacy of the very
large doses of bark, which I afterward ventured to give in the intermitting
fevers of North America, obliges me to speak with hesitation, when I mention
the powers of that remedy. It is probable that bark, with the same management,
might have had the same effects, in the fever which prevailed at Savanna la
Mar, as in that which is commonly epidemic in Georgia and the Carolinas; yet no
doubt remains, that as commonly employed in Jamaica, it has no right to be
considered as a remedy, which abruptly cuts short the course of the disease. In
every case where it was tried, (except one) it did not seem to do more than
give a degree of tone and vigor to the system, to excite a certain state of
inflammatory diathesis, in consequence of which, the crisis was observed to be
more perfect and complete, though it did not perhaps actually happen at an
earlier period. Thus I am disposed to conclude, from all the experience which I
have had, that bark is not generally carried farther, in the cure of the
remitting fever of Jamaica, than merely to support the tone and vigor of the
powers of life. If we trust to it for more, in doses of two scruples or a
dram given every two hours, we shall certainly be deceived.

Having mentioned the different methods of treatment, by which it was attempted
to procure remission in the endemic fever of Jamaica, and having likewise
endeavored to ascertain how far we can go in preventing the return of
paroxysms, it only remains to detail some particulars in the management of the
plan of cure, where the different species of fevers were distinguished by a
peculiar train of symptoms. It was observed in general, that fevers, with a
moderate degree of inflammatory diathesis, seldom required our interference.
The disease, after a certain duration, terminated usually of its own accord.
After I had gained some experience of the general course of fevers, I usually
allowed those, in which I did not perceive marks of danger, to go on their own
way, that I might better discover those periods, at which the disease was
naturally disposed to terminate. Thus where the paroxysms continued regular and
distinct, the remissions perfect, and the vigor unimpaired, nothing material
was attempted to be done. On the con^^ary, where the paroxysms were long, or
less distinctly formed, with signs which indicated an approaching affection of
the nervous system, bark, and other remedies, which excited and supported the
powers of life, were given with the earliest opportunity. Changes from
inflammatory diathesis to nervous affection, were observed to happen frequently
on the fifth day. Bark, and such remedies as imparted tone and vigor to the
system, were given without delay; and the disease terminated for the most part
on the ninth. In those fevers, which were of a complicated nature, in which
signs of inflammatory, nervous, or putrid diathesis were variously mixed,
blisters applied in different manners, opiates, bathing and antispasmodics were
often materially useful; but it would be arrogance to attempt to describe rules
for the particular mode of application, which must vary more or less in almost
every case, and which only can be learned from actual observation. There is one
rule, however, in the treatment of fevers, of which the practitioner ought
never to lose sight, viz. that wherever it is necessary to interfere, it is
only the most vigorous decision which can do good. We cannot, as was said
before, depend with certainty upon bark, as a remedy possessed of the power of
absolutely cutting short the cause of the fever of Jamaica; yet wherever the
fevers of that country discovered signs of nervous affection, I do not know any
thing in the materia medica, from which such beneficial effects may be
expected. If it did not actually stop the disease, it was eminently serviceable
in conducting it to a favorable issue. Opium, wine, snake-root, etc. were
often observed to heighten its good qualities: but the particular use of such
additions can only be regulated by circumstances. Wine has been freely
recommended in fevers with symptoms of nervous affection; and it must be owned,
that its good effects were considerable, not only in real debility, but
wherever the cause of the disease acted by weakening or depressing the powers
of life. Wine was likewise observed to be more useful in cases of mobility and
weakness, than in cases of stupor and suspension of the nervous influence. But
though it is actually a remedy of great value, its virtues appear to have been
greatly enhanced. In many instances it was not proper in any quantity; in some,
it was only proper in a small quantity, and in very few, perhaps, could we
allow of the quantities which are given in common practice. At one time I
carried the use of wine in the nervous fever of Jamaica, to a very great
length; but I afterward learnt, that a third part of the quantity would have
probably answered the purpose better. Though it undoubtedly is an useful
cordial and tonic, it is still inferior to cool air, and particularly to cold
bathing.

In those treacherous and malignant fevers, which I have described in the third
section of the sixth chapter, the ordinary medical aids were often feeble and
insufficient. The course of the disease was generally rapid. There was little
time left for deliberation; and where the first, at least where the second
remission passed over, without some bold and decided steps to prevent the
return of the paroxysm, or change the nature of the symptoms, the opportunity
was probably never again in our power. The type of this malignant fever was
usually of the single tertian kind; yet it was often found to anticipate, by
such long anticipations, that the second paroxysm sometimes made its
appearance, before any decided steps were taken by the practitioner to stop its
progress, or often, indeed, before there were any surmises of danger. As this
disease seemed to have a nearer resemblance to the intermittent, than some
other species of the endemic of Jamaica; so bark appeared to be capable of
producing more effect, in the present instance, than in those cases where the
remissions were more obscure. It still, however, deserves to be remarked, that
such scanty doses, as were usually given in Jamaica, could not be effectual;
indeed, we could scarcely hope, that any powerful alteration could arise from
less than half an ounce given at the short interval of every other hour. I
confess heartily, that I never ventured so far; yet I also confess, that I am
by no means satisfied with the success of the method of cure, which I adopted
at first, in this disease. I lost some patients before I was aware of danger,
and perhaps suffered others to die, from a dread of stepping over the bounds of
common practice. At last, I acted with more decision; and have cause to be
satisfied with the success of the attempt. As soon as I discovered the
malignity of the disease, the marks of which, for the most part, were plain in
the course of the first paroxysm, the head was immediately shaved, and covered
with a blister, which reached half way down the neck; the feet were likewise
put into warm water, previous to the expected return of the paroxysm; the body
was rubbed with brandy or rum; wine, and sometimes opium were given in quantity
sufficient to exhilirate the spirits, or to produce a low degree of
intoxication; bark was also prescribed in larger doses than usual, during the
remissions; and cold bathing was occasionally employed with freedom. I do not
say, that the return of the paroxysm was absolutely prevented by this method of
treatment, but I have the satisfaction to add, that the fatal tendency of the
disease was evidently obviated by it.

I must farther observe, that bark has been considered as the principal remedy
in those fevers, the nature of which has been believed to be putrid; but the
great fame of this remedy has proceeded from theory, rather than from actual
observation. A real putrid disease, (as I have said before), if we except the
yellow fever, occurs very seldom in Jamaica. Symptoms of languor and debility,
however, are frequent in the fevers of that country; appearances which, though
in fact, only signs of nervous affection, have often been imputed to a putrid
tendency in the habit. Bark has been found to be efficacious in those cases of
languor and debility, which have been falsely thought to arise from a
putrefactive tendency in the system. Hence this remedy has gained credit, on a
foundation which does not exist. I may add with truth, that the power of the
bark was very equivocal, in those cases where the marks of putrid tendency were
obvious. The principal dependence was then constantly placed in the cold
salt water bath; which, if well managed, produced most astonishing effects. An
additional quantity of salt was often added to the water of the sea; and care
was taken that the coldness should be as great as the circumstances of the
climate would permit. The chief dependence I have said, was constantly placed
in this remedy, where the putrid tendency prevailed in the general system; but
where it was more particularly confined to the bounds of the alimentary canal,
saline draughts, in the state of effervescence, were useful, as were likewise
glysters of cold water impregnated with fixed air. It is superfluous to mention
cool air, clean linen, cold drink and the liberal use of wine.

The remedies, which I have hitherto mentioned, are such, as seem chiefly
intended to support and invigorate the general powers of life; but which are
less immediately directed to obviate the fatal tendency of particular symptoms;
which I proposed to consider, as the second indication of cure. I shall
probably depart material^^ from the usual ideas of practitioners in the
prosecution of this subject. I do not deny, that bark may be given with safety
in fevers, which are accompanied with local affections, or irregular
determinations to particular parts; yet I must likewise observe, that bark is
not the remedy on which the weight of the cure depends. Local affections, or
irregular determinations are often distinguished by the name of the efforts of
nature. I do not indeed dispute, where the part of the body, to which the
determination takes place, is of little importance to life, or more certainly,
where it is an organ of excretion, that such parts as are of greater
consequence, are, in some degree relieved in consequence of this effect; and
though there is still an impropriety, there is less danger in considering this
irregular action of the morbid cause, as an effort of nature, or a quality of
the vis naturae medicatrix, by means of which, the health of the system is
eventually rendered more secure. This, however, is only a circumstance of
accident. It does not appear to depend upon a regular design of nature, and
cannot be admitted with safety as the basis of a plan of cure. We find, in
short, that though the life of the whole is sometimes preserved by it, the
destruction or derangement of the part is generally the consequence. But that
the fallacious tendency of those tumultuary efforts of nature may be more
clearly illustrated, I shall adduce the example of fevers, distinguished by an
increased secretion of bile. It is an opinion, which seems to date its origin
from Hippocrates, that bile vitiated in quality, or redundant in quantity,
deserves to be considered as the cause of the species of disease distinguished
by the name of ardent fever: and it must be confessed, that the frequent
appearance of bilious discharges, in the fevers of hot climates, gives
countenance to the supposition. From the frequency of this symptom, perhaps,
the practitioners of the West Indies adopted the idea, that bile is the cause
of the fever of that country; while the method of cure, which they usually
pursue, has served to confirm them in their error. Prepossessed with an opinion
of the prevalence of bile, they administer cathartics and emetics with a
liberal hand. If bile appears in the first evacuations, they consider it
sufficient authority to proceed; if it does not appear, they conclude that the
remedy has not been of sufficient force to reach the seat of the disease; and
therefore persist in their intentions, till the effect is at last produced. It
is well known, that a repetition of cathartics and emetics seldom fails to
produce the appearances of a bilious disease. Hence this symptom of fever, and
all the dangers which follow it, are frequently the work of our own hands. That
this is the case, appears from a relation of the method of cure, which I
usually adopted in such fevers as were distinguished by symptoms of this nature
at an early period. Instead of encouraging the vomiting, or promoting the
evacuation of bile downwards, I generally did every thing in my power to
moderate, or even to check it. -- Sometimes I prescribed an emetic; but it was
more with a view to excite the action of the stomach and biliary system, than
to promote an evacuation of redundant or vitiated humors. After the operation
of vomiting was finished, a blister was usually applied to the region of the
liver, and such a plan of cure was pursued, as supported a determination to the
surface of the body, and gave tone and vigor to the stomach and general powers
of life. By this mode of treatment, bilious appearances vanished speedily, or
ceased to be troublesome; while by the repeated use of emetics and cathartics,
they generally continued long, and often prevailed throughout the course of the
disease. We may thus, I hope, conclude, without any unnatural inference, that
there appears to be danger in encouraging those tumults, which have been
usually considered as the efforts of nature. If they are in fact efforts, no
person can pretend to deny, that they are generally precarious; nay, that they
are often the immediate causes of death.

I have now detailed the particular steps of the method of cure, which I
adopted in the remitting fever of Jamaica; a disease which I treated, in some
respects, on a different plan, and if self-love has not blinded me with more
success than the generality of those practitioners whom I had the opportunity
of knowing, I treated the disease with success; but I dare not affirm, as some
have done, that under this method of treatment, I never lost a patient. I
proceeded, indeed, with diffidence and distrust of the powers of the medical
art; venturing no farther than to support the general powers of life, and to
obviate symptoms of a fatal tendency. Many pretend to cut short the course of
fevers, by the force of a single remedy; but the means do not appear very
obvious, and the effect was often precarious. I grant, that it is sometimes in
the power of the practitioner to exterminate the cause of disease by forcible
means, or to destroy a certain aptitude of constitution, in which this disease
may be said to consist; but I must at the same time observe, that there is
danger likewise, least he extinguish life. The bark, which has been so much
celebrated for checking the course of fevers, though generally safe, is seldom
effectual: others are frequently dangerous. During the time that I remained in
the West Indies, I observed attentively the state of body, which usually
attended recovery; as likewise those appearances which preceded, and apparently
were the causes of death. Tone and vigor, or a moderate degree of the state of
body distinguished by the name of inflammatory diathesis, without local
affection, afforded the surest signs of safety; general failure of the powers
of life, or irregular determinations to organs of importance, were the most
certain appearances of danger. Thus, after obviating particular symptoms of a
fatal tendency, it was the principal indication to support the general powers
of life, or to excite the tone and vigor of the system. This was best
accomplished by bark, wine, cool air, and above all, by cold bathing, which I
am induced to consider as the most important remedy in the cure of the fevers
of the West Indies; and, perhaps, in the cure of the fevers of all hot
climates. Though it might not absolutely cut short the course of the disease;
yet it seldom failed to change the fatal tendency of its nature.

CHAP. XI. YELLOW FEVER. (a)
THE disease, known in the West Indies by the name of yellow fever,
particularly that species of the disease distinguished by black vomiting, has
not, so far as I know, been described by the practitioners of any other
country. In the autumnal fevers of most climates, indeed, as well as in the
remitting fever of Jamaica, yellowness is not by any means uncommon: neither is
vomiting of matter of a dark color altogether rare, in the moments preceding
death: yet in as much as I can judge, from what I have seen myself, or heard
from others, the complaint which is the subject of the present treatise,
possesses some characteristics of its own, different from those of every other
disease. I do not pretend to determine, in what this characteristic difference
precisely consists: yet I may say with confidence, that the species of this
disease, which terminates in black vomiting, may be distinguished with
certainty from the autumnal fever of aguish countries, or from the endemic
remitting fever of Jamaica, even in the first hours of its attack. I must,
however, at the same time own, that there is a species of disease, where the
remissions are obscure, and where signs of nervous affection, or even sometimes
of apparent inflammation, are more conspicuous than symptoms of putrescency,
that I have some difficulty in classing properly. There is not any thing more
foreign to my intention than multiplying names, or establishing distinctions
which do not exist in reality; yet, as I have often seen instances of fever, to
which yellowness and black vomiting did not seem to be essential; but in which
paroxysms and remissions were extremely obscure, or perhaps did not exist, I at
last ventured to conclude, that this species of illness had more affinity with
the disorder usually known by the name of yellow fever, than with the common
remitting endemic of the country. I shall therefore describe it as a species of
that disease; though I am less solicitous about fixing its place in ^^sological
arrangement, than of giving a history of it, by which it may be easily
recognized.

I am not ignorant that there are several authors, who have written on the
subject of the yellow fever; yet I had not the opportunity of consulting any of
them, except Dr. Hillary, during the time that I lived in Jamaica. This
writer's method of cure was adopted very generally by the medical people of the
island, and many of them were disposed to think favorably of its success. I
cannot however conceal, that I was disappointed in every instance where I saw
it employed. If, in any case, the patient recovered, this fortunate event
appeared to be more owing to great natural strength of constitution, or to a
lower degree of disease, than to the efficacy of the method of treatment. But
besides, that this author's method of cure is feeble and ineffectual, the
historical part is particularly defective; the disease, in short, being only
very imperfectly discriminated from the common endemic of that country. The
consideration of these circumstances, induced me to throw together the
observations which I had made on this subject, during the time that I resided
in the West Indies; and though I am conscious that they are imperfect, I still
hope that they contain some hints which may be useful to those, who have had
little experience of the fevers of hot climates.

In our enquiries into the history of the yellow fever, some circumstances
present themselves to our observation which are not a little curious. It has
never been observed that a negro, immediately from the coast of Africa, has
been attacked with this disease; neither have Creoles, who have lived
constantly in their native country, ever been known to suffer from it: yet
Creoles or Africans, who have traveled to Europe, or the higher latitudes of
America, are not by any means exempted from it, when they return to the islands
of the West Indies. Europeans, males particularly, suffer from it soon after
their arrival in the tropical countries; yet, after the natives of Europe have
remained for a year or two in those hot climates, especially after they have
experienced the ordinary endemic of the country, the appearance of the yellow
fever is observed to be only a rare occurrence. But besides, that this disease
seldom discovers itself among those people, who have lived any length of time
in a tropical country, it has likewise scarcely ever been known to attack the
same person twice, unless accidentally after his return from a colder region.
The remitting fever, on the contrary, does not cease to attack such as have
resided the greatest part of their life in those climates; or who have lived
after the most regular and abstemious manner; a fact which seems to prove, that
there actually exists some essential difference between the two diseases; or
which shows, at least, that the revolution of a season or two destroys in the
European constitution, a certain aptitude or disposition for the one disease,
which it still retains for the other.

Having thus premised some circumstances, which regard the general nature of
the yellow fever, I shall proceed to give a more particular description of the
disease, previously dividing it into three forms, in each of which, I believe,
I have frequently seen it appear. 1. Into a species of disease, in which signs
of putrefaction are evident at a very early stage, which is generally rapid in
its course, and which usually terminates in black vomiting. Yellowness seldom
or never fails to make its appearance in the present instance; and perhaps it
is only this form, which, strictly speaking, can be called the yellow fever. 2.
Into a form of fever, which either has no remissions, or remissions which are
scarcely perceptible; in which signs of nervous affection are more obvious than
symptoms of putrescency; and in which yellowness and black vomiting are rare
occurrences. 3. Into another form, in which regular paroxysms and remissions
cannot be traced; but in which there are marks of violent irritation, and
appearances of inflammatory diathesis in the earlier stage, which give way
after a short continuance to signs of debility and putrescency, to which
yellowness frequently succeeds, or even sometimes the so much dreaded vomiting
of matter of a dark color. The disease, which I have divided in the above
manner into three distinct forms, appears to be in reality only one and the
same. The difference of the symptoms probably arises from very trivial or very
accidental causes; and it is a matter of great difficulty to discriminate those
signs, which are essential and necessary to its existence. It is in some degree
peculiar to strangers from colder regions soon ofter their arrival in the West
Indies, and may generally be distinguished from the remitting endemic of the
country, not only by the obscureness, or total want of paroxyms and remissions,
but likewise by a certain expression of the eye and countenance, with something
unusually disagreeable in the feelings, of which words convey only an imperfect
idea.

SECTION I.
I SHALL describe, in the first place, the most common and most formidable
species of this disease, which, as I observed before, is distinguished by early
signs of putrescency, by an intense degree of yellowness; and, toward its
termination, usually by vomiting of matter of a dark color. It was mentioned
in the preceding treatise, concerning the remitting fever of Jamaica, that
fever of different types had their different hours of invasion; but no such
property was observed in the present disease. In some instances the yellow
fever began in the morning, though the evening, upon the whole, was the more
usual time of its attack. The first symptoms were languor, debility and
headache, together with an affection of the stomach peculiarly disagreeable.
This last often preceded the others, and was in some measure characteristic;
but it is impossible to give a clear idea of it in words: -- anxiety, nausea,
and certain unusual feelings were so strangely combined, that any description,
which I might attempt to give of this complicated sensation, would hardly be
intelligible. The horror and shivering, which so usually precede fevers, was
seldom great in degree in the present instance; but it sometime continued long,
and was often accompanied with sensations of a very unpleasant kind. The heat
of the body, though rarely intense, was frequently of an (...) and pungent
nature. The pulse was weak and confined in its stroke. It was likewise
frequent, and the nature of the arterial pulsations were creeping or
vermicular; in short there was a perpetual motion under the finger, combined
with something, which gave the idea, that the disease was not of the kind which
has paroxysms and remissions. Together with this, the eye was sad and watery;
or in some degree inflamed, having much that appearance, which is the
consequence of exposure to the smoke of green wood. The face was often flushed;
yet the flushing, in the present case, was different from that which arises
from ordinary causes. There was a degree of confusion, and often a degree of
grimness joined with it, difficult to be described in words; but which a
person, acquainted with the appearances of the disease, immediately recognizes
as a distinguishing mark of its character. The tongue was often moist, and
generally soul; the thirst was seldom great, and though there was usually a
peculiar nausea, there was rarely any severe vomiting or retching. The
breathing was hurried, for the most part, with much anxiety and distress; while
the patient frequently expressed sufferings, which a person, unacquainted with
the nature of the disease, would be disposed to believe were not real.

The symptoms, which I have enumerated above, are those which usually show
themselves in the first twelve hours of the disease. I marked them with all the
attention of which I was capable; yet still I am fearful, that the history may
not be so explicit as to be totally free from ambiguity. The characteristic
marks of the yellow fever, are not by any means doubtful to a person well
acquainted with the diseases of hot climates; but they are not easily conveyed
in words, and may often be overlooked by those, who have drawn their
information from books alone. I am induced to think so, from an instance which
happened to myself. I had read Hillary's account of the yellow fever, both
before and soon after my arrival in Jamaica; I had likewise heard some
conversation on the subject, so that I might be supposed to have been tolerably
well informed of the general character of the disease; yet the first person,
who came under my care in this illness, was within a few hours of death before
I knew the disorder, or even suspected it to be of a dangerous nature.
Fortunately for the peace of my conscience, the patient had been visited, on
both the first and second day after the attack, by a practitioner who had lived
many years in the island; but, between carelessness and inexperience, the poor
man's situation was either not known, or not attended to, till approaches of
death were visible. The body had been evacuated very plentifully by a solution
of salts, during the two first days of the illness; but no material good seemed
to ensue from it. The patient complained still more on the second day, than he
had done on the first; but as the external signs of fever were moderate, I
really suspected that he complained without much cause. It so happened, that I
could not visit him on the third; and on the morning of the fourth, he became
of a deep orange color, and vomited black matter in great quantity. I then
suspected, that this complaint, to which I had not paid particular attention,
was actually the disease known by the name of yellow fever; but it appeared
likewise, to be so far advanced in its progress, that I could do nothing more
than witness the approach of death. My want of discernment, and in some degree
my carelessness, a charge from which I cannot altogether acquit myself, made so
deep an impression on my mind, that I turned over every circumstance of the
disease with which my memory supplied me; and I soon had that satisfaction to
find, that the mistake which I had committed, had not happened to me without
leaving an useful lesson. In ten or twelve days another person was affected in
a manner so similar to the former, that I suspected the disease to be the same,
and the event proved my suspicions to have been well founded. From that time
forward, I never found difficulty in distinguishing this particular form of
fever, in the first hours of its attack, not only from the remitting endemic of
the country, but even from the other two species of this disease, which I shall
afterward describe.

A trifling abatement of the symptoms, was sometimes taken notice of, in ten or
twelve hours after the commencement of this disease; but in no instance so far
as I have observed, was there ever so much alleviation, as with any justice
could be called a remission. The symptoms of distress, where any abatement had
been perceptible, recurred in a short time with aggravation; and if there
actually ever was any relief afterward, it was only momentary and uncertain.
The appearance of the eye became still more desponding, with a sensation of
burning heat, and greater marks of inflammation, affording incontestible signs
of the real genius and nature of the fever. The pain of the head was now
violent; the countenance was confused and grim: the gums were frequently
spongy, and disposed to bleed; the tongue, which was sometimes moist, sometimes
dry, was almost always foul; the thirst was irregular; at one time intense, at
another very little increased beyond what it naturally is. Nausea, I observed
above, was a common sign, from the first hours of the illness; yet vomiting,
during the first day or two, was not by any means a constant, perhaps scarcely
a frequent symptom: neither, if it did take place, was it often found to be
bilious. The liquor thrown up, for the most part, was clear; in short, seldom
altered from the state in which it had been drank, unless by having acquired an
unusual degree of ropiness, or by presenting some flakes of a darker colored
mucus. To the above symptoms we might add, uncommon restlessness and anxiety; a
torment scarcely to be expressed in words; watchfulness; a hurried and
difficult respiration; frequent deep and heavy sighing, with more or less
disposition to faint, where any exertion was attempted. It deserves to be
remarked, however, with regard to the disposition to faint in the yellow fever,
that it did not depend upon the same cause, as in some other diseases. It
seemed, in fact, to be owing to torpor of the nervous power, rather than to
excess of mobility. The patient was often able to stand upright, for some time,
even to walk to a considerable distance; and when at last overcome, was
observed to fall down in a torpid, rather than in a fainting state. Sweating
was a rare occurrence in this stage of the disease; at least I do not find,
that I ever had remarked any greater degree of it, than a clammy moisture on
the head and neck. It was also rarely observed, that the external heat was much
increased beyond its natural state; while the pulse now began gradually to
abate in point of frequency. The yellowness, which is intense in the last stage
of the disease, was seldom seen in the period which I now describe; yet,
together with a general obfuscation of countenance, a tawney hue rather than a
paleness, was observed about the eyes and corners of the mouth, when the
patient turned accidentally languid and faint. The body was frequently costive
in the first days of the illness; and I have even seen some instances where
strong cathartics did not occasion the usual evacuations. The urine was
generally high colored, and turbid. In some cases there was active hoemorrhage
from the nose; which was generally followed with some relief from the violent
pain of the head. I have also observed a high degree of delirium, though I
never saw any instances, where this symptom was of long continuance.

The duration of the tumultuary state, which I have described is uncertain.
Sometimes it did not exceed twenty-four hours, though it more generally
continued till the third day; sometimes even longer. The symptoms, which now
made their appearance, were many of them different in their nature from the
former. The agony of distress, which was so strongly depicted in the
countenance of the patient, during the first days of the disease, was observed
about this time to be sensibly diminished; the eye became more cheerful, the
countenance more serene and composed; yet yellowness of the skin became
speedily evident: the external heat and fever subsided; the pulse became
gradually fuller and slower, and approached by degrees to its natural state: no
sweat or moisture was now observable on any part of the body; the state of the
skin impressed the idea, as if it were not pervious to any degree of
perspiration, and heat gradually forsook the surface and extremities; the
tongue turned moist, and at the same time frequently clean about the edges: the
gums turned redder, more spongy, and showed a greater disposition to bleed:
vomiting was now troublesome -- the liquor thrown up was ropy, much in
quantity, and abounding with villous or mucus flakes of a darker color: thirst
in a great measure vanished; but sensations of anxiety, distress and uneasiness
in the region of the stomach suffered no material abatement.

Things went on in this manner, sometimes for one day only, sometimes for two,
three or more. The circulation in the extreme vessels became gradually more
languid; the natural heat retired from the surface of the body, which was now
dry and impervious; the pulse returned nearly to its ordinary state, or became
slow, full, and regular; the yellowness increased fast; so that the whole of
the body was frequently yellow as an orange, or of as deep a color as the skin
of an American savage; anxiety was inexpressible; vomiting was irrestrainable,
and the so much dreaded symptom of vomiting of a matter resembling the grounds
of coffee, at last made its appearance. It deserves, however, to be remarked,
with regard to this formidable symptom, that the color of what was thrown up,
was often black as foot, where the disease had hurried on rapidly to the last
stage: while it was not only less intensely black, but was often tinged with
green, where the progress had been slow and gradual. I observed before, that
villous or mucus flakes were discovered early in the vomitings of the patient,
and that these appearances increased as the disease advanced in its progress. I
may now add, that streaks of blood were sometimes found to be joined with them;
the greatest part of which seemed to come from the throat and gums. The
vomiting, which now returned at shorter intervals as the disease approached
this fatal period, was seldom accompanied with violent retching. A quantity of
liquor, sometimes a quantity so enormous, that we could not help wondering
whence it had been supplied, having been collected in the stomach, was
discharged without much difficulty, and the patient enjoyed some respite till a
like accumulation had again taken place. It may further be remarked, that as
soon as the vomited liquor acquired this dark and sooty color, the belly
generally turned loose, the stools being black and smooth, not unlike tar or
molasses. The tongue likewise became clean, the gums became putrid;
hoemorrhage, or rather oozings of blood were sometimes observed at different
parts of the body; while livid blotches frequently made their appearance on the
belly and insides of the thighs. The pulse, which during the latter stages of
the disease, could scarcely be distinguished from the pulse of a person in
health, became at last quick, irregular, or intermitting; soon after which,
coma or convulsions closed the scene. It may not be improper to remark, before
leaving the subject, that the yellowness of the skin, which was said to precede
the black vomiting in most instances, in some cases was found to succeed to it.
In such, the vomiting began unexpectedly, or without much previous affection of
the stomach; the color of it was usually intensely black, the patient turned
yellow almost in an instant, and died in a very short space of time: -- the
disease, in short, passed suddenly from the first stage to the last.

I may observe in this place, that the number of those who recovered from the
last stage of this species of the yellow fever, was extremely small: yet,
though such fortunate instances were rare, they were not altogether wanting.
The termination, however, did not appear to be by regular crisis. The black
vomiting ceased, sometimes apparently in consequence of treatment, sometimes
evidently of its own accord; but a vomiting of a ropy, glutinous matter
continued for a great length of time, together with an extreme irritability of
stomach, and a very peculiar state of the skin; which sometimes did not recover
its natural smoothness and unctuosity, till after several weeks had elapsed.

During the time that I lived in Jamaica, I opened several persons who died of
this disease; but it was seldom that I found any material variation in the
appearances. Soon after death, and even sometimes before death had actually
taken place, the body became covered with large livid blotches; and, it is
almost unnecessary to mention, was extremely offensive. In opening the abdomen,
the omentum and all its appendages were discovered to be in a dry and parched
state, and of an uncommon dark gray color. But together with this dark gray
color of the omentum, and a want of the unctuosity or moisture, which is
usually found in the cavity of the abdomen, the stomach and intestines had a
dirty yellow appearance, were highly putrified, and much distended with wind.
The liver and spleen were generally enlarged in size; the color of the liver
was often of a deeper yellow, than that of any other of the abdominal viscera;
while the texture of the spleen was frequently less firm, than it is found to
be in its natural state. The gallbladder, for the most part, was moderately
full; but the bile it contained, was black and thick, not unlike tar or
molasses. The biliary ducts were likewise enlarged, and moderately filled with
the same sort of bile, which was found in the gallbladder: while the very
blood vessels of the liver bore the marks of uncommon distension. In the cavity
of the stomach likewise, there was usually more or less of a dark colored
liquor, similar to what had been thrown up in the last stage of the illness.
But besides, that this dirty fluid was generally present in the stomach in
considerable quantity, the villous or inner coat of that organ was also abraded
in various places; at the same time that some spots appeared on the surface,
which were probably the beginnings of mortifications. The superior portions of
the intestinal canal were generally in a situation similar to what I have
described; only it must be remembered, that the morbid appearances were not yet
so far advanced in progress.

The state of the body, as it appeared on dissection, throws considerable light
on the nature of the yellow fever. It enables us to explain satisfactorily many
of its leading symptoms; and may even afford useful hints in the conduct of the
cure. It was mentioned above, that the natural heat and vigor of circulation
retired from the surface and extremities of the body at a certain period of the
disease; and that a copious and obstinate vomiting ensued soon after this
change had taken place. The fluid thrown up, which was usually pituitous,
glutinous, or flakey in the beginning, acquired, after some time, a color of
various degrees of blackness. In quantity, it was often immoderate, bearing no
proportion to the liquor which was drank; a circumstance which could only be
explained by the ordinary determination to the surface of the body being turned
upon the internal parts; in consequence of which, there was a preternatural
discharge of fluid into the cavity of the alimentary canal. Flakes, of a mucus
or villous nature, were likewise frequently observed in those matters which
were thrown up by the patient; an appearance which we could not have easily
accounted for; unless we had discovered, in examining the dead body, that the
inner coat of the stomach was actually abraded; but in what manner this
happened, may be difficult to explain. It might either arise from the repeated
action of severe vomiting; or, still more probably, from the preternatural and
forcible determination to the exhaling vessels of this cavity, forcing off some
portions of the villous coat, in the manner of cuticular blisters. To which
explanations I may add, that the black color of the vomited matter, was
evidently owing to a mixture of vitiated bile; the passage of which might be
easily traced from the gall duct into the pylorus.

The species of the yellow fever, which I have now described, is universally
acknowledged to be a terrible disease; and there are few, I believe, so
uncandid, as to boast of general success in the manner of curing it. A road is
therefore left open, not only for improvement, but almost for total innovation.
The only author I have read on the subject, or the practitioners with whom I am
acquainted, do not seem to have extended their views beyond the symptoms of the
disease. There are some, who, from observing that there is pain of the head and
flushing of the face, recommend bleeding; others, from the presence of nausea
or inclination to vomit, make trial of emetics; and many, from various causes,
insist on the indispensible use of cathartics. My views, I must confess, are
different from those of preceding authors. Bleeding was employed occasionally;
emetics were cautiously avoided; but time appeared to be too precious to be
spent in attending to the effects of cathartics, which cannot often be known in
less than twenty-four hours; and which at best are precarious or feeble.
Instead, therefore, of attempting to evacuate redundant bile, or to correct it
when supposed to be vitiated, I exerted myself, from the first moment that I
was called to the patient, to change the genius and natural tendency of the
disease; or, if I may be allowed the expression, to take the business, as
speedily as possible, totally out of the hands of nature.

I remark in the first place, that I generally began the cure of this species
of the yellow fever with bleeding. Bleeding was employed in the present case,
chiefly with a view of paving the way to remedies of greater efficacy. It was,
however, found to moderate the violence of local pain, particularly the
violence of the headache, and to be not altogether without effect, in retarding
the usual rapid progress of the disease. It has hitherto been thought
necessary, indeed almost indispensible, to empty the first passages in this
species of fever; but time is short, and the good which accrues from such
evacuations, is not very certain, and often not essential. It was, therefore,
thought sufficient to trust this intention, for the most part, to laxative
glysters; after the employment of which, (bleeding having been premised in such
quantity as was deemed proper,) the patient was washed clean, and bathed in
warm water, in as complete a manner as the circumstances of situation would
permit. It is needless to mention, that this was done with a view to increase
mobility of system, and to remove spasmodic stricture from the extreme vessels
of the surface; in consequence of which, greater benefit was expected from the
application of cold salt water, which was dashed suddenly from a bucket on the
head and shoulders. This practice may appear hazardous, to those who argue
without experience; but I can vouch for its general safety, and bear testimony
to its good effects. Sweat, with perfect relief from all the feelings of
anxiety and distress, was generally the consequence of this mode of treatment.
If employed within the first twelve hours from the attack, it seldom failed of
removing all the symptoms of danger: or of effecting a total and complete
change in the nature and circumstances of the disease; but if the progress was
more advanced, though the same rule of practice might still be proper, the
execution required more boldness and decision. It is only possible to judge
from the circumstances of the case, at this period, of the necessity or
propriety of bleeding, and of emptying the lower intestines by means of
glysters; but when this business shall have been accomplished, in such manner
as may be deemed right, or conducive to the main view, it will be advisable to
shave the head, to bathe the whole body in warm water, and instantly to dash
cold water from a bucket on the head and shoulders. I have even sometimes,
where there was an appearance of greater obstinacy, ventured to wrap the whole
body in a blanket soaked in sea water, or water in which was dissolved a large
portion of salt. If anxiety was great, or nausea and vomiting troublesome, I
have also observed benefit from the application of a blister to the epigastric
region. Opiates, joined with remedies which had a tendency to determine to the
surface, were found to be serviceable; and wine, with a supply of fresh and
cool air, in most cases, was highly necessary. This method of proceeding will,
perhaps, ^e thought unwarrantable; but I can speak confidently of its safety;
and I may farther add, that unless some decided steps are taken to change the
nature of the disease, during the continuance of this stage, our future
endeavors to do good, will generally be in vain. I have hitherto promised
success in the cure of this fever, with a good deal of confidence; but if it
should so happen, that we are not called to the patient till the yellowness has
spread over the whole of the body, or till (...) black vomiting has begun to
make its appearance, the prospect, I must confess, is then very dark. The
ordinary resources of our art are feeble; and if good can be done at all, it
can only be done by means, which in the common opinion of practitioners, border
on rashness. In this latter stage of the complaint, so great a degree of torpor
overwhelms the powers of life, that remedies do not produce their usual effect,
and our labor is often the same, as if we attempted to resuscitate a corpse. I
have, however, seen instances of such unexpected recoveries from the most
hopeless state in fevers, that I seldom totally despair as long as life
remains. I know that death may be prevented, even after black vomiting has
appeared with all its terrors, if a remedy can be found powerful enough to
excite the action of the extreme vessels, and to recall the determination to
the surface of the body. For this purpose, I have employed alternately warm and
cold bathing with success. I have even wrapped the body, as I mentioned before,
in a blanket, soaked in water, in which a large portion of salt was dissolved,
or which had been steeped in brandy or rum, enjoining at the same time the
liberal use of wine, or even more powerful cordials. I have heard of some
well-attested instances, where plentiful draughts of rum and water, have
checked the vomiting, and apparently saved the lives of patients, after the
medical people had given them up for lost.

I have now mentioned the method of cure which I pursued in the yellow fever of
Jamaica; and I must be allowed to add, that the general indication appears to
be confirmed by a view of the history and progress of the disease, as also by
considering the appearances which are found after death. It was observed in the
preceding pages, that the circulation became languid at a certain period in the
course of this fever, and that the determination was, in fact, turned upon the
internal parts, particularly upon the alimentary canal, and biliary system. To
support, therefore, or to recall the determination to the surface, where it had
begun to retire, was the principal aim which was kept in view. It was pursued
with vigor; and, I have the satisfaction to add, frequently with success. I am
afraid that the means may be thought hazardous; but I have never yet perceived
from them, even a momentary harm. I shall not therefore cease to recommend
them, till I find that others have tried them fairly, and found them dangerous
or ineffectual.

SECTION II.
IN the preceding pages, I attempted to describe the disease, which has been
usually regarded as the proper yellow fever of the West Indies, detailing at
the same time, the particular steps of a method of cure, which I have cause to
believe, was followed with more than ordinary success. I now proceed to
consider another species of disorder, which frequently makes its appearance
among people newly arrived in hot countries, and which, from some striking
marks of affinity, I have been induced to rank as a species, or variety of the
former. Yellowness, indeed, is not by any means common to it, and black
vomiting is actually rare; yet paroxysms and remissions are scarcely
distinguishable, and the difference between it and the preceding, is perhaps,
in fact, only accidental.

I remarked before, that this species of disease, as well as the yellow fever,
properly so called, appears but rarely among those who have resided any length
of time in tropical climates. It was observed to begin, as fevers usually do,
with disagreeable affection of the stomach, with languor, debility, and pain of
the head. The horror of shivering, so common in the commencement of febrile
diseases, was seldom great in degree; but it often lasted long, and sometimes
was accompanied with unusual feelings. The pulse was generally small, frequent,
and easily compressed; the eyes were watery, muddy, or inflamed; the features
were confused, and the countenance was sometimes flushed: the thirst was seldom
great; and the heat of the skin was usually moderate; but a deep and heavy
sighing, a hurried respiration, with an inconceivable distress and anxiety
about the praecordia, gave strong indications of the nature of the complaint.
-- In some instances I have known such severe and excruciating spasms, as, in
some measure seemed, to suspend the ordinary functions of life.

In twelve hours, or less, there was often some abatement in the violence of
those symptoms; but seldom such material relief, as, with any degree of
justice, could be called a remission. The skin became cool, and sometimes
moist; yet there scarcely ever was any sweat. The pulse became fuller, and
often less frequent; the restlessness and anxiety were sometimes sensibly
diminished; and the local pain often abated; but this respite was neither long,
nor of certain duration. In a few hours, all the symptoms returned with
aggravation. The eyes became more muddy; the countenance more confused; the
headache, and other pains increased, together with sensations of anxiety, and
restlessness, hurried respiration, and deep and heavy sighing. The pulse was
now more frequent, smaller and harder; the thirst was increased, with nausea,
and sometimes with vomiting. The vomiting was seldom bilious: it was not often,
indeed, that the matter thrown up, was altered from what had been drank, unless
by having acquired an additional degree of ropiness. -- To the above symptoms
was sometimes added an obstinate costiveness, sometimes such a degree of
purging and griping, as might easily be mistaken for proper dysentery.

As the disease advanced in its progress, the abatement of the violence of
symptoms, which at first was sometimes perceived toward the mornings, became
gradually less and less perceptible, and at last was scarcely to be
distinguished. The anxiety and restlessness were now particularly distressing;
the skin was sometimes dry, though oftener moist, and in point of heat below
the ordinary temperature of health; while it gave the idea to the person who
felt it, as if there was a powerful spasm subsisting on the surface. I may
likewise remark in this place, that a beautiful red color of the cheeks,
together with a smoothness and cherry plumpness of the lips, was frequently
observed toward the latter periods of the disease. Yellowness, as was
mentioned before, was seldom seen, unless in the very last stage of the
illness; and vomiting of black, or even bilious matter was extremely rare.
There was, however, at all times, a great disposition to faint, with more or
less of a certain species of low delirium.

The course of this species of the disease, was less rapid, than the course of
that which terminates in black vomiting; the termination of the one being often
protracted to the eighth or ninth day, that of the other seldom exceeding the
fourth or fifth. The marks of crisis, as was observed before, were rarely
discoverable in the first species of the yellow fever. They were likewise
obscure in the present, and I cannot pretend to speak with confidence, of the
influence of critical days. Where the termination was favorable, the pulse
became gradually stronger, and less confined in its stroke; the skin likewise
became softer, while the impression, which it made on the hand that felt it,
communicated an idea that the circulation was more vigorous, and the spasm on
the surface less obstinate; the eye and countenance likewise brightened up; the
anxiety and restlessness vanished or decreased, and some appetite for food
returned; but it was often difficult to mark the point of time precisely, at
which this change took place. -- It may be observed likewise, where the
termination was fatal, that death approached in two different ways. A patient,
apparently possessed of vigor, was sometimes suddenly seized with coma or
convulsions, and died unexpectedly; but it happened more frequently, that the
powers of life were gradually and slowly extinguished; the pulse became weaker
and more confined in its stroke; while the natural heat and circulation retired
by degrees from the surface and extremities of the body.

The cure of this species of the disease, though by no means easy, was less
difficult upon the whole than that of the former. Instead of the torpor and
insensibility, which prevailed in the latter periods of the proper yellow
fever, the mobility of the nervous system was so much increased in the present
species of disease, that remedies seldom failed of producing sensible effects:
and wherever remedies produce effects, it generally is in our power to manage
the business in such manner, that some good may arise. It may be observed in
the first place, with regard to the cure, that bleeding, which frequently was
useful in the former species, was generally hurtful in the present; and that
instead of retarding, it oftener accelerated the progress of the disease.
Emetics were employed very commonly by the practitioners of the West Indies, in
this as in other cases of fever; but I cannot help remarking, that languor and
debility, frequently yellowness, and sometimes a continual vomiting, which no
remedies could restrain, were often the consequence of antimonial emetics of
severe operation; and I have no doubt in saying, that the approach of death was
actually hastened, in several instances, by this method of treatment. Laxatives
were occasionally of service; but the stronger purgatives were frequently
hurtful. Blisters were often extremely beneficial; but it requires care and
discernment to apply them in the proper circumstances, so as to reap the full
advantage. Opiates were sometimes serviceable, and bark and wine, in most
instances, were remedies of great value; but the principal trust was placed in
warm and cold bathing; which, under proper management, seldom failed of
answering every expectation completely, or speedily, of removing the chief
symptoms of danger. Sometimes it appeared to cut short the course of the
disease abruptly.

SECTION III.
I HAVE now described two species of a fever, which seems to be, in some
degree, peculiar to the natives of northern regions, soon after their arrival
in the West Indies. In the one, a determination to the alimentary canal and
biliary organs, with marks of putrescent tendency in the general mass of
fluids, was discoverable at an early period; in the other, the brain and
nervous system were more particularly and principally affected; while the
species, of which I now (...) give some account, exhibited strong marks of
vascular excitement, with a very high degree of the apparent inflammatory
diathesis. This was more irregular in its appearances and more complicated in
its nature, than the others. The marks of inflammatory diathesis were generally
very apparent in the beginning; but they usually gave way or became complicated
in the latter stages, with symptoms of putrescency or nervous affection. In
describing the history of this disease, it may not be superfluous to remark,
that there is seldom any thing particular in the sensations of debility and
horror, which precede the formation of the paroxysm. The hot fit was generally
observed to run high; the heat was often intense; the pulse, which was quick,
frequent and irregular, vibrated often in an uncommon manner, and with an usual
degree of force; the thirst was sometimes immoderate, sometimes not greatly
increased; the countenance was flushed; the eye glistened, and appeared
frequently to be in some degree inflamed; the signs of excitement were in
general uncommonly high; yet the disposition to faint was sometimes sudden and
unexpected. It deserves farther to be remarked, that blood drawn from the arm
did not commonly exhibit the usual buffy appearance of real inflammatory
diathesis; and though times of aggravation and alleviation were often
discernible; yet they did not happen at regular and stated periods.

It was observed frequently, that many of the leading circumstances suffered a
material change, about the third day of the disease. The symptoms of high
inflammatory diathesis, which prevailed in the beginning, became mixed, more or
less, with symptoms of putrescency, or nervous affection. Delirium made its
appearance; sometimes it ran high, with startings and symptoms of violent
excitement; sometimes there was a low and muttering incoherence with marks of
languor and debility. The gums turned red and spungy, and sometimes bled; the
thirst was frequently intense, the tongue dry, with vomiting and severe
retching; yet vomiting of bilious or vitiated matters was a rare occurrence.
The above symptoms generally went on to increase, during the space of six or
seven days, about which period the powers of life either yielded to the
disease, or signs of recovery began to appear: the marks of crisis, however,
were seldom distinct and final; neither was the influence of critical days so
much to be depended upon as in the common remitting fever of the country.

It was mentioned above, that the nature of this fever was more complicated
than that of the two former; so the indications of cure are likewise more
difficult and perplexed. If we proceed on the first obvious view of the
disease, we shall often do irreparable mischief by copious and repeated
evacuations; yet there will not be less danger, on the other hand, if,
regardless of the present degree of excitement, we indulge freely in the use of
stimulants. It is necessary to observe a middle course; and I must confess,
that it is sometimes difficult to do any thing, without doing harm. Bleeding
was frequently employed in the cure of this disease, and in most cases, it was
a useful remedy, though less perhaps from its own effects merely, than from
paving the way to other more powerful applications. It is, however, capable of
being easily carried to excess; and ought not to be trusted to wholly for the
removing of the irritability, and high degree of excitement, which prevails so
generally in the beginning of this disease. After bleeding, emetics and
cathartics are employed very freely. I have always professed myself an enemy to
the practice of giving emetics in the fevers of Jamaica; yet, I must confess,
that antimonials were not only safer, but of more particular service in this,
than in any other species of fever, where I have seen them tried. Among the
great variety of forms which have been recommended by practitioners, for the
purpose of emptying the first passages, I have not found any one answer so
well, as a thin solution of the sal-catharticum, given at different intervals,
with a small portion of emetic tartar, and sometimes with the addition of
laudanum. The operation of this remedy was extensive. It might be so managed,
as to promote nausea or vomiting, sweat, or moderate evacuations downwards; at
the same time that it proved very powerfully sedative. I may likewise add, that
I have sometimes found benefit from nitre, camphire and opium, given in pretty
large doses, and accompanied with plentiful dilution. But though these remedies
were often serviceable, and contributed in many cases to moderate the high
degree of irritability, yet the chief dependence of the cure was much better
trusted to cold bathing. After the surface of the body had been sufficiently
relaxed, by the previous use of warm bathing and fomentations, the effects of
cold bathing were wonderful. The excessive irritability was moderated or
removed, and the powers of life were invigorated in a very singular manner in
consequence of it.

I have attempted in the preceding pages, to give a short view of a disease,
which has not, I believe, been hitherto very accurately described by authors'
or treated with much success in practice. It is a disease of a continued kind;
and, as I said before, in some degree peculiar to the natives of northern
latitudes, soon after their arrival in the tropical climates. I cannot help
thinking, that it may be easily distinguished, even in the first hours of its
attack, from the intermitting or remitting fever, which is the common endemic
of hot countries: but I must at the same time add, that this distinction does
not reside in the presence or absence of one individual symptom. The state of
the pulse, indeed, conveys information, that the disease is not of the kind
which has paroxysms and remissions: yet this information can only be obtained
from a knowledge and actual comparison of the two diseases: -- I do not pretend
to describe it in words. The state of the eye and countenance, was likewise
observed to be strongly descriptive of the nature of the disease; as also were
the deep and heavy sighing, the hurried respiration, the anxiety and
restlessness, with a certain uncomfortableness of sensation, which no words can
express; but I confess myself, at the same time, perfectly at a loss to fix on
any one single symptom, which appearing at an early period, discriminated it
with certainty from all other fevers. I have described it under three distinct
and separate forms; but I must also add, that they may sometimes be found to be
more complicated with each other, than they appear to be in the above
description.

CHAP. XII. INTERMITTING FEVER OF AMERICA.
HAVING endeavored in the preceding treatise, to give a more accurate history
of the endemic fever of Jamaica, than is met with in books, and I am disposed
to flatter myself, having pointed out a more successful method of cure than
that which has been generally pursued; I shall now add a few observations on
the intermitting fever of America; a disease, in which my experience has been
tolerably extensive. The frequent occurrence of intermitting fevers in every
climate, together with the full and ample manner in which the disease has been
treated of by many learned and ingenious writers, excuses me from entering into
a minute and full discussion of the subject. I shall therefore employ only a
few pages in attempting to illustrate particulars in the history of the
disease, which have been superficially noticed; or to explain some points of
treatment, which, though not new, I have ventured to carry farther than is
usual in common practice. As I had the opportunity of attending to the history
of the intermitting fever in several of the southern provinces of the continent
of North America, I shall first mention the more constant and general course of
the disease, and afterward point out those circumstances of peculiarity, which
seemed to arise from the difference of climate, or from the influence of the
season of the year. I shall likewise occasionally take notice of the general
state of health of the troops who were employed on the same expedition, though
I must also add, that I can only pretend to trace the progress of the fever
with accuracy, in the regiment in which I had the honor to serve.

I shall attempt, in the first place, to give an accurate description of the
paroxysm of an intermitting fever, marking as carefully as I can, the order of
succession, in which the symptoms most usually appear. We are taught by the
descriptions of most writers, to consider languor and debility as the first
feeling or first essential symptom in the paroxysm of an intermitting fever;
but I cannot avoid remarking, that an unusual affection at stomach, a
flatulence, -- in short, something disagreeable, which I cannot easily define,
but which was accompanied in many cases with headache, and sometimes with
drowziness, preceded every sensation of languor or debility in most cases,
where my observations were made with such care that they could be trusted to. I
may also farther observe, that, as soon as this languor or debility began to be
perceived, the veins began to subside, the nails turned pale, and at last blue;
the skin of course was dry and constricted; and there was sometimes an evident
diminution of hea^, particularly of the heat of the extremities. To these
symptoms was often added, a disagreeable kind of yawning, with strong
sensations of weariness, and an irresistible inclination to stretch the limbs.
A sensation of cold was now felt in the back, as if water ran down upon it in
separate streams. It soon vanished, indeed; but suddenly returned again in a
more violent degree; in which manner it went on, ceasing for an instant, and
then recurring with aggravated violence, till the whole body became at last
affected with rigor or shaking, accompanied, in a more especial manner, with
chattering of the teeth. The coldness having now arrived at its acme, or
highest point of intensity, glowings of heat were perceived in the intervals
between the rigors or successions. These glowings grew gradually stronger, and
continuing for a greater length of time, at least banished every sensation of
^old. The heat, which now succeeded, was often much above the temperature of
health; marks of fever sometimes ran high; the veins became full^ the face was
flushed, and the surface of the body bore marks of (...). The duration of this
state was uncertain: sometimes it did not continue the space of one hour,
sometimes it lasted four or five. A dampness at first began to appear on the
forehead and breast, which extending itself gradually to the extremities, was
at least formed into a sweat; in consequence of which, the fever gradually
subsided, and the body returned nearly to its natural state.

The above are the most usual symptoms of the paroxysms of an intermitting
fever. I have described them in the order of time in which they most usually
appear. I must however remark, that symptoms are sometimes observed different
from those which I have now taken notice of; as also, that the order of
succession, which I have mentioned, is not, by any means fixed and invariable.
It is impossible to deny the common observation, that languor or debility is a
general and early symptom in almost every species of fever; but it is likewise
certain, that there are many instances, where it is not in our power to
perceive its actual presence. It is therefore precipitate to conclude with Dr.
Cullen, that all the future phenomenon depend upon this, as their essential and
original cause. There may frequently be deception in attempts to describe the
situation of others; but that which we feel ourselves is more to be trusted to:
-- and I can affirm, that I have often felt sensations of cold in my own
person, previous to every feeling of languor or debility; previous, I might
even sometimes say, to any perceptible deviation from a state of health. But
besides, that the existence or perception of languor and debility, does not
seem to be essential to the existence of a paroxysm of intermitting fever, I
may likewise add, that I have seen instances; particularly in the hot months of
summer, where the whole of this disease passed over, without the least
perceptible degree of a previous cold fit. It happened sometimes also, that
during the continuance of the paroxysm, there was scarcely any observable
disorder in the pulse, or any material signs of external fever. The tumult and
uneasiness, which terminate in most cases by sweat, went off in some by urine
or stool, or perhaps declined in others, without the appearance of any
preternatural evacuation. In like manner it was commonly observed, in the
disease distinguished by the name of partial intermittent, that there was not
any perception of cold, nor increase of heat; no disorder in the pulse, or
preternatural evacuation; in short, not a symptom, which characterizes the
genius of the disease, except local pain, which continuing for a certain time,
disappears, and then returns again at a stated hour. To this we may add, that
there are various instances, where the whole duration of a complaint, which
indisputably depends on the cause of intermitting fever, is occupied by a
comatose disposition, by convulsions, or even by tetanic affection. If we
therefore consider these phenomenon attentively, we shall find little cause to
believe, that the most usual symptoms of the intermitting fever, are symptoms
without which the disease cannot exist; or that they are mutually the cause and
effect of each other. The order of succession I have observed is not fixed
invariably; and cases are numerous, where those symptoms, which some authors
have considered as absolutely essential, do not appear at all. This fact is
certain; and we may safely conclude from it, that the main hinge of action in a
paroxysm of fever has not been yet discovered.

The vital and natural functions are variously affected, not only in different
people, but in the same person, in the different stages of a paroxysm of the
same fever. The pulse, in the first approach, is often remarked to be flower
than natural, sometimes it is more languid and weak. It soon however becomes
more frequent, though it continues for the most part small and contracted, till
the latter stage of the cold fit. It then usually acquires strength and some
degree of fullness, sometimes greater frequ^ncy and hardiness; but as the sweat
begins to flow, the handness and frequency abate, while the fullness increases;
so that it returns by degrees nearly to its natural state. The disagreeable
affection of stomach, (which I formerly observed was sometimes the first
perceptible symptom of a paroxysm of the intermitting fever) increases
frequently to nausea or retching, sometimes to severe and continual vomiting;
which does not cease till sweating has become general all over the body. The
respiration, which in the beginning of the paroxysm, is usually flow, and
sometimes interrupted with sighing, in the progress of the hot fit becomes
frequent, laborious and high. It often happens, likewise, that there is more
than ordinary dullness of perception in the mental faculties in the first
approach of the fever; while this is often succeeded by extraordinary acuteness
in the more advanced stages, particularly during the continuance of the hot
fit. But though it is only during this period that excitement and delirium are
observed to be common; yet instances are not wanting, where derangement of
intellect is among the first symptoms of the disease, and where it continues
among the principal throughout the whole of the course. To the above
appearances we may add, that the urine, which is thin and pale in the first
stage, becomes high colored in the progress of the hot fit; and as the
sweating advances, thick and turbid, frequently with the addition of a copious
lateritious sediment.

I remarked formerly, in treating of the remitting fever of Jamaica, that
certain hours of attack were in a very peculiar manner connected with the
different types or forms of that disease; but I cannot pretend to say, that the
same rules were observed to hold good, with any degree of certainty in the
intermitting fever of America. Single tertians, indeed, began most usually
about twelve; though there were likewise many instances where they came on so
early as ten in the morning, or so late as two in the afternoon. The other
forms were still less regular. It was also taken notice of, that anticipations
were common in the single tertian of Jamaica; as also that they were irregular
and long. In America they were still more frequent; but seldom exceeded one or
two hours at once. They often, however, prevailed to a certain acme, or point
in the disease, observing a regular interval of time in their progress. It
sometimes likewise happened, that the type postponed gradually, till the
complaint disappeared finally, This, however, was much more rare than the other.

Having mentioned, in the preceding pages, some general resemblances of the
intermitting fever of America, I shall next trace its peculiarities in the
different provinces, in which the regiment to which I belonged, had the fortune
to serve. I may observe, in the first place, that I joined the first battalion
of the 71st regiment, on York Island, in the beginning of the summer 1778. Few
of the men were then sick; neither did the number increase materially, till
toward the latter end of June. The intermittents, which appeared previous to
this period, were generally single tertian; and of perfectly easy treatment. In
the month of July, a dysentery, of a very particular kind, became epidemic, and
the sporadic intermittent instantly vanished. The stools in this complaint were
numerous and bloody, the gripings were severe, but there was seldom any very
material disorder in the pulse. The disease did not often terminate in less
than seven days; sometimes it continued a fortnight or longer. The ordinary
treatment was very rarely of benefit; yet the complaint was of a nature so
little dangerous, that I do not recollect a single person who died of it. It
disappeared totally about the beginning of August, or rather changed into an
epidemic intermittent, the type of which was usually single tertian. The
paroxysms of this fever were regular, the intermissions were distinct; and its
nature was so far from being obstinate, that I scarcely met with an instance
which resisted the Peruvian bark, where that remedy was given in sufficient
quantity. This fever continued highly epidemic during the months of August and
September. The frequency of new attacks was considerably diminished in the
month of October; yet such as happened then, were generally accompanied with
dangerous and alarming symptoms. Relapses were common. But though the
intermitting fever of this island was epidemic in a considerable degree, it was
not by any means of a fatal nature. If neglected in the beginning, foundation
was sometimes laid for obstinate complaints; but the disease was not fatal in
its proper form to any one patient, who remained with the regiment. I cannot
speak with certainty of the issue of a few of the worst cases, which were sent
to the General Hospital, on the breaking up of the encampment in the month of
November. The regiment was then embarked in transports, on an expedition to the
southward. The sick were collected into one ship, which, after a stormy and
tedious passage, arrived with the rest of the fleet at Savanna, in Georgia, in
the latter end of December. The voyage had an excellent effect on the health of
the men. Out of a hundred and twenty convalescents, who embarked at New York,
in the month of November, not a man died; and there only remained two, who were
unfit for the service of the field, on the day of our arrival in the Savanna
river. During the months of January, February and March, the battalion of the
regiment in which I served, was a total stranger to sickness. It was employed
in long and almost continual marching, till the latter end of April, when,
encamping at Ebenezer, on the Savanna river, the intermitting fever soon made
its appearance, and spread so rapidly, that before the end of June, very few
remained, not only in this regiment, but even in the garrison, who had not
suffered more or less from this raging disease. It was commonly remarked in the
history of this fever, that the type during the month of May, was usually
single tertian, till the fifth or sixth day; after which, paroxysms were often
observed daily, though generally unequal in force and duration: that is, the
disease changed about this period, to a double tertian form. But though this
was observed to be the case, during the greatest part of May, the type of the
fever was usually double tertian, or quotidian, from its very commencement, in
the month of June. The disease was then of the most ardent kind. The paroxysms
were seldom ushered in by a cold fit; and the remissions, for the most part,
were very indistinct and imperfect. The heat of the weather was excessive,
during the greatest part of the month; and strange and alarming symptoms
occurred frequently in the course of the disease. In some cases a comatose
disposition, approaching to apoplexy, or rigid spasms, resembling a perfect
tetanus, occupied the greatest part of the paroxysm; in others there were
various local pains, deliria, bilious vomitings or purgings, with a multitude
of other affections, which appeared on a superficial view to constitute the
whole of the complaint. Yet these, symptoms declining after some continuance,
recurred again at a stated hour, and were finally removed, or at least
suspended, by the Peruvian bark. I left the garrison of Ebenezer in the
beginning of July, and went directly to Savanna, where the same epidemic
prevailed, though in a degree of less frequency, and with symptoms of a less
alarming nature than at the abovementioned place. At Savanna, it usually
retained marks of distinct intermission, and its type was often of the single
tertian kind -- in short, it was similar to the fever of Ebenezer in the month
of May. From Savanna, I went to Beaufort in the beginning of August. The fever,
which usually prevails at this season of the year, in all the southern
provinces of North America, was then epidemic among the troops who were
stationed on this island. The type, however, was still more commonly single
tertian here, than at Savanna. The beginning of the paroxysms was likewise more
generally distinguished by a cold fit; and the intermissions, for the most
part, were more perfect and distinct. In a few cases, indeed, marks of
malignity were discoverable; yet the disease, upon the whole, was not of a
fatal nature, or of obstinate cure; though unless speedily checked by bark, it
often degenerated into dysentery or dropsy, which were not only removed with
difficulty, but in the circumstances under which we labored, were often of
very precarious issue. This epidemic was still acquiring force, when the
outposts were summoned to the defense of Savanna. Its progress was, in some
measure, suspended during the active service of the siege. The enemy, however,
had no sooner retired from before the place, than a fever began to rage with
violence, which carried off prodigious numbers, particularly of the foreign
troops. It was observed in the history of the preceding year, that few were
attacked afresh with the intermitting fever on York Island, so late as the
months of October and November; but it was likewise remarked, that, where the
disease happened at those periods, the symptoms were oftener malignant or
dangerous. The same was in some respects the case at Savanna. The fever, which
made its appearance after the siege, was or an alarming and violent kind. Marks
of distinct intermission were seldom discoverable, delirium was a common
symptom, spasmodic affections were sometimes violent, and the course of the
disorder was generally rapid. The rage of this epidemic ceased in December; but
relapses continued to return occasionally, during the following winter; which
was an unusually severe one in that southern latitude.

There likewise still remained some dysenteric complaints, which resisted every
mode of treatment that could be devised. They yielded however to the return of
the warm, weather, assisted, in no small degree perhaps, by the active service
of the siege of Charlestown. The recovery, indeed, was so complete, that, in
the beginning of June, the whole of the regiment arrived at Camden in perfect
health. The first battalion was sent to occupy a post at the Cheraws, on the
river Pedee. The distance is seventy-five miles; yet such was the spirit and
activity of the men, that they performed the march in three days, without
fatigue or inconvenience. An open field, between four and five hundred paces
from the bank of the river, was chosen for the encampment of this battalion;
while a situation perfectly dry and cleared of wood, but nearer to the bank,
was reserved for the encampment of the second, which was not expected to arrive
till after some time. In a fortnight or three weeks, the intermitting fever
began to show itself. It spread so rapidly, particularly in the second
battalion, that before the end of July, when the post was abandoned, few were
left who had not felt its influence. The prevailing symptoms of this disease
were much similar to those of the fever of Ebenezer. The type was frequently
double tertian, or quotidian; the remissions were indistinct; the bilious
vomitings and purgings were often excessive, and marks of malignity appeared in
several instances. The approach of the enemy made it necessary that the post
should be withdrawn; but there was much difficulty in accomplishing it. Two
thirds of both officers and (...) were unable to march; and it was not
possible, in the situation in which we were placed, to find wagons sufficient
to carry them, together with the necessary provisions and baggage; so that no
other resource was left, than to convey some part of them to George Town by
water. Boats were therefore collected for this purpose, and such men were put
into them, as were judged least likely to be soon fit for the service of the
field. These, however, unfortunately fell into the hands of the militia, in
their passage down the river, and were soon dispersed into the different parts
of the country; so that I cannot speak with certainty of the general issue of
the disease. Those who retired to Camden by land, improved unexpectedly in the
state of their health, in the course of the march. During the time that we lay
at the Cheraws, the remissions were generally obscure; but after the second or
third day's march, the type changed frequently from double to single tertian;
at the same time that intermissions became clear and distinct. It may be
difficult to determine precisely to what cause this might be owing; whether to
removal from a situation, where the fomes of the disease was in a very
concentrated state; to the mere exercise of traveling; or to the effects of
cooler ^eather with rain, which happened at this time, and ^^ich continued for
two or three days with little in^^^mission. The whole of those causes, perhaps,
^^^ntributed to operate this salutary change; though (...) will probably be
reckoned among the first instances, where traveling and getting wet, are
recommended as being useful in the cure of fevers. During the month of August,
and a great part of September, the army remained encamped near Camden. The
weather was excessively hot, and fevers were frequent, -- sometimes malignant
and dangerous; though they preserved, in general, the distinct character of
intermittents. In the months of October and November relapses were numerous,
and original attacks, though rare, were dangerous and alarming when they
happened. Some instances of a disease were now observed of a more serious
nature than any that had hitherto appeared. Instead of distinct intermissions,
which prevailed during the preceding months, the smallest traces of remission
were scarcely perceptible; the countenance was dusky, and of a greasy
appearance, the tongue was constantly dry and parched; the head was often much
affected, and grangrenous spots sometimes appeared on the extremities. The
duration of this disease often did not exceed seven days; sometimes it
continued a fortnight, or even longer. It was generally of a fatal nature; and
where it happened to people who had been subject to the intermitting fever in
the preceding months, it for the most part effected such a change on the
constitution, as destroyed the tendency to relapse. But besides this unusual
species of disease, which sometimes appeared in the months of October and
November, it was likewise observed that relapses of the fever, which preserved
the distinct intermitting character, were not only less frequent, but commonly
less alarming, in proportion as the weather turned cooler. Relapses were often
remarked in this season to terminate of their own accord, in a very short time;
and frequently to leave the body in a state of greater vigor than they found
it. I find a fact in my notes, with regard to this subject, which is curious
and important. Between thirty and forty of the men of the regiment entered upon
the service of the campaign in so weak a state, that they were unable at first
to carry their arms. They however gained strength speedily as they proceeded on
the march; and seldom forgot to mention, that they felt a new accession of
vigor after every accidental relapse. But I must further observe, that,
together with the above changes which happened in the progress of the season,
the epidemic showed a remarkable tendency to degenerate into dysentery or
dropsy in the months of September and October. The gripings in this species of
dysentery were often severe; the stools were large and watery; and times of
aggravation and remission were frequently observed, as in a regular
intermittent. Indeed the intermittent, the dysentery, and even the dropsical
swellings so often alternated with one another, as evidently showed that they
all depended upon the same general cause. The campaign of the following winter
was a very active one. The army traveled over a great extent of country, and
was considered by many as performing very hard service; but I have the
satisfaction to add, that notwithstanding occasional forced marches, wading of
rivers, exposure to rain, accidental scarcity of bread, and no great profusion
of beef, with the total want of rum, the troops enjoyed in general a most
perfect state of health. Valetudinarians were restored to perfect vigor; and
when we arrived at Wilmington, in the latter end of April, there scarcely was a
man in the regiment to which I belonged, who was not fit for the duty of the
field. In the summer campaign through North Carolina and Virginia, there was no
room to complain of hardships. The camp abounded with a profusion of the best
provisions; and the marches were seldom long or fatiguing. We arrived at
Portsmouth toward the end of July, with a very moderate list of sick.
Portsmouth is said to be unhealthy; and we soon were able to verify the
observation: an intermitting fever, complicated, or alternating with a
dysenteric complaint, made its appearance soon after our arrival, and continued
to increase during the short time we remained in the place. A disease of a
similar kind continued to prevail in the army, after our removal to York Town.
It was not, however, by any means fatal in its nature, or difficult of cure, if
attended to in time, though if allowed to go on, it often degenerated into
dropsy, obstructions in the abdominal viscera, or a dysenteric complaint which
frequently proved fatal in the beginning of the following winter. The 71st
regiment had now served three campaigns in the southern provinces, and might be
considered as being perfectly well seasoned to the climate. It was in fact more
healthy than any other corpse in the army; there not being more than five or six
unfit for the duty of the line, when the French and Americans invested the
place. After the capitulation the proportion of the sick of the army increased
considerably. Some instances of a fever, similar to that which prevailed at
Camden and Savanna, in the month of November, were observed in several
regiments; but a species of dysentery, which appeared often to have originated
from an ill cured intermittent, was the complaint which proved principally
fatal.

From the above short history of the intermitting fever, as it appeared in the
71st regiment, in the different provinces of North America, where that corpse
happened to serve, we may be enabled to form some idea of the changes, which
are more constantly produced by season and climate, or which arise accidentally
from the particular effects of local situation. In the spring and beginning of
summer, the single tertian was the most usual type of the endemic of America,
in every province which the regiment visited: -- the paroxysms were distinct,
and the intermissions were generally perfect. In the months of June, July and
August, double tertians were common, and in some situations banished every
simpler form. As the weather turned cool, the single tertian resumed its place;
so that any other type was scarcely ever seen. But besides the above changes of
type, which in some degree followed the changes of season, dysentery or dropsy
frequently made their appearance in the months of August, September and
October, alternating with, or succeeding the intermittent; while fevers of a
bad and uncommon kind were by no means rare in the months of October and
November.

I have thus observed (...) a cursory manner the more general changes of the
intermitting fever, as influenced by change of season. I may also remark, that
besides season, climate had a considerable effect in modifying the appearances
of the disease. It thus happened, that the type was generally single tertian on
York Island, even in the heat of summer; in spring and winter other forms were
rarely seen. In Georgia, the single tertian was the prevailing form, only in
the winter and spring. In summer, and some part of autumn, double tertians were
common; and types of still greater complication frequently made their
appearance during this period, in some particular situations of the province.
Dysentery dropsy and dangerous fevers were likewise more frequent here in the
autumnal months, than they were found to be in the neighborhood of New York;
while the course of intermittent, as long as the form was regular, was more
speedily checked by Peruvian Bark in Georgia, than in the more northern
latitudes. The prevailing type of the climate of South Carolina, was single
tertian, even in the summer and autumn; yet where the forms of the disease was
in a high state of concentration, as at the Cheraws, the type was of (...)
complicated that remissions were scarcely discernible. The tendency of the
endemic of this province, to degenerate into dysentery or dropsy in the antumn,
was likewise less remarkable than in Georgia. The dangerous fevers of October
and November were also fewer in number; though still more frequent, and more
formidable than in the province of New York. The province of Virginia lies
about halfway between New York and Savanna; and the general effects of its
climate, on the common endemic of the country, corresponded with its local
situation. -- Deviations from the tertian type were more frequent than at the
one place, less so than at the other.

It appears from what has been said above, that the single tertian is the
proper fundamental type of North America. It undergoes, as we have seen, a
regular change and alteration, in consequence of the ordinary changes of the
seasons, as also in consequence of the effects of the various climates of the
different provinces of that extensive continent: but besides these changes,
which are more general and certain, we likewise find, that the accidental
circumstances of local situation often produce very remarkable effects. In this
manner, though the type of the fever which prevailed on York Island, was
properly single tertian; yet double tertians, and even more complicated forms,
were not by any means rare, in a part of the battalion which lay contiguous to
a swamp. The real nature of the endemic fever of Georgia, is, perhaps, properly
of the intermitting kind; yet remissions were often scarcely perceptible at
Ebenezer; which is situated immediately on the bank of the river Savanna, and
which, in some degree, is surrounded by creeks of fresh water. It may not be
improper to remark with regard to Ebenezer, that few places in America have
been observed to be more unhealthful; though such a conclusion probably would
not be drawn from a general view of its situation. It occupies a sandy eminence
of considerable elevation, and possesses a considerable environ of cleared
ground. At Savanna, which is situated twenty-five miles nearer the mouth of the
river, there were likewise many instances of deviation from the single tertian
type, but still fewer than at Ebenezer. The fever likewise was generally of a
less dangerous kind. The obvious appearances of the two places did not afford
sufficient reason for forming this conclusion. The situation of Savanna would
have probably been thought to be the least favorable to health. Though
elevated and dry, and possessing a wider environ of cleared ground than
Ebenezer; yet a swamp on the right and left, with a river and rice swamps in
front, threatened great ravage from intermittents. That they were less
formidable than might have been expected, was probably in a greater measure
owing to the bluff or sand bank being higher than the situation of the town,
and intercepting, in some degree, the exhalations from the river and great
swamps.

I observed on a former occasion, that the signs of crisis, in the remitting
fever of Jamaica, were generally clear and unequivocal. I must now own, that I
have not been able to attain certainty, on this head, in the intermitting fever
of America. In fevers of a single tertian type, the intermissions were
frequently so perfect and complete, that it was not easy to say what was
wanting to constitute perfect health: even in the hot months of summer, where
the remissions were extremely obscure, I often found it difficult to form an
opinion to which I could confidently trust; as it happened frequently, that
those signs, which I had been disposed to consider at one time as marks of
final crisis, proved in the event only to be indications of more distinct
intermission, or of some change in the nature of the symptoms.

Having given a short view of the history and progress of the intermitting
fever of America in the preceding pages, I shall now proceed to offer a few
observations on the manner of treatment. And I may observe in the first place,
that the intermitting fever is not in general a disease of a dangerous nature.
If treated with decision in the beginning, it is for the most part removed very
speedily and very certainly; though if attacked with feeble remedies, it often
continu^^ (...), and not seldom lays the foundation of (...) have an
unfavourable (...). The intermitting fever sometimes proves fatal from the
actual violence of the symptoms of the paroxysm, though the danger more
generally arises from a tendency to degenerate into dysentery or dropsy, or to
form visceral obstructions. But besides the danger, which arises from the
actual force, or from the more tedious effects of the disease, we often find a
character of peculiar malignity, in the intermittents of some seasons and some
situations, which deserves to be particularly attended to. Malignity is a word
of a vague meaning; and on different occasions is differently applied. In the
present instance, I refer the term to a peculiar character of the disease,
expressed by a certain state of the eye and countenance of the the patient. It
was sometimes observed, that the countenance of the patient was flushed; but at
the same time dark and overcast; or that it was of a greasy and dusky
appearance, with a look of sternness and despondence in the eye. Those
appearances, particularly where a white glutinous covering appeared on the
tongue, were constantly indications of concealed or lurking danger. They
occurred often at Ebenezer and the Cheraws, and I had the misfortune to learn
from experience, that whenever they occurred, time ought not to be spent in the
frivolous preparations, which are usually thought necessary to precede the
giving of bark. If we judge it not to be proper in any case to venture upon the
use of bark, before the body has been sufficiently prepared by emetics and
cathartics, we shall too often meet with instances where the course of the
disease will be finished before these preparations are completed. It has
happened oftener than once to myself, that the fatal paroxysm commenced before
I had gone through the usual routine of preparation, which at that time I
thought indispensably necessary, before I attempted to cut short the course of
the fever by means of its well known specific.

Having premised so much with regard to the general nature of the disease, I
shall now add a few observations about the management of those remedies which
have been most usually employed; some of which appear to be superfluous; while
there is only one of them which has a right to be considered as effectual. It
is a common and obvious remark, that the intermitting fevers of the same season
show a general tendency to run over a similar course, though the modes of
treatment may be sometimes directly opposite. As I had often taken notice of
this fact during the time that I remained in America, I began to suspect that
the changes, which I had been accustomed to attribute to treatment, were in
reality owing to a disposition in the nature of the disease, which was little
affected by the ordinary prescriptions. But that I might in some degree
ascertain the truth of this suspicion, I selected thirty cases of fever, which
had commenced within twenty-four hours of each other. This experiment was made
at Ebenezer, in the month of May; where the disease, though highly epidemic,
had not yet discovered any signs of malignity; so that danger was not
apprehended from a delay of a few days. I classed those thirty cases in three
divisions, without paying regard to the nature of the symptoms of any
individual case. To one I prescribed a repetition of emetics, at such intervals
as were judged proper; for another, cathartics of various kinds, or managed in
various manners; while I left the third wholly to its own course. I watched the
progress of the disease attentively for the space of eight days, and cannot
pretend to say, that I observed any material difference in the changes or
appearance of those cases, which were treated in so different a manner. The
type, which was generally single tertian at the commencement of the disorder,
changed for the most part to double tertian or quotidian, after the second or
third paroxysm; though not in a different proportion, as far as I could judge,
in those which were left entirely to Nature, or which were created in the
manner which has been mentioned above. It deserves however to be remarked, that
the paroxysms were usually milder, more regular and distinct after the (...)
use of carthartics; as also that bark succeeded more speedily and more
certainly after a repetition of antimonial emetics.

Where bleeding is judged to be proper or necessary in the cure of the
intermitting fever, the circumstances are generally such as require that it
precede every other in order of time. Bleeding was often found to be useful in
particular cases. It moderated the violence of symptoms, and seemed not to be
without effect in removing a certain state of the system, which resisted the
successful operation of the bark; but I must likewise add, that there was
seldom occasion to employ it in the southern provinces of America. It was
blamed by some as increasing the disposition to relapse: of this, however, I
can say nothing from my own experience; and as I am disposed to believe, that
the loss of a moderate quantity of blood, seldom does material harm in this
disease; so I have reason to think, that it is seldom necessary in warm
climates, particularly in the hot months of summer or autumn.

Emetics have been employed in the cure of intermittents for a long time past.
There are many practitioners, who consider there use as indispensable; and some
have pretended, that the cure of the disease, in its earlier stages, may be
trusted to this remedy alone. Emetic tartar, so managed as to operate at the
hour of the fever's return, was sometimes found to prevent the access of a
particular paroxysm; but though obliged, from want of bark, to have recourse to
this method of treatment in numberless instances; my experience does not supply
me with a single one, where I could positively (...), that it absolutely cut
short the course of the disease. Relapses, I must confess, disappeared
frequently in consequence of the practice; but they likewise disappeared
frequently, where nothing at all was done: so that I cannot help being of
opinion, either that the real effects of emetics have been mistaken, or that
the proper modes of managing them are not generally known. I must not however
omit to mention, that emetics are occasionally of great service, and that
antimonial emetics especially obviate the effects of inflammatory diathesis,
and on particular occasions facilitate the successful operation of the bark.
They are likewise seldom followed by those dangerous effects which frequently
arise from the employment of them in fevers of Jamaica; though I certainly
should advise that they be used with great caution in the southern provinces,
in the summer and autumn, where the remissions of the fever are obscure.

Cathartics have likewise been much employed by practitioners in the cure of
intermitting fevers; and in few cases, perhaps, can be omitted with safety.
They certainly possess very remarkable effects in rendering the form of the
disease regular and distinct; but they do not seem to be endued with a
particular power of cutting short its course. -- The circumstances of the case
can only point out the propriety or advantage of the various remedies of this
class.

The above are the usual modes of evacuation, which most practitioners consider
to be indisputably necessary previous to the exhibition of bark. I must however
remark, that cases sometimes occurred in the southern provinces, particularly
in the hot months of summer, which only admitted of those evacuations in a
small degree. Instead of the distinct and regular paroxysms, which were
expected to follow the use of emetics or cathartics, the disease was sometimes
observed to assume a languid and continued form, in consequence of such
treatment, while it likewise in some instances recovered the distinction of
paroxysm and remission, by means of applications, which excited the tone and
vigor of the system; particularly by means of exercise in cooler air, or
accidentally by exposure to rain.

Peruvian Bark is the chief remedy, upon which we now depend, for the cure of
intermitting fevers. It is a remedy, which like others, has undergone some
reverses of reputation, since its first introduction into Europe; and, though
its efficacy is now fully acknowledged, perhaps over-rated by English
practitioners, it does not seem yet to have gained the same general credit with
other European nations. The French use it with caution, and many of the Germans
are still its enemies. It has been accused even by some of the English writers,
of failing in the cure of intermittents; and blamed by many of occasioning
complaints more dangerous in their nature than those it was intended to remove.
I was early aware of these objections, and watched narrowly that I might
discover its real effects; and am warranted in saying, that it has every right
to be considered as a specific in ague and fever; while it is totally free from
the imputation of occasioning dysentery, dropsy, or visceral obstruction. Those
complaints were always most frequent, where this remedy had been the most
sparingly employed.

But though I have mentioned that bark is both a safe and efficacious remedy in
the cure of intermitting fevers, I must also confess, that it is only rendered
so by particular modes of management. It is probable that much of the bark,
which is now imported into England, is either in some shape adulterated, or
naturally inferior in quality to what it had been in former times; as we often
read of cures effected by a single dram in the last century, which we should
scarcely now expect from an ounce. Three or four ounces seldom failed of
checking the progress of the most formidable fevers of America; one or two
frequently did not produce any sensible effect. Being perfectly convinced of
the truth of this observation, I generally gave bark in cases, where the
circumstances were judged proper for its exhibition, in doses of two drachms;
which I directed to be repeated every two hours during the absence of the
fever. By this mode of treatment the disease was often so completely conquered,
that the patient was frequently capable of returning to his duty in the space
of seven or eight days. Time ought not to be spent in frivolous preparations,
or diseases attacked with feeble remedies, where the health of soldiers is
concerned. The speediest cures are generally the best; and I have had many
opportunities of witnessing more health and strength gained during eight days
in the field, than I should have expected from a month's ease in an hospital,
assisted by the best advice of the physicians. The abovementioned quantity of
bark, for the most part, was sufficient to effect a cure in ordinary cases of
the disease; but where danger appeared to be threatening, the doses were often
increased to half an ounce, or even more. In some cases of obstinacy, indeed,
accompanied with a sluggishness of constitution, I observed no other rule in
the quantity than such as proved disagreeable to the stomach, or excited a
tumul^ in the system. The method was often successful; and I may observe in
general, that two ounces taken at five or six times, and in the space of eight
or ten hours, were often more effectual, than double the quantity in small
doses, and at long intervals. If the large doses of bark, which I have
recommended, should appear to any one to be dangerous or unnecessary; I may
add, that I have myself frequently taken an ounce at once; while I have
likewise observed the cure to be tedious and uncertain with the moderate doses
of ordinary practice. I may farther remark, that this remedy was often rejected
by the stomach, and in some cases passed off almost instantly by stool; yet
that the course of the fever seemed to be no less effectually checked by it,
than when such effects did not occur.

The quantity of bark, which I frequently prescribed in the intermitting fever
of America, may appear to be greater than necessary: so the time at which it
was sometimes given, may also appear to be premature. Bark was seldom given in
the fevers of the spring and beginning of summer, unless in cases of relapse,
till after sufficient evacuations had been premised. In the autumnal months,
where signs of malignity and danger were discovered, the first intermission was
often laid hold of* neither was it uniformly deemed necessary, to premise the
evacuations of vomiting or purging. In relapses I seldom let pass the
opportunity which the first intermission afforded; by which means, those who
were subject to the returns of this disease, were rarely returned in the
reports of the sick.

Where bark was given in such quantity, and in such manner as I have mentioned
above, it generally was successful in checking the progress of the disease; yet
I must not omit to observe, that instances sometimes occurred, where it totally
failed of this effect, under every mode of management that could be devised. It
would be useful to ascertain those circumstances exactly; but this is a task
which I cannot promise to perform. It was however remarked, that where the
inflammatory diathesis prevailed in very evident degree, bark was frequently
given without success: and owing to this cause, perhaps, it was less to be
trusted to in the spring, (unless in cases of relapse), than in the hot weather
of summer and autumn. But besides the obvious marks of inflammatory diathesis,
there appeared to be other conditions of the frame unfriendly to the successful
operations of bark. The exact nature of these, indeed, was perceived with
difficulty; yet I have often observed them to be connected with some of the
following circumstances; viz. with a small and hard pulse, or with a pulse
where the stroke was obscure or without expansion, and where a creeping or
vermicular motion was observed in the state of the artery; to which was
sometimes added, a constricted state of the skin, a clammy moisture on the
surface of the body, without signs of free perspiration, and together with a
suspension or irregular action of the nervous influence. In the state described
above, bark alone was often given in great quantity, without producing any
senble effect. It sometimes succeeded where antimonials, opiates and other
antispasmodics were joined with it; but blisters applied to the back part of
the head and neck, were serviceable above all other remedies in removing those
circumstances, whatever they were, which stood in the way of its successful
operation. In some cases which had proved obstinate to every other means, the
disease disappeared immediately after their application; and in every one where
they were employed, ceased any longer to resist the bark. Bark alone
undoubtedly has a right to be considered as a specific in the cure of the
intermitting fever, but its virtues are occasionally improved by the addition
of aromatics, chalybeates, and particularly by a certain proportion of snake
root. It was a practice with some of the country people of Carolina, to attempt
the cure of the intermitting fever by means of Virginia snake root, given in
doses of two scruples or half a dram. I made a trial of that remedy in
several instances; but did not find that it was successful. Joined however with
the Peruvian bark, in the proportion of two drachms to an ounce, it was often
observed to produce very excellent effects. The cures were more complete and
more permanent. There was not only less tendency to relapse, but dysenteries
and dropsies were more rare, after I was fortunate enough to adopt this mode of
practice, than they had been during the preceding years.

There have been many different conjectures about the mode of the bark's
operation in the cure of intermitting fevers; but none of them afford a
satisfactory explanation of the subject. Bark is evidently bitter, astringent
and aromatic; but how it becomes specific in intermittents, in a degree so
superior to all other bitters, astringents and aromatics, is a mystery we
cannot easily comprehend. It obviously possesses a power of giving tone and
vigor to the powers of life; and often communicates to the sanguiferous
system, a certain state or disposition, known by the name of inflammatory
diathesis. Thus it is usually observed, that where the nervous frame is weak
and delicate, bark rarely failed of cutting short the course of the disease,
and its success in such cases, is preceded, for the most part, by apparent
changes in the general diathesis of the system. If strength, fullness, and
vigor of pulse follow the employment of bark, the fever frequently disappears;
but if those signs are wanting, it is not possible to form any certain judgment
of the future effect. In like manner, if signs of inflammatory diathesis
continue to prevail during the course of the disease, bark sometimes changes it
to a continued fever; but seldom checks its progress effectually. From these
facts, which I have often seen verified, I am disposed to conclude, that bark
is only to be considered as an accidental specific in the cure of
intermittents, and that its salutary effects probably may be explained from the
change, which it occasions in the relative state of the body. That bark is so
often successful depends, we may presume, on the intermitting fever being so
often connected with an attonic state of the system; from which cause it
probably arises, that it is so much more effectual in summer and autumn, in
warm weather and in warm climates, than in the opposite circumstances. But
though an attonic state of the system is frequently connected with intermitting
fever, it is not constantly so; hence the disease is not invariably removed by
those processes which excite tone, or give rise to the inflammatory diathesis.
Excessive evacuations and other causes, by which the body has been reduced to
the last state of debility, have often interrupted the course of an
intermittent. So that we have every reason to conclude, that bark is only
relatively specific, in as much as it destroys certain circumstances of
aptitude, whch are essentially connected in particular situations with the
existence of the disease. In this manner, voyages, journeys, new pursuits, or
new modes of life, frights, the active service of the field, or the hardships
of sieges have often removed intermitting fever, which had resisted the
ordinary aids of medicine.

I observed in a former part of this treatise, that it was seldom a matter of
much difficulty to stop the course of the intermitting fever of America; but I
must now add, that it was always difficult, sometimes impossible to secure the
patient against any future return of the disease. Bark, though much celebrated
for this purpose, did not seem to prevent a relapse with the same certainty
with which it stopped the course of the fever, when actually present. It
deserves however to be remarked, that where bark had been given at regular
intervals after the disease disappeared, the paroxysms in the relapse were, in
general, not only slighter, but had usually more of the inflammatory diathesis
joined with them, while the complaint showed more disposition to terminate of
its own accord, after a few revolutions. It is universally known, that the
powers of bark seldom fail in the cure of intermitting fevers, where given in
sufficient quantity; yet I must also observe, that its virtues do not seem to
extend farther than to a temporary suspension of the paroxysms. That bark does
not elimenate or destroy the actual cause of the disease, appears plainly from
this fact, that relapses are frequently the consequence of those circumstances,
which occasion debility, or which counteract the effects of this tonic remedy.
To which we may add, that though relapses are often of a different type from
the original fever, yet, as they generally happen on an even day from the
suppression of the paroxysm, there can be little room to doubt that the old
complaint again resumes its course, though it probably, in the mean time, loses
several of its original symptoms. It is a fact likewise which we ought not to
omit mentioning, but which in general, does not seem to be much attended to,
that some periods are more remarkable for the relapse of intermitting fevers
than others. I observed before, that relapses almost constantly happen on the
even days. I now add, that the most remarkable of those days are the sixth, the
eighth, twelfth, fourteenth, twentieth, twenty-second, twenty-eighth, and
thirtieth. The fourteenth is remarkable for relapses above all the others. Next
to it we may rank the twelfth, twentieth, and twenty-second; unless in times of
very prevailing sickness, where the sixth and eighth often come in for a great
share. If we take pains to examine the particular circumstances of the patient,
and attend to the nature and degree of the prevailing epidemic, we may often be
enabled to form a tolerable conjecture with regard to the most probable period
of return. Having therefore acquired from observation some general ideas of the
different propensities to relapse in different situations, and in different
subjects, I usually began to give the bark in quantity, and to use other
precautions on the fifth, after the suppression of the paroxysm, in case^ where
there were the strongest suspicions of a speedy return; while this was delayed
till the eleventh, nineteenth, or twenty-seventh in others, in proportion to
the different degrees of healthiness. This practice was continued for the space
of three days, or till the suspicious period was past. But I must further
remark, that besides the propensity, which was observed in fevers to return at
the periods abovementioned, the approach to the new and full moon was likewise
found to be connected with relapses in a very remarkable manner. Independent
therefore, of the precautions, which were used at the septenary periods, the
approach to new and full moon was constantly attended to.

If the above directions were carefully complied with, we might in general
prevent the disease from proving fatal, or from injuring the constitution
materially, though I must at the same time confess, that we could in reality do
little more than preserve the patient in a valetudinary state, till cool
weather, a change of situation, or such a change in the manner of life as
excited the active powers of the constitution, contributed their part to effect
a permanent establishment of health. Being perfectly convinced of the truth of
this observation, I generally remitted the men to the regiment, to be put upon
the list of duty, as soon as I was certain that the course of the disease was
actually stopped. The practice at first sight may appear harsh; but I have found
it to be salutary. Exercise, even some degree of exertion, promotes the
recovery of health. Habits of sloth and indolence are speedily contracted in
hospitals: the military ardour is gradually extinguished, and bodily strength
is recruited more slowly than in the field, under every disadvantage of fatigue
or inclement weather. -- Of the truth of this I have had ample experience.

I have now pretty fully described the method of cure, which I pursued in the
intermitting fever of America. I am not ignorant that other plans have been
adopted, and other remedies employed by others; but as I have not had
experience of any, except that which I have mentioned, I do not reckon myself
qualified to furnish any remarks on the subject. Bark, indeed, is so safe, and
at the same time so effectual, that I should be slow in recommending any other
remedy, where this can be procured in sufficient quantity. The strongest proofs
of its value arise from a comparative view of the mortality of the intermitting
fever, in different regiments, which were employed on the same service, but
which were treated in different manners by their respective surgeons. -- The
Hessians were all of them inveterate enemies to the bark; and there were ever
some of the British surgeons who employed it very sparingly. The mortality
among the troops trusted to the care of those, was uniformly in great
proportion. There was a Hessian regiment, the situation of which I had the
opportunity of knowing exactly, that lost one third of its men by this disease
and its effects, during one year's service in Georgia. There were British
regiments also, which lost more than a fourth; while there were others, which
did not lose a twentieth. The whole of these regiments were engaged on the same
services; they were all alike foreigners in America; and there appeared to be
no obvious cause for so great a difference in the degree of mortality, except a
difference in the management of the bark. Bark was scarcely ever employed in
one case; in another it was used with timidity; whilst it was given with the
earliest opportunity, and in quantities far exceeding the usual practice in the
third.

I have described, in the preceding pages, the method which I adopted in the
cure of the intermitting fever of America, whilst that fever preserved its
distinct and proper form. I have likewise mentioned the best means I am
acquainted with, of guarding against its return; and it will not be improper in
the next place, that I add a few remarks on some of its most usual and
formidable effects. The intermitting fever of America showed a strong
disposition to change into a species of dysentery, or a purging and griping at
particular seasons of the year, and more especially in particular local
situations. Dropsy was likewise a frequent effect of this complaint, and
obstructions of the viscera were not by any means uncommon, where the
intermittent, from neglect or other circumstances, had been allowed to go on in
an uninterrupted course.

The changes from intermitting fever to dysentery, and from dysentery to
intermitting fever, were so frequent in the months of August and September,
that those diseases seemed evidently to depend on the same general course;
assuming at different times the one or the other form from causes which we
could seldom ascertain. In those cases of dysentery the stools were uncommonly
copious and watery, and remissions and exacerbations frequently appeared at
regular periods; but though the cure was often attempted by the bark, it did
not in general succeed.

I must begin with acknowledging, that I shall not be able to give a complete
or accurate history of the progress and final termination of this species of
dysentery, into which the intermitting fever is so much disposed to degenerate;
as I shall likewise only have it in my power to mention the general methods of
cure, which were pursued in the earlier stages of the disease. Where it was
found that a cure could not be accomplished in a reasonable time in the field
or regimental hospital, dysenteric patients were generally removed to places
where they could meet with better accommodation; so that the disease in its
latter stages has seldomer fallen under my observation.

I must observe in the first place, that this species of dysentery had no right
to be considered as an infectious disease. It appeared in fact to be no more
than an intermitting fever, which, from some cause or other excited its
principal force on the alimentary canal. Remissions and exacerbations were
generally observable in the one disease, as well as in the other in the earlier
stages; yet these appearances became gradually less and less remarkable, and
there appeared at last marks of permanent affection of the intestines. The skin
now became dry and harsh, the flesh wasted, and the bowels were uncommonly
irritable, particularly where the prickly heat had retired from the surface;
the disease was now evidently supported by the existence of permanent local
affection.

With regard to the cure of this species of complaint I have little to observe,
which is not generally known. Bark was sometimes employed to check its course;
yet I must confess, that bark alone was seldom found to be successful. Where
there were no marks of an actual inflammatory state of the stomach and bowels,
it succeeded better when joined with aromatics, powder of camomile flowers, and
particularly with snake root. Laxatives were prescribed frequently, and seemed
often to be proper. They were however more useful where some other thing was
joined with them, which had the quality of determining to the skin. Opium in
various forms was a common remed^; and often a useful one before there were
marks of permanent affection of the intestines. Ipecacuanha, or such
preparations of antimony as promoted the evacuations by the skin, were
frequently combined with it. The great object which I pursued in this disease
was to restore and support a free perspiration, to diminish the irritability,
and to strengthen the tone of the alimentary canal. I was disposed to expect
benefit from warm bathing, frictions, etc. but the situation in which we were
placed did not admit of a trial of them. Exercise was proper, and even some
degree of exertion. Change of air was serviceable in many cases, well seasoned
food in some, and wine in others. The above plan was pursued in the beginning
of the complaint with tolerable success; but if it failed, or could not, from
the circumstances of the service, be properly executed, the disease then lost
the remitting form, the body became lean and exhausted, the stools bloody, with
a very irritable state of the bowels. In such cases there was often ulceration,
various degrees of inflammation, or obstructions in the coats of the
intestines. Blisters applied to abdomen or loins, and kept open, were often
serviceable; medicated glysters, varied according to the nature and seat of the
affection, were likewise of benefit; and in the latter stages I have seen much
good from the employment of strong astringents. In illustration of this I shall
mention the case of an officer, who was attacked with this species of
dysentery, soon after the siege of Savanna. Every thing, which the medical
people of the garrison could suggest was put into execution, without much
benefit. The disease continued through the whole of the winter without material
abatement; the flesh wasted, the skin became dry, with such other symptoms as
are usual in this complaint. In the month of March, a person of the country
recommended the decoction of the bark of a tree, (probably of the species of
the Simarouba,) which appeared to be possessed of a considerable share of
astringency. It checked the purging and griping instantly; so that the disease
ceased for the space of three weeks. The appetite was good, the stools copious,
and in some degree lienteric. The griping and even purging at last returned;
the decoction was repeated, but had not the same effects. Other astringents,
the extract of logwood, terra japonica, etc. checked it for a short time, but
no material ground was gained. He died in the month of May.

Dropsy succeeding, and sometimes alternating with intermitting fever, was not
by any means a rare appearance in America, particularly in some seasons, and in
some situations. The swellings generally prevailed in every part of the body.
They were usually leucophlegmatic, though I have also seen some instances of
tympanitis; a disease which was commonly supposed to proceed from improper
management of the bark.

With regard to the cure of dropsical complaints, I have little to observe
which is not generally known. It consisted not only in evacuating the water,
but in communicating to the system such a degree of tone and vigor as resisted
farther accumulation. With this view exercise, and even some degree of
exertion, was proper: wine, even more stimulating liquors, high seasoned food,
frictions and warm clothing, were serviceable. I should likewise have been
disposed to expect benefit from sea bathing; but I cannot venture to say, that
I have ever made a proper trial of it. Blisters were also useful; not only as
occasioning a discharge of the waters, but as exciting the action of the
vascular system. Among the numerous class of diuretics, there is not any one,
which has so powerful effects as cantharides, in substance or in tincture; and
among the corroborants, I should be inclined to give the preference to
chalybeates, colombo root, and Peruvian bark. It may not be improper to mention
in this place, that I have seen some instances where a general anasarca has
been completely cured by the accidental supervening of convulsions.

Obstructions of the abdominal viscera are likewise reckoned among the common
effects of intermitting fevers. They are frequently attributed to the early or
improper use of bark; but appear in fact generally to arise from the long
continuance of the disease. I cannot add any thing to the manner of treating
them that is not known to every one.

CHAP. XIII. A GENERAL REVIEW OF THE PRACTICE OF PRECEDING AUTHORS IN FEBRILE
DISEASES.
HAVING described the method of cure, which I followed in the remitting fever
of Jamaica, the yellow fever and intermitting fever of America; it will not, I
hope, be deemed superfluous to give a short sketch of the general principles,
which have directed the practice of physicians in febrile diseases, from the
days of Hippocrates, till the present times; a subject of which I have not yet
seen a connected view. There is reason to believe that the science of medicine
made considerable progress in different parts of the world, particularly in
Egypt, at an early period; but distinct records of the art, prior to the age of
Hippocrates, are either lost, or so blended with the writings which are
assigned to that author, that we do not know how to distinguish them. The
practice of Hippocrates in fevers, has been accused of being feeble and inert;
and it is certain, that many of the most effectual remedies of modern times,
were unknown to that venerable physician; yet if we take the pains to estimate
heartily the whole mode of proceeding, we shall be forced to acknowledge, that
its effects were less inactive than has been generally imagined. The mode of
treatment adopted by the Coan Sage, seems not only to have done evident good,
but sometimes to have actually cut short the course of the disease. Sweating at
an early period, the most effectual means we yet know of cutting off the course
of fevers, was employed frequently by this author; and though antimonials were
then unknown, yet sweat, excited by a simpler process, was often observed to
produce very decisive effects. Hippocrates, indeed, has been less
circumstantial in the detail of remedies than we could have wished. He has
however related the dietetic part very distinctly. His rules are always
judicious, and his regimen sometimes of such efficacy, as evidently to operate
very considerable changes in the state of the system. It appears frequently to
have been his aim to attempt to exterminate the fever in its early periods, or
to endeavor to cut short its course abruptly, by direct or indirect opposition
to its proximate cause: yet this idea was not pursued beyond a certain point.
After the fourth day had passed, Hippocrates usually contented himself with
supporting the general powers of life with proper diet and nourishment,
allowing nature after that period to perform the work her own way: in other
words, to complete the business by the slower operations of coction and crisis.
These two views, viz. the attempts to cut short the disease abruptly in its
beginning; or in the late periods, the endeavors to support the powers of
life, till the natural termination might arrive, comprehend the general rules
of practice followed by this celebrated physician: and I much doubt if the
moderns, notwithstanding all their pretensions, have actually discovered any
other indications more decisive, though I willingly allow, that they have made
great improvements in the mode of executing those I have mentioned. At least, I
acknowledge for my own part, that I am not yet acquainted with any mode of
treatment, by which the natural course of a continued, or even obscurely
remitting fever can certainly be prevented, after the first days of the disease
are past; -- that is, after a distinct formation of the type; before that
happened, the sweating process is frequently successful. But though the attempt
to cut short the disease in its beginning, or to support the powers of life in
the later periods, comprehend this author's general rule of practice; yet we
find considerable diversity in the manner of accomplishing these different
purposes. The (...), or an attempt to counteract the derangements of morbid
causes, may be considered as the first general maxim, which was established in
the cure of diseases. Hippocrates has this maxim constantly in his eye, and
endeavors by various means, according to a supposed diversity in the mode of
action, to cut off the immediate existence of fever. In this manner the
presence of heat and bile, or the supposition of obstructed perspiration, have
severally furnished him with different indications. His ideas however are not
precise; so that his practice frequently fluctuates between conjecture and
experiment. If the disease does not yield to one mode of treatment in a given
time, he frequently passes to its opposite much at random.

The doctrines of Hippocrates acquired such general credit, in every part of
the world where they were known, that we do not remark any material innovations
in the cure of fevers, till the time of Erasistratus; a space of near two
hundred years. The intervening period, indeed, was distinguished by
philosophers, who employed their time in investigating the structure and
economy of the human frame, as well as by physicians, who improved the art of
medicine by the invention of new remedies. Plato, Aristotle and Theophrastus
were the most eminent of the former; Petro is chiefly distinguished among the
latter. (1) This author, as we find recorded both by Celsus and Galen,
attempted to extinguish a fever by copious drenching with cold water; soon
after which, he nourished his patient with wine and strong foods, a custom
which was in some degree imitated by Clophantus. Hints, however, of the first
of those practices are found in the writings of Hippocrates, so that we may
justly consider Erasistratus, as the first who departed so far from the
principles of the Coan Sage, or who arrived at so high reputation, as to be
regarded by posterity as the author of a new method of curing diseases. I
mentioned in a former part of this treatise, the opinion which Erasistratus
entertained concerning the cause of fevers. All that we know of his practice
may be comprised in a few words. Erasistratus was every where the inveterate
enemy of bleeding. He was likewise the author of a certain plan of abstinence,
which, with a little modification from Asclepiades and Themison, made a
conspicuous figure in the annals of physic for several succeeding ages.

Herophilus, who lived much about the same time with Erasistratus, acquired
also high reputation in the medical world; but unfortunately we have it not in
our power to give a particular detail of his discoveries. Soon after the period
I have mentioned, the science of medicine was divided into three distinct
branches; viz. as the art is employed to remove diseases by diet, by drugs, or
by manual operation. Serapion likewise, who is considered as the author of the
empiric sect, made his appearance not long after this division of the
profession into separate branches. His followers were numerous, and many of
them were respectable; but we are not enabled to give a distinct account of
their practice on the subject of fevers. The summary views of Celsus and Pliny,
or the accidental fragments in the voluminous works of Galen, furnish only
imperfect information. Contentions, however, ran high between dogmatics and
empirics, the former of whom were chiefly guided by reasonings, as the latter
trusted solely to experience.

The Greeks, for many ages, were the only people we are acquainted with, who
cultivated the sciences with industry. For near five hundred years they were
almost exclusively the professors of the healing art. The Romans were cautious
of admitting the refinements of learning into their state; and had nearly
attained the height of their glory, before they willingly received physicians
into their city. Asclepiades the Bithynian, the contemporary and friend of
Pompey and Cicero, appears to be the first, who practiced medicine at Rome with
any degree of reputation. This author left his native country, with the design
of instructing the Roman youth in the arts of eloquence; an acquirement, which
was held in high estimation among that warlike people; but not succeeding in
this pursuit, according to his wishes, he soon discovered, that the profession
of medicine offered a fair opening for the exercise of his talents. The state
of the art, indeed, was then peculiarly propitious to his undertaking; the
former same of Hippocrates being divided between Erasistratus and Herophilus,
and some authors of the empiric sect. Asclepiades was two discerning not to
perceive, that new doctrines could not fail of drawing followers, and too
enterprizing not to attempt to carry this purpose into execution. He probably,
in the first place, read over all that had been written by former physicians;
the most essential parts of which, he selected with a good deal of art, and so
modified as to form a system, which appeared to be complete, and which
exhibited upon the whole, considerable appearances of novelty. If we take the
pains to trace his opinions to their sources, we shall find that Democrites or
Epicurus furnished him with his philosophy, that Herodicus supplied him with
the hints of bathing, friction, and gestation, that the plan of abstinence, or
fasting for three days, was learnt from Erasistratus; and that Petro and
Cleophantus instructed him in the practice of giving cold water, and of
allowing greater indulgence in the use of wine. -- But though the authors I
have mentioned furnished Asclepiades with the hints of his doctrines and
practice; yet we may observe, that he has always modelled these after his own
fashion, and carried them farther than had ever been done by their original
inventors. It was remarked above, that the profession of medicine was divided
into different sects before the time of Asclepiades; yet, as far as we can
judge from the imperfect information which has been transmitted to us, this
author was the first, who deserves the name of an active physician. Previous to
the time of this enterprizing Bythynian, medical men trusted the cure of fevers
chiefly to the efforts of nature; and were only solicitous about the mode of
death. Asclepiades, assuming a bolder principle, endeavored to cut short the
fever in the midst of its course: and it is reasonable to suppose, that by
stepping suddenly from the extremes of torture to the highest gratification of
the appetites, such changes were effected in the state of the system, as
probably sometimes accomplished the purpose. Such were the general views of
this author. It may not be improper to add a few remarks on some of the
remedies which ^e employed.

It is impossible to six the date, when friction and warm bathing were first
numbered among the assistances of the physicians. They appear, however, from
the testimony of Celsus, to have been used with caution by the ancients.
Asclepiades not only indulged in them with freedom, but so conducted the
management of bathing, that it might be justly considered as a luxury of the
highest elegance. Gestation, another of the gymnastic remedies employed by this
author, even in an early period of ardent fever, is an experiment of a still
bolder and more desperate kind; and such as succeeding writers with one voice
seem to have condemned: -- perhaps without examination or fair trial. I am
sensible that the opinion, which I am to offer on this subject, is not likely
to meet with general approbation; but the opportunity which I enjoyed, during
the late war, of serving with a regiment, which was almost constantly in the
field, enables me to confirm the truth of it by ample experience. The good
effects of gestation or traveling, even in awkward conveyances, were very
obvious in almost every stage and situation of the ardent bilious fever; but I
shall relate some instances of its success, which appear to preclude all
possibility of doubt. At Ebenezer in Georgia, at a season, when the
thermometer, in the coolest part of the house, often stood at ninety-six, and
even sometimes rose above it, I was seized with the ardent bilious fever, which
at that time made dreadful ravage among the troops. For six or seven days I did
not once shut my eyes; my thirst was great, yet every sort of liquid, which I
could procure, was nauseous; the distinction of paroxysm and remission was no
longer perceivable; the pulse, at the wrist, was neither uncommonly frequent
nor strong; but the pulsation of the descending aorta was so great, as to shake
the whole frame; anxiety and restlessness were intolerable: in short, the
torment was so excessive, that human nature could scarcely suffer more. The
situation was precarious; and without much reflection I indulged the desire of
being carried to Savanna; though the distance was not less than twenty-five
miles. An open carriage, the only conveyance which the country afforded, was
provided for the purpose; and I was put into it, in a very feeble and
distressed condition. Fortunately the day was cloudy, and cooler than ordinary.
The roads were likewise soft and sandy. Though the carriage was very defective,
the motion was no ways unpleasant; and I had not traveled two miles before I
felt a wonderful increase of vigor. It rained heavily about half way, and
before I reached Savanna, I was drenched to the skin. The effects which might
have been expected, did not follow. Instead of being hurt, I was surprizingly
benefited. I walked into the house with strength and firmness, eat something
without dislike, and slept sound the following night; in short, obtained a
perfect remission of the fever. This is a strong instance of the good effects
of traveling in fevers; yet it is only a solitary one. I shall add another,
which places the fact on a still firmer basis. I mentioned in a former part of
this treatise, that while the 71st regiment lay at the Cheraws, the endemic of
the country prevailed among the men in a most unusual degree. The disease was
often without distinction of paroxysm and remission; the anxiety and
restlessness were intolerable, bilious vomitings and purgings were frequent,
and excessive. While near two hundred men were in this situation, an order
arrived for abandoning the post. It being impossible, as we were situated, to
provide wagons to transport so great a number of sick, about forty of those
who were least likely to be soon fit for service were sent down the river in
boats. Of the particular fate of this party I cannot speak with certainty; but
I have the satisfaction to add, that not a man died of those who retired to
Camden by land; and that after the third day, scarcely a fever was left, which
had not assumed a regular intermitting form. This appears at first sight almost
an incontrovertible proof of the salutary effects of gestation; but I must not
at the same time omit to mention, that benefit also probably resulted from a
change, which accidentally happened in the state of the weather. The weather,
(which, during the time we remained at the Cheraws was uncommonly hot,) became
unexpectedly cool after the march was begun; together with rain, from which the
sick men had nothing to shelter themselves. This instance of exposure to rain
furnishes a proof of a fact of much importance. It is generally believed that
getting wet with rain is hurtful to a person in health. It is no less commonly
supposed to be certainly pernicious in sickness; but the contrary appears to be
sometimes the case. I have seen the happiest effects from the application of
cold, even from getting accidentally wet with rain in many instances, besides
the present. Increase of tone and vigor was generally the consequence; and
life was evidently protracted, sometimes perhaps saved, by accidents, or modes
of treatment, which, in the common opinion of mankind, would have been reckoned
the causes of death. -- But though I have mentioned the accidental good effects
of gestation, and even of exposure to rain in different states of the ardent
fever; I shall not be so paradoxical, as to recommend such experiments in
common practice. I must however be allowed to observe, that we have little
cause to be afraid of their pernicious effects. Motion and traveling, as far
as my experience goes, were constantly hurtful in cases of local pain and
inflammation; or in derangement of intellect; but, on the contrary, constantly
serviceable in anxiety and restlessness, depending on the state of the stomach;
as also in affections of the biliary system.

I mentioned before, that Asclepiades practiced medicine at Rome with great
reputation. He propagated his doctrines with a good deal of success; but such
is, and ever has been the fate of our conjectural art, that no system has yet
preserved its credit undiminished for any length of time. The views of
physicians, with regard to diseases, had hitherto been various and complex;
even fevers had been often considered, by the same person, as depending on
different causes. Themison, a pupil of Asclepiades, attempted to remedy the
perplexity which necessarily arises from this instability of arbitrary
conjecture; and endeavored to reduce all the disorders, to which the human
body is liable, to two general classes; -- viz. to those which arise from an
increased degree of stricture, or its opposite affection, preternatural laxity;
to which he afterward subjoined some complaints, which appeared to partake of
the nature of both. -- The idea of simplifying diseases did not probably arise
in the mind of Themison, till the latter period of his life; on which account,
perhaps, the doctrines were left in some measure unfinished; and it is to
Thessalus, who lived in the time of Nero, that we are indebted for completing
the methodic system, and for enlarging the bounds of its same. Soranus likewise
added to its credit. It is a misfortune, which we must regret, that except
Coelius Aurelianus, there is not one of the many authors who were attached to
the tenets of this sect, whose works have escaped the wreck of accident or
time. This only remaining author appears to have copied, by his own confession,
almost literally from Soranus.

It does not belong to this place to enter deeply into the tenets of the sect,
with regard to diseases in general; but leads to views of some importance in
the theory and treatment of many disorders. It proceeds on the supposition of
circulation in all parts of the body; and with a little latitude may be
supposed to comprehend the affections of the animated solid or contractile
fiber. Fever is considered by the writers of this system, as a disease of the
class of stricture; and if we had authority to add spasmodic, we might believe
the methodics had discovered a very important phenomenon in the history of
febrile diseases. -- But this some may think is granting them too much. If we
take the trouble to trace their doctrine, respecting the cause of fever, to its
source, we shall find that the hints of it are furnished expressly by
Asclepiades, who perhaps borrowed his ideas on the subject from Erasistratus,
or even from Hippocrates. -- But as stricture, assigned by the writers of the
methodic sect as the cause of fever, is not perhaps radically different from
the obstruction of preceding authors; so we do not find much material
difference in their manner of conducting the cure. The followers of
Hippocrates, Erasistratus and Themison proceeded equally on the idea of
restoring permeability in the minuter canals of the system; a purpose which
they conceived would be best affected by certain processes of attenuation and
relaxation. Thus Hippocrates diluted plentifully, and gave nourishment only
sparingly, during the first days of a fever. Erasistratus enjoined a general
abstinence, Asclepiades prescribed a term for the duration of the abstinence;
while Themison limited it so rigidly to the space of three days, that the
practice was distinguished by the name of diatriton, as its followers were
known by that of diatritarii. This idea of diatri^on constituted an object of
much importance in the system of the methodic physicians. It directed all their
movements, and is the only view, which can properly be called their own. The
mode of application of the remedies of preceding authors was occasionally
modified by this sect; but except that which I have just mentioned, we do not
discover much that is fundamentally new.

It may not be improper in this place to take notice of the practice of cold
bathing in fevers, which was introduced at Rome in the infancy of the methodic
sect; and which afterward acquired great celebrity in different parts of the
world. The Emperor Augustus, who for the greatest part of his life was
afflicted with ill health, was at last attacked with a complaint of so
obstinate a kind, that the usual applications did not afford him any relief.
Warm bathing and all that train of remedies had been tried in vain. The Emperor
was sensible of his desperate situation; and his physician Antoni^s Musa,
baffled in all his attempts, ventured, though apparently at great hazard, to
prescribe the cold bath. The health of Augustus was unexpectedly restored by
it; and the physician was highly honored, and amply rewarded. It is a
misfortune that we do not know the specific nature of the disease, under which
the Emperor labored; but we have reason to conclude, from the circumstances
which attended the cure, that it was a fever of a bilious remitting kind;
perhaps complicated with catarrhal affection, and wasting of the body. But
though the success of cold bathing, in the instance I have mentioned, was much
greater than expectation; yet the remedy did not long ^retain its credit. It
was soon afterward employed in the case of Marcellus, a youth of great hopes,
and presumptive heir to the empire; but the event proving unfortunate, it fell
suddenly into disrepute, -- probably without sufficient cause. We find however
that Celsus, in less than half a century, afterward ventured to recommend it
in a certain species of the flow or hectic fever; though Charms, a physician
of Marseilles, appears actually to be the first who rendered the use of the
remedy general. Galen employed it frequently with great freedom and boldness.
The Arabians, particularly in pestilential diseases, went still farther than
the Greeks or Romans; and we presume, from the fact recorded by Busbequius,
that it was sometimes prescribed at Constantinople, even so late as the
sixteenth century. I do not know that it has been often tried in Europe, since
the revival of the medical sciences in the West. I mentioned in a former part
of this treatise, that I had employed it frequently in the fevers of Jamaica; I
now add, that I have ventured upon it in the fevers of this country with so
great success, that I should expect the most beneficial effects might result
from a proper management of it. (2)

We are indebted to Celsus, who lived in the time of Tiberius, for preserving
many of the opinions and practices of preceding physicians, which otherwise
would probably have been lost. This author, not less remarkable for candor,
than for the elegance and perspicuity of his manner of writing, does not seem
to have been blindly devoted to the tenets of any particular sect. He has
favored us with valuable extracts from the works of the most celebrated
dogmatics; he has likewise taken notice of the most remarkable opinions and
practices of the Empirics, without omitting to mention the innovations of
Asclepiades and Themison. With regard to his particular merit as a physician,
we may observe that he every where discovers an excellent judgment, and that
his practice is generally decided without being rash.

So great have been the ravages of time or accident among the writings of the
early physicians, that it is scarcely possible altogether to avoid error in
attempting to trace the various revolutions in medical practice, prior to the
time of Galen. From that downwards we are enabled to give a more certain and
better connected view of the subject; there being few of the principal writers
of this latter period, who have not been preserved entire. When Galen came
first to Rome, which was in the time of the Emperor Antoninus, the practice of
medicine was chiefly in the hands of the followers of the methodic system. The
practice of diatriton, or abstinence for three days was then in high fashion,
not only with the professed pupils of Thessalus, but even with the few
remaining adherents of Erasistratus. Galen every where declares himself its
inveterate enemy; and often transgresses the bounds of liberality and decency,
in his attempts to turn it into ridicule. His own endeavors are expressly
exerted to revive and establish the principles of Hippocrates; and to complete
those parts, which the want of time or the want of experience of his master had
left imperfect. He possessed uncommon fertility of genius, a great flow of
language, and a judgment by no means deficient; yet, from a sophistical spirit
of philosophizing, he frequently so entangled his opinions with theoretical
distinctions, that his views are often uncertain, and sometimes embarrassing.
The principle with which he sets out is directly to oppose the actual existence
of fever; he next recommends to remove, at least to avoid an increase of those
(...) which give rise to the disease. These ideas are drawn from the writings
of Hippocrates, and are such as no person will dispute: but, as the causes of
fever are supposed, both by Hippocrates and Galen, to be many and various, so
the indications of cure often require to be executed in different, and
sometimes in directly opposite manners. This necessarily gives rise to
confusion; and entangles the practitioner in the mazes of doubt and conjecture;
to obviate which, as much as possible, the learned commentator of Hippocrates
has thought fit to divide fevers into three general kinds, viz. ephemeral,
continued, and hectic or habitual; the causes of which he supposes to be so
little analogous to one another, as to demand particular management in the
method of cure.

We look in vain for new views, or material improvements in the management of
fevers, in the writings of those Greek physicians who followed Galen. Oribasius
professedly is no more than a collector of the opinions and practices of other
men; and Aetius, on the present subject, does not aspire to much higher fame.
There are, indeed, few of his observations, which may not be found in the
volumes of Galen, or some preceding writer; yet he seems generally to have
comprehended what he wrote. He digested the knowledge which he found in books
with care and judgment; and gives an arrangement so clear and perspicuous, that
the person may derive information from Aetius, who would be overwhelmed and
lost in the prolixity of Galen's discussions.

From those writers, however, who trod implicitly in the footsteps of Galen, we
must be allowed to separate Alexander of Tralle, a physician who lived in the
sixth century. This author wrote his book on fevers at a very advanced age; and
though the treatise perhaps does not contain many ideas, which may not, in some
shape or other, be found in the writings of his predecessors, yet the
observations have the appearance every where of having originally arisen from
actual experience. The language, which is concise, clear and perspicuous, is
wholly his own. The ambiguous circumstances of diseases are more accurately
discriminated than in any preceding work which has descended to the present
times; and though the manner of accounting for things may be sometimes
erroneous, yet it has had little influence on the practical indications, which
are almost unexceptionably judicious. As Alexander of Tralle wrote at a time of
life when fame must have been indifferent to him, and to a friend, whom he was
more solicitous to instruct than to amuse with the splendor and variety of his
learning, we have an additional cause to give our confidence to his
observations. His manner is candid and ingenious; and the treatise before us
may be considered by the practical physician, as the most valuable of the
remains of the ancients. Judicious cautions are every where interspersed, and
considerable changes in the management of remedies are sometimes attempted; but
the practice of giving opiates in a certain state of fever is the only practice
of this author, which has any title to be called innovation.

Paulus is the next physician of note, who lived after the days of Galen. He
was born in the island of Aegina, and traveled over many countries. It is
probable that he was sufficiently acquainted with every discovery, which had
been made by his predecessors; yet Galen, on the subject of fever, is the
author whose works he has principally followed. His book on fevers, indeed,
contains all the material doctrines and observations of that voluminous writer;
and those who dread the labor of encountering the prolix and sophistical
disquisitions of the commentator of Hippocrates, may find a very distinct
analysis of his opinions and practices in the treatise of Paulus A^gineta.

Having endeavored in the preceding pages to give a short view of the methods
which were usually pursued by the most eminent of the Greek physicians, in the
cure of fevers, it will be necessary in the next place to take some notice of
the improvements of their immediate successors, the Arabians. This task will be
soon performed; the Arabians have not in reality opened any views in the
curative indications of febrile diseases, which were unknown to their
predecessors; or which require that we should spend long time in endeavoring
to explain them. The medical science evidently drew its origin from the East;
yet it was also soon reconveyed to the countries from whence it sprung, with
improvements and additions from the genius of the Greeks. We learn from
Herodotus, that Democedes, a native of Crotone, who had studied medicine in the
island of Aegina, far excelled all the physicians of the Persian court, even so
early as the time of the first Darius; though the court of this Prince probably
could boast of all the skill, both of Assyria and of Egypt. Clesias sometime
after was held in great estimation by Artaxerxes; and the invitation, which was
held out to Hippocrates by the Persian monarch, indicates very clearly, that
the Greeks, even then, were more famed for medical skill than the inhabitants
of the Eastern countries. The islands and shores of the Mediterranean seem
through the whole history of medicine, to have produced the greatest number of
physicians. Crotone and Cyrene were famous for several ages: and Alexandria, at
a later period, rose into great celebrity. Students flocked to it from every
part of the world; it was even necessary that every one, who aspired to wealth
or reputation in physic, should spend some time in this celebrated seminary. It
was owing perhaps, in some degree, to the vicinity of this illustrious school,
that the province of Syria enjoyed at one time, a considerable share of
learning and learned men. The works of the most eminent of the Greek physicians
were translated into the dialect of the Syrian country, in the seventh and
eighth centuries; by which means they were probably, in some measure,
propagated in the East: though we also are informed by Abulpharage, an Arabic
writer, who had preserved many curious anecdotes of private history, that the
doctrines of Hippocrates were planted in the Chorasan, at a still earlier age,
by the physicians, who followed in the train of Aurelian's daughter, who was
married to Sapores king of Persia: nor is it improbable, that these doctrines
were still more generally diffused through the Persian dominions, by the
alliances of friendship, as well as by the long wars, which were afterward
carried on between the Greek empire and the celebrated Khorrou Pawiz. But
though the inhabitants of Syria and Irak were an enlightened nation, at an
early period; their neighbors, the Arabians, who afterward attained so great
a name in science no less than in war, remained long in a state of illiterate
ignorance. Before the establishment of islamism, there scarcely was a native
Arab, who could either write or read. The little genius they possessed was
chiefly exerted in composing verses, or in coloring a rhetorical harangue.
They appear, indeed, to have acquired some practical knowledge of the motions
of the heavenly bodies; and it is likewise reasonable to suppose, that they had
the same skill in medicine, as is common to savage nations; but there is no
reason to believe, that they, as yet, had made progress in the medical art,
considered in a scientific view. Hareth, a native of Tayef, who lived in the
time of the prophet, and who seems to have been in habits of intimacy with that
singular man, is the first of the Arabs, whose name is recorded among the
physicians of the East. This person, who acquired some knowledge of medicine at
Nisabour, and other places in the Chorasan, returned home after some time, with
great wealth, and no small share of fame. He practiced among his countrymen
with much reputation; but how far he spread the light of science among them is
uncertain. The Saracens advanced rapidly in conquests and the establishment of
their faith; but we do not hear any thing of their progress in the healing art,
till the ninth century. Syrians and Persians, generally of the Jewish or
Christian religion, labored sometimes for the warlike Arabs in the servile
occupation of curing diseases, at least we do not know that any of the Saracens
attained much eminence in medical science, till the translations of Honain and
his pupils laid open to them the treasures of the Greeks. We are ill qualified
at this period to judge of the merit of these translations. But if we may be
allowed to form conclusions, from the use which has been made of them, we shall
not, perhaps, be disposed to entertain a very high opinion of their accuracy.
In many instances, the later Arabian physicians have expressed the ideas of
Hippocrates and Galen only very loosely; and in some few cases, perhaps, have
not very clearly comprehended their meaning. But, as the later Saracens were
seldom skilled in any language except their own; the original translators are
probably alone blameable for the whole of these mistakes.

The medical authors, who wrote in the Arabic language between the ninth and
fifteenth centuries, and, who still lie concealed in the less accessible dress
of their native country, are almost innumerable: neither are those, who have
been introduced into the common acquaintance of Europeans few in number, or
small in volume. If I possessed a complete series, even of those who are
commonly known in Europe, the examination I have entered upon might be drawn
out to a considerable length; but as I have no hopes of obtaining that soon, I
shall content myself with giving some idea of the Arabian system of practice in
fevers, from the works of Avicenna, the most eminent and best known of the
Oriental physicians. An examination, indeed, of one of the writers of this
nation may, in a great measure, render an inquiry into the others unnecessary.
Those, at least whom I have seen, do not differ materially from one another; or
perhaps essentially from the Greeks who went before them. The canon medicine,
the principal work of Avicenna, exhibits a systematic view of the whole art of
medicine, theoretical as well as practical. I have read over with care all that
relates to fevers; and though there is little, perhaps which may not ultimately
be traced to Galen or Hippocrates; yet the author has not copied servilely from
either of them. He is more full and particular than the one; less prolix and
tedious than the other. I must however remark, that the distinctions and
divisions, which he has attempted to introduce into the history of fevers, are
not only unnecessary, but actually serve to embarrass the indications of cure.
His general theories are those of Galen. In the general conduct of the cure, he
treads in the footsteps of the same master. He appears, indeed, to be more
fearful of the lancet; while he is not perhaps always judicious, or consistent
with himself, in the manner of employing it. On the contrary he has admitted
cool air rather more freely, and has perhaps carried cold drink even to a
bolder length, than had been done by the Greeks. Cool air, cold drink, and even
the external application of cold, may be reckoned among the most effectual
remedies in the fevers of hot climates; and this author has conducted the
management of them, in a luxurious, elegant and efficacious manner. But though
the works of Avicenna furnish a general view of the practice of the Arabian
school of physic, it is still in some degree a defective one. As he has not
furnished us with a detail of the case of an individual, we are not able to
judge precisely of his powers of discerning the disease, or of his decision in
the manner of treating it.

The medical science, which after the taking of Alexandria was little
cultivated by the slothful Greeks, or barbarous nations of the West, sprung up
with new vigor in the province of Syria, in Irak and Arabia; and followed
every where in the train of the Saracen conquerors. Extending with their arms
over the northern coasts of Africa, it soon found its way into Spain; and, even
so early as the eleventh century, was conveyed to Salernum in Italy, by
Constantinus Africanus, a native of Carthage, who had lived long in Asia, and
who was well acquainted with the language and medical knowledge of the
Orientals. The Arabians were the first who opened the sources of chemistry;
they also made great improvements in the art of surgery, and even described
some complaints which in earlier ages were not taken notice of but they
departed but little from the system of the Greeks in the management of febrile
diseases. After the fall of the Roman empire the genius of learning made no
exertion in Europe for a very long period of time. The native European
slothfully acquiesced in the imperfect knowledge of Arabian writers, which was
obtained from the inelegant, and perhaps often unfaithful translations of the
Jews, who, for a considerable time, were no contemptible professors of the
medical art. But, though some part of the knowledge of the Arabian physicians
was communicated, in this manner to the nations of the West, in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries; yet a part of the sixteenth passed over, before it was
possible to trace any marks of improvement. Commentaries were written without
number; but, for many years, there scarcely was an individual in all the
seminaries of Europe who dared to think for himself. It has been customary to
date the revival of sciences in the West from the taking of Constantinople, by
which the stores of Greek literature were in some degree opened to the world.
The language of Galen began then to be more generally understood, and the
writings of Avicenna fell rapidly into neglect; yet the advantage which accrued
to medicine from the change, does not appear to have been great. The mind was
exercised in a wider field of learning; but it was still in chains to the
authority of the ancients. The opinions of Galen and Hippocrates were copied,
recopied and commented upon by hundreds; but there were very few who ventured
to use any judgment of their own. Among the most celebrated of the followers of
Galen we may reckon Fernelius, Forestus, Lommius and Senn^rtus, men of
considerable talents, but who were too scrupulously devoted to the principles
of their master, to open a new road in the practice of the art. This was
reserved for Paracelsus, who early in the sixteenth century ventured to attack
the opinions of his predecessors, and the authority of Galen. Paracelsus
possessed a consummate share of assurance, together with knowledge of remedies
which were not generally known at that time. He acquired some acquaintance with
the chemical discoveries of the Arabians, in the course of his various travels,
and applied in practice what he had learned, on his return to his native
country. He despised the authority of the regular physicians, employed remedies
with great boldness, and often with singular success. This success was even
very probably exaggerated by report; and there appear to have been many, who
followed him implicitly; while others exerted themselves in modifying and
improving his ideas. Under this last view we may rank Van Helmont, a person,
who effected a very material innovation in the manner of curing febrile
diseases. Van Helmont possessed considerable learning; but discovered, at the
same time such marks of warmth and enthusiasm of genius, as diminished his
credit with contemporary and succeeding practitioners. The terms which he
employs, are sometimes ridiculous; and his reasonings are frequently disfigured
with fancy and whim; yet his ideas are generally important, and often well
founded. The archaeus of this author does not differ materially from the
sentient principle ((...)) of Hippocrates; and perhaps comprehends the whole
idea of the vis medicatrix naturae of the moderns. Van Helmont proceeds to the
cure of fever on the important principle of exciting, or calling forth the
powers of life, to exterminate an offending cause; so that we may actually
consider him as the first, after Asclepiades, who attempted to take the
business wholly out of the hands of nature. He disregards the processes of
coction and crisis; and makes a decided effort to cut the disease short at an
early period. He is likewise an enemy to bleeding, purging, vomiting, and the
various evacuations which had been employed by his predecessors, attempting to
accomplish his purpose solely by the means of sweat, and insensible
perspiration. The success of his practice was so great, that he deems the man
unworthy the name of physician who suffers a fever to exceed the fourth day; a
degree of success, which all the powers of antimony have not yet enabled us to
boast of.

The circulation of the blood having been proved incontestably about the middle
of the last century, hopes were reasonably entertained, that the healing art
would be benefited by the discovery. It does not however appear that medical
men, for some time at least, either argued more clearly, or practiced more
successfully. The advocates of the galenical and chemical schools had gradually
approached to each other; so that the doctrines and practices of those
contending parties were now insensibly blended together. Sometimes the one mode
of thinking predominated, sometimes the other; but chemical principles every
where gave scope to the imagination, which often indulged in the wildest
extravagance of conjecture. Among the number of those conjecturers, who arrived
at much eminence and same, we may reckon Sylvius de le Bae, who lived in the
end of the last century, and introduced a considerable innovation in the manner
of treating fevers. His theories are generally known. They appear to be totally
destitute of foundation; yet unfortunately are the groundwork of all his
practical indications. His principal view consists, in regulating the mixtures
of bile and pancreatic juice. He likewise lays so great a stress upon the
nature of the occasional cause, as gives rise to doubt and ambiguity. Thus he
sometimes prescribes acids, though oftener aromatics, volatiles, and opiates.
But as we possess some cases, which he appears to have healed, in the Leyden
hospital, with all his skill and attention, we are enabled with more certainty
to form a judgment of the particular merits of his practice. It has not any
claim to extraordinary success; yet it is evidently innocent of the great harm
which some later authors have imputed to it. In short, if we except opiates, we
may consider the rest of his remedies as very feeble and ineffectual.

During the time that Sylvius flourished in Holland, a new theory of fevers was
offered to the public in England by Dr. Willis, the celebrated author, to whom
we are so much indebted for bringing into view the importance of the nervous
system, in the economy of the human frame. It does not however appear, that
this writer's theory ever extended far, or that it was the cause of much
innovation in practice.

The method of treatment, which was generally adopted in the fevers of England,
at the time when Sydenham began to study medicine, consisted principally in
bleeeding, in vomiting with antimonials, in evacuating the intestinal canal by
means of glysters or gentle laxatives; and, in the latter periods of the
disease, in attempting to raise sweat by hotter alexipharmics. In the first
constitution of seasons described by this author, viz. the years 1661,-62,-63,-
and 64, we do not find any material deviation from this general plan of cure;
which was the plan followed by Willis, and other contemporary physicians. In
the next constitution, viz. the years 1667, 68 and part of 69, Sydenham forces
himself on our observation by an attempt to effect a very important innovation.
The fever which prevailed during the last mentioned years was generally of long
duration. It was usually accompanied with profuse sweatings, and often
distinguished by petechial eruptions. Cordials, and hot regimen were sometimes
observed to cut short its course abruptly; yet dangerous symptoms were still
more frequently the consequence of this stimulating mode of treatment, than a
favorable termination. The sagacious Sydenham, instructed by repeated
experience of the bad effects of this common method of cure, adopted a contrary
one; which he pursued with boldness, and apparently with great success. It may
not be improper to observe in this place, that our author is not to be
considered as the inventor of the antiphlogistic method of treating fevers. The
ancients, particularly the Arabians, carried the cooling system still farther
than the moderns. About this time however it had fallen into general neglect;
and Sydenham undoubtedly possesses the merit of restoring it; more perhaps from
his own observation, than from a knowledge of what had been done by his
predecessors. Part of the year 1669, the years 1670,-1671 and 1672, form
another constitution of seasons, according to this author's arrangement of
diseases. The epidemic assumed a different appearance from the former. It was
chiefly distinguished by symptoms of dysenteric affection. Our author, however,
still adhered to the outlines of the antiphlogistic plan; and treated the
disease successfully with bleeding, and the repeated use of laxatives. The
method of treatment, which (...) adopted, admits of a remark. In the former
epidemic, the profuse sweatings were checked; in the present, the intestinal
evacuations were encouraged; in one case he appeared to promote, in the other
to thwart the intentions of nature; practices so opposite that we cannot easily
reconcile them. The next constitution, viz. the years 1673,-74 and 75
discovered a fever with a new train of symptoms, and in Sydenham's opinion of a
very different race. It was principally distinguished by pleuretic and
rheumatic affections, by coma and stupor. The general antiphlogistic practice
was still persisted in; and the whole of the cure was trusted to discretional
bleeding, blistering the back part of the head and neck, with the repeated
employment of glysters. The hotter diaphoretics were cautiously avoided. In the
year 1684, this diligent observer imagined he discovered the appearance of a
fever of a perfectly new and unknown kind; a fever accompanied with more or
less derangement of intellect, and many other symptoms of nervous affection;
the species of disease, perhaps, which nosologists have distinguished by the
name of Typhus. But though this species of fever was supposed by our author, to
be extremely different in its nature from any that he had yet seen, we do not
however perceive, that this idea suggested to him any material difference in
the mode of treatment.

From the short view which has been given of Sydenham's practice in fevers, it
is easy to perceive the rise and progress of the method of cure which he
adopted. Antiphlogistic processes were carried to a greater length by the
ancients, than the moderns have yet dared to risk. But there is little reason
to suppose, that Sydenham owed the ideas of the alterations which he introduced
to information from preceding writers. His practice bears every where authentic
marks of having arisen from his own observation. -- The most common termination
of fevers, is by sweating or increased perspiration; a fault observed by Van
Helmont, and which furnished that author with the idea of prosecuting the cure
of the disease wholly on this plan. The practice seems to have been early
adopted in many parts of Europe; and it even continued in general reputation in
England, at the time that Sydenham began his medical studies. Sweating
undoubtedly is often beneficial, and may be considered, upon the whole, as the
most certain means of exterminating the cause of fevers; yet bad effects often
resulted from it -- then probably more owing to the manner in which it was
conducted, than to the real hurtfulness of the thing itself, viewed in the
light of a general remedy. Sydenham, who does not appear to have discriminated
between the actual effects of sweating and the effects of the manner of
exciting it, condemns the practice in general terms, and passes to an opposite
method of treatment with a good deal of boldness. It has ever unfortunately
been the fate of physic, like every other conjectural art, to pass from one
extreme to its opposite by large strides; and thus, even the sagacious
Sydenham, who had seen the bad effects of treating remedies in fevers with much
of the inflammatory diathesis, was induced to employ antiphlogistic processes
in those species of disease, which we should be disposed to believe do not well
admit of them. The new, or nervous fever, in the opinion of the practitioners
of the present age, could not well bear the plentiful evacuations prescribed by
this author; at least, we may safely affirm, that such evacuations are not by
any means necessary. -- But I shall dismiss this subject with observing, that
the practice of Sydenham, if we except the article of bleeding, can only be
considered as feeble, and as often insignificant. His remedies sometimes,
perhaps, obviate the fatal tendency of symptoms; but are not capable of having
any decided effects on the (...) course of the disease. I may likewise add,
that his practice is directly at war with the principle of (...) theory. If
fever is considered an effort of nature to exterminate something hurtful from
the constitution, bleeding and those evacuations, which diminish the powers of
life, are not the proper means of effecting this purpose. But the truth is, the
practice of Sydenham was his own; his theory was that of the times in which he
lived, formed from a mixture of the doctrines of Van Helmont, Campanella and
Dr. Willis.

It may not be suspected, perhaps, from the remarks which I have made on the
practice of Sydenham in fevers, that I do not consider him as the author of so
much essential improvement, as has been generally imagined. I must however
acknowledge, that he deserves the highest praise for the accurate and well
discriminated history of acute diseases, which he has left us. The descriptions
are complete, and the circumstances so peculiarly chosen, that the disease
itself is actually before the eyes of the reader. These a^^ the great, and as
yet the unrivalled excellencies of Sydenham; but in admitting such essential
differences in the cause of epidemics as he has done, he necessarily leads us
to embarrassment, and often leaves the practitioner in a state of uncertainty.
The disease described by Sydenham, in the various constitutions o^ seasons
between the years 1661 and 1685, shows external marks of considerable
diversity; yet I must confess, that I see but little reason for supposing, that
these appearances arise from causes which are totally and fundamently distinct.
The fever of Sydenham, in all its forms, is in fact the common endemic of
England. Circumstances however often arose then, and still arise, which modify
the general cause in such a manner, that the disease appears (...) time with
symptoms of inflammatory diathesis, at another with symptoms of nervous
affection, and at another, with a general disposition to affections of
particular organs. These modifying causes, which are more general or
particular, more obvious or obscure, often continue for a certain train of
seasons, and influence very materially the character of the reigning epidemic.
The general cause of the fever is in reality one and the same, yet I must also
acknowledge, that the modifications are evidently many and various, and often
very remotely different from each other.

Chemical principles for some time past, had the principal share in enabling
medical writers to account for the phenomena in fevers; but about the end of
last century, the mechanical philosophy was again revived, and being
incorporated with the doctrines of the chemists, the laws, and various
derangements of the human frame, were then explained on the principles of
hydraulics, or chemical mixture. The authors who adopted this mode of reasoning
were numerous, and some of them were of great eminence; but at present I shall
only take notice of one of the greatest of them, the celebrated Boerhaave, who
formed a system, which was considered as the most perfect that had hitherto
been offered to the public. The doctrines of this author acquired uncommon
fame. They soon extended over all Europe, and, indeed, still prevail in the
greatest part of it. But though Boerhaave has presented us with a methodical
explanation of the phenomena in fevers; and has detailed the method of cure
with clearness and precision; yet we do not find, that he has furnished much
that is new and original in practice. He is every where cautious, and in most
instances judicious; though he has committed a principal error in forming
indications of cure, from a supposition of lentor and viscidity; a cause the
very existence of which we have every reason to doubt.

During the time that Boerhaave flourished in Holland, (...) before this author
had arrived at much reputa^^^^ Professor Stahl, at Halle in Saxony, proposed
some new opinions, which acquired considerable fame, and which have been
considered, in some manner, as forming a peculiar system. The leading principle
of this author, as is confessed by all, admits only of a feeble and inactive
practice. I might even add, that it frequently leads to a pernicious one. Those
tumults, or sufferings, which pass by the name of the efforts of nature, are
extremely deceitful; and have obviously, in many instances, a destructive
tendency. I mentioned before that they are trusted with danger; yet Stahl,
proceeding on this principle, boasts extraordinary success in the cure of the
petechial fever, which prevailed in most parts of Saxony toward the end of
last century.

In a review of those authors, who have written on febrile diseases, it would
be unjust to omit mentioning Hoffman, contemporary with Stahl, and professor in
the same university. The actual alterations which this author has introduced
into the cure of fevers, are not perhaps very great in themselves; yet his
important discoveries, in regard to its theory, entitle him to great
consideration. The most of the remedies, which he employed, are found in the
writings of his predecessors, or contemporaries; yet they were not, perhaps,
always prescribed by them with the same intentions. The theory of Hoffman opens
a road for the trial of antispasmodics, merely on the footing of
antispasmodics; a class of remedies of much importance in the cure of febrile
disorders. In practice, Hoffman is more decided than Stahl; and his views,
perhaps are more extensive than those of Boerhaave. He is likewise uncommonly
candid; and has furnished us with a great variety of histories, which serve in
many cases to illustrate the nature of the disease.

The antiphlogistic method of treating fevers, the groundwork of which was
laid by Sydenham, and improved by Boerhaave, prevailed in most parts of Europe,
without material alteration, till near the present times. Blistering with
cantharides, which had been employed with caution, and which was even suspected
of deleterious effects by many, was introduced into practice in the end of the
sixteenth century, aad about the beginning of the present began to be, as
employed, a common remedy in many species of fever: its good effects were often
obvious, and, according to the prevailing mode of reasoning, were supposed to
arise from a quality which cantharides were believed to possess, of attenuating
the blood. This mode of operation is no longer admitted; but the remedy still
retains its credit. Few people pretend that blisters are possessed of specific
powers in shortening the course of fevers; yet every one allows, that they
obviate many symptoms of dangerous tendency, and that they often dispose the
disease to assume it proper form. In fevers, accompanied with local affection,
their beneficial effects are universally acknowledged; and, even in many cases
of general irritability, they often produce very fortunate changes. But I must
observe, with regard to this, that much depends on managment, and the mode of
application. In local affections the local application is most effectual; in
cases accompanied with much general irritability, the back part of the head and
neck ought, perhaps, to be preferred to others. I have thus frequently seen in
fevers, where there was much general irritability, that blisters applied to the
extremities evidently aggravated the disease; while I have also observed, that
they as certainly diminished the hardness and frequency of the pulse, and
disposed the patient to rest, where they were applied to the back part of the
head and neck. There is another remedy that I shall take notice of before
leaving this subject, which possesses still higher reputation than blisters.
Antimonial preparations have been employed occasionally in fevers for many
years past; but they did not gain established credit in this country, till
within these thirty years. The discovery of the famous powder of Dr. James
appears to have been the cause of a considerable innovation, in the manner of
treating febrile diseases. The practice of Boerhaave did not go farther than to
obviate symptoms of fatal tendency; it left the disease to pursue its own
course. Dr. James assumed a bolder ground, and promised to cut short the fever
abruptly by means of his powder. There are many who still tread in his
footsteps; I acknowledge, as I have hinted before, that their attempts may be
often successful in the early stages of the illness, or often useful toward a
critical period. I cannot however believe, that this powder, or any preparation
of antimony with which we are yet acquainted, possesses the power of abruptly
terminating a fever wherever it is employed; at least, to effect this requires
a management of which I confess myself ignorant. The effects which Dr. James
promised from his powder, others have attempted to obtain from emetic tartar;
but I have reason to think with inferior success.

The wonderful power, which the Peruvian bark is observed to possess, in
suspending the course of intermittents, has led the practitioners of the
present times to employ it, with the same views, in fevers of various
denominations. But after what I have said of the uncertainty of its effects in
checking the course of the remitting fever of Jamaica, it will be needless to
repeat here, that I do not expect to find it of much efficacy, in shortening
fevers of a more continued kind. I must, however confess, that, even in many of
these, it is a remedy of great value. It supports, in a very eminent degree,
the tone and vigor of the powers of life.

Opium has been prescribed occasionally in fevers for a long time past; but it
is only of late years, that it has been recommended, as a general remedy in
some particular species of this disease. The practitioners of the West Indies,
prescribe opium with more freedom, than is generally done in England. It is
frequently employed to mitigate symptoms; and in some situations which were
very alarming, I have given it in very large quantity with unexpected good
effects. In the flow fevers of this country I have frequently had recourse to
it; and, combined with antimonials and camphire, have found it to be a remedy,
of great value. Opium in general was more cordial than wine. In cases of
despondence and distress it gave a confidence to the mind, and imparted a
pleasureableness to the sensations above all other remedies. In short, it
appeared often, not only to be instrumental in conducting the disease to a
favorable termination, but it enabled the patient to pass through it with
comfort to himself.

I have mentioned in the preceding pages, the most eminent of those authors,
who have written on the cure of fevers; giving at the same time such extracts
from their works, that the reader, who has not the opportunity of consulting
the originals, may be enabled to form some idea of the successive changes, the
improvements, and oftener perhaps the corruptions, which have arisen in the
method of treating febrile diseases, from the earliest records of the art to
the present times. The apparent changes are more numerous than the real ones;
while the most opposite modes of treatment do not often appear to have much
perceptible effect on the event. The cure of fever has been hitherto pursued on
two general and opposite views, viz. on the idea of exciting the powers of
life, by means of heating and stimulating remedies; or of diminishing the
reaction of the system by evacuations and other antiphlogistic processes. The
above extremes of those directly opposite modes of treatment have approached
gradually to each other, or been variously combined by different practitioners.
It cannot however fail of appearing strange to a person, who views the science
of medicine in a philosophical light, to hear one set of men asserting that the
proper cure of fever consists in exciting the powers of life, or in enabling
nature to expel the disease by force; while another, with no less confidence,
maintains that the plan of moderating or diminishing increased action is that
which ought alone to be pursued. From such contradictory assertions we cannot
easily avoid concluding, either that the most opposite means produce the same
effect, or that nature has a prescribed mode of proceeding in fevers, which
ordinary medical assistance is not powerful enough to control. There are many
eminent practitioners, who have been conscious of this truth. The candid
Sydenham himself acknowledges, that those, whom he treated with all his skill
and attention, and who possessed all the comforts that affluence could afford,
did not often fare better than the poor, who were only sparingly furnished with
necessaries, and who met with little assistance from medicine. I have myself
seen many examples of the same kind. Sometimes I pursued the usual methods of
cure with care and perseverance; sometimes I left the business almost entirely
to nature, and I cannot say, that the difference of the event gives me much
cause to be vain. But though I may appear to be skeptical with regard to the
effects of common practice, I still cannot help being of opinion, that we may
arrive at a high degree of perfection in the management of febrile diseases. So
sanguine, indeed, are my expectations, that I cannot easily forgive myself,
when the event of this disease happens to be unfortunate. The remitting fever
of Jamaica is not a disease by any means devoid of danger; yet I should not be
satisfied with myself, from the view which I now have of the subject, if I lost
one patient in fifty. I own indeed that this is a degree of success, which
neither I, nor perhaps any other man has yet attained. I must however add, that
I have not always had the liberty of doing what I wished to do; neither have I
always dared to venture upon what I judged not proper to be done. The
prejudices of patients in some cases, and the idea of responsibility in others,
confine us to the beaten track, though we may be conscious in ourselves that it
never can lead us to our object. If these obstacles, were removed, a man who
will act with decision, may promise almost any degree of success in the
remitting fever of the West Indies, in constitutions which are free from
habitual complaints.

The constant fluctuation which has hitherto prevailed in the opinions of
physicians concerning the causes of fever, and in their practices with regard
to its cure, oblige us to (...) doubtfully of the real progress of the healing
art. Hippocrates was allowed to have practiced with more success than his
predecessors. Asclepiades was believed by many to have been still more
fortunate than Hippocrates; yet the road which he pursued was totally
different. Galen, who reviewed and improved the system of the Coan sage, rose
to great eminence, and marked out the path of medical practice for many
centuries. The doctrines of Paracelsus shook his authority; and these in their
turn gave way to newer modes of thinking. In this manner there have been such
perpetual revolutions in the modes of treating febrile diseases, that we can
scarcely avoid concluding, that little or nothing of the matter is yet known
with certainty. Medical writers have wandered from conjecture to conjecture,
for more than two thousand years; and we do not yet perceive any prospect of
these conjectures being nearer to an end.

APPENDIX. CONTAINING SOME HINTS WITH REGARD TO THE MEANS OF PRESERVING THE
HEALTH OF SOLDIERS SERVING IN HOT CLIMATES.
HAVING treated pretty fully of the remitting fever of Jamaica, and
intermitting fever of America, I shall now offer a few thoughts on the various
means of preserving the health of soldiers in warm climates; taking the liberty
at the same time to suggest some ideas, which might perhaps be usefully
attended to by those who superintend the medical establishments of the army.

The climate of the West Indies has been fatal to the European constitution,
even since its first discovery by Columbus. To the armies and navies of England
it has been particularly destructive. The sad fate of the troops who went on
the expedition to Carthagena will be long remembered; neither will the loss
sustained at the Havannah, Martinique and Gaudaloupe soon be forgotten; while
the destruction, occasioned by the effects of climate at St. Lucia, St. Juan,
and even in Jamaica, during the late war, is still fresh in our memories. As it
appears from a comparative view of the mortality of the troops employed in
these different services, that we have profited but little by the experience of
our former misfortunes, it might probably be supposed, that the great sickness,
observed on these occasions, has actually arisen from the irremediable effects
of climate, or unavoidable hardships of service in hot countries; but there is
reason to believe that this is not wholly the case. I will venture to assert,
nor should I expect to meet with difficulty in proving, that much of it has
proceeded from the inexperience or inattention of those who conducted the
expeditions, or from such errors in the medical departments as might have been
easily obviated. It is superfluous to observe, that the health of the soldier
is an object of principal importance in ensuring the successes of war. We have
many instances of expeditions apparently well concerted, which have failed from
the excessive sickness of the troops: and too many proofs of this sickness
proceeding from a neglect of such precautions, as might have contributed to the
preservation of health. I have accustomed myself to look at this subject for
more than fifteen years. I have turned it often in my mind, and cannot discover
that much judicious attention has yet been paid to it. We cannot often perceive
that health has been an object of consideration, in fixing the permanent
stations of troops; or that it has been much regarded in choosing encampments
in the field. Exercises, which might inure the body to hardships, have not been
sufficiently enforced; and such sorts of diet, and such modes of life, as might
obviate the danger of diseases, have been little attended to; while the best
regulations for a speedy and decisive plan of cure do not appear to have been
adopted. I shall be obliged, in tracing this subject, to advance some ideas
which are contrary to the opinions of some celebrated authors, which combat
popular prejudices, or which interfere with the views of interested men. I may
be reckoned presumptuous perhaps in censuring freely; but I am conscious that I
do not advance any thing which has not truth for its foundation.

It has frequently been the practice, in times of war, to send new raised
regiments to serve in the islands of the West Indies; and though the
injudiciousness of the practice has long been discovered, it does not yet
appear to be discontinued. During the late war there were several corpse sent
out to those countries newly recruited, the consequence of which was, that
though not a man died by the sword; yet in the short space of two years, there
scarcely was a soldier left. A great part of this dreadful mortality
undoubtedly arose from the climate; yet some share of it seems likewise to have
proceeded from the particular circumstances of raw undisciplined troops. -- Men
newly enlisted in England, are generally of gross and full habits, and too
often accustomed to irregular and dissipated modes of life. Under such
circumstances, a sudden transition to a hotter air, joined with full meals, and
the habitual indolence of a passage at sea, cannot fail to produce a plethoric
state of the body, which is often rendered dangerous by the incautious use of
strong liquors, or the ordinary exertions required in performing military
exercises, under the influence of a powerful sun. I do not pretend to insinuate
that those are the causes of remitting fever, but I am very sensible at the
same time that they are causes which occasionally aggravate its danger, and
which even sometimes accelerate its appearance. In soldiers who have been
inured to a military life, such change of climate operates with diminished
effect. The bulk of the fluids is perhaps diminished by a continuance of less
full living; while the tone and elasticity of the moving powers are increased
by habits of exercise and exertion. -- The disposition to commit excesses is
likewise repressed by the rigor of discipline; and the mind acquires a
philosophical firmness from long service, which not only contributes to the
preservation of health, but which enables the individual to sustain with
fortitude the attack of diseases.

In passing from a cold to a hot climate, the first thing that occurs to be
considered, is the effect produced by the simple increase of heat on the human
frame. Expansion of the fluids, and consequent fullness of the vessels is
constantly observed to take place from such a change, frequently however
accompanied with diminished energy of the moving powers, particularly where
heat is combined with dampness of the air. To obviate therefore this natural
effect of heat is the first general object to be attended to, in transporting
troops to the tropical climates. The English, from the constitution of their
bodies, and still more perhaps from their manner of living, suffer more from
those sudden changes than some other European nations. The French and Spaniards
are not only less gross constitutionally, but eat likewise less animal food,
and drink their liquors greatly more diluted, than the natives of England. They
do not probably owe more to medical assistance than the English; yet they are
known to escape better from dangerous diseases; and their safety I might add
has been remarked to bear some proportion to the different degrees of
abstemiousness, which they are known to observe. An idea prevails with the
generality of people, who visit warmer or more unhealthy climates, that it is
necessary to eat and drink freely, as a security against the attacks of endemic
fevers; but a very narrow observation will serve to show, that good living, as
it is called, has no such effects; and we may even soon perceive, unless
blended by long established prejudices which flatter our appetites, that it
actually is attended with pernicious consequences. The most abstemious, so far
as I have observed, escaped the best, not only from the attacks, but
particularly from the danger of diseases. With regard to the diet of a soldier,
serving in a hot climate, I should be disposed to believe, that one spare meal
of animal food would be perfectly sufficient in twenty-fours: and if it were
easy to alter established customs, it would be most proper, perhaps, that it
were made in the cool of the evening. Coffee, or tea for breakfast might
likewise be substituted with advantage in place of the ordinary allowance of
rum: but this I must confess would be a dangerous experiment, Our soldiers have
been so long accustomed to consider this gratuitous allowance of rum as their
right, that no man could answer for the consequences of withholding it. The
practice certainly is pernicious, and the man, who first introduced it into the
army, did no good service to his country. I do not deny that a judicious use of
spirits might be of benefit occasionally: neither do I pretend to say, that,
even the hardest drinking can be considered as a general cause of fevers; but
it would not be difficult to produce evidence, that hard drinking aggravates
the violence, and increases the danger of the disease, when it happens to take
place; while I cannot perceive much reason for concluding, that the use of
spirituous liquors has ever been productive of general good to the army,
particularly in warm climates. But as I have just mentioned, that spirituous
liquors have little claim to be considered among the number of those things,
which contribute to the preservation of health: so I may add, with perfect
confidence, that the allowance of rum granted to soldiers, has done much harm
by ruining discipline, and good behavior. If it is withheld for one day,
discontent immediately begins to show itself among the men. If withheld for
any length of time, complaints sometimes rise to a state of mutiny, and
desertions become numerous. But besides this, that soldiers seldom perform
extra-duty with alacrity, unless they are bribed with a double allowance of
liquor. A double allowance, drank undiluted, as is generally the case, is
frequently sufficient to produce some degree of intoxication. I need not
mention the disasters to which an intoxicated army is exposed. Disasters of a
very serious nature have actually happened from this cause, and they might have
happened oftener had the enemy been always vigilant, and bold enough to have
seized the opportunity.

A deal might be said on the subject of abstemiousness. Moderation both in
eating and drinking is essentially necessary to the health of troops newly
arrived in hot climates; but a truth so obvious need not be enforced by many
arguments. The example of the French and Spaniards afford a very convincing
one. It is known to every medical person, that the fevers of hot climates are
generally most dangerous in full and plethoric habits. It ought to be an object
of attention therefore to obviate this cause of mortality, by means of spare
living, and the cautious use of stimulating liquors: but soldiers have ^ittle
self command, and seldom resist the gratification of their appetites. Hence it
becomes the duty of their officers to enforce their compliance with what is
proper, and to preclude them, as much as is possible, from the means of
obtaining what is pernicious; but this requires great vigilance and attention,
and often great severity. It is not enough that soldiers are obliged to eat in
messes. The officers ought daily to inspect their meals, and inflict penalties
where they observe transgressions. And further, as it is a matter of much
importance to preserve troops in a state of health fit for action, and as the
course of fevers is often uncommonly rapid in the West Indies, it would be
proper, perhaps, that the surgeon reviewed the men daily. The distant approach
off the disease would be frequently discovered by this means, and the danger of
it might probably be sometimes averted by timely assistance. Before men appear
in the sick-reports, the fever is often considerably advanced in its progress.

Besides the alterations which might be made in the diet of troops, on their
arrival in hot climates, some changes in the mode of clothing might, perhaps,
be likewise adopted for the sake of ease and convenience, if not for purposes
of real use and economy. Round white hats would be the most proper covering for
the head; and dowlas might be substituted with advantage in room of the thick
cloth, of which the coats of soldiers are usually made. There can be no grounds
for supposing, that a soldier will not fight as well in dowlas as in scarlet;
and there is certain proof that he will perform duties, which require exertion,
with greater safety and effect, as the nature of his clothing will preserve
him cooler by some degrees. But though such alterations may be hinted, there is
little room to believe that they will be attended to. In the present rage for
military show, it will be a difficult task to convince men to lay aside an
uniform, which adds so much to the brilliancy of the appearance. Much stress
seems at present to be laid upon the dress of the soldier, and I do not pretend
to argue, that it is a matter of perfect indifference. It has certainly very
often had visible effects upon the enemy; but these effects have oftener
proceeded from a knowledge of the character of the troops who wore it, than
from any thing formidable in the uniform itself. But to leave this subject of
dress, I shall only observe, that a flannel or cotton wrapper would be more
useful to a soldier, serving in the West Indies, than a blanket; and perhaps
the expense of it would not be much greater. It would serve for his covering in
the night, and would secure him against the effects of cold, where occasions
obliged him to go out.

I shall endeavor in the next place to point out some of those benefits, which
may be derived to health, from habits of daily exercise. This is an object of
the greatest importance, but unfortunately it is an object very little attended
to in the British army. It appears, indeed, to be little regarded in most of
the armies of modern Europe. I should incur a charge of presumption, perhaps of
ignorance, did I attempt to point out the exercises which are the most proper
for the forming of soldiers. Those only which contribute to the preservation of
health, belong to this place. I may however remark, that the essential part of
the art of disciplining troops, consists in imparting sentiments of heroism and
virtue to the minds of the men, in improving the exertions of their limbs, and
in sustaining knowledge of the correspondence of their exertions when called
into action. If I durst take so great a liberty, I should be inclined to say,
that our ordinary exercises are flat and insipid in their nature; that they
occasion no exertions, and excite no emulation: they neither improve the active
powers of the body, nor inure the soldier to bear fatigue and hardship. The
Romans, who owed more to the discipline of their armies than any nation on
earth, were extremely rigorous and persevering in their exercises. They
practiced their soldiers in every species of service that might occur; so that
nothing at any time happened wi^^ which they were unacquainted. Actual war was
in reality a time of relaxation and amusement to the soldiers of this warlike
people, who appear to have been trained for the service of the field, as horses
are for ^^nting or the course. The Romans were not only sensible of the
advantages which those habits of exercise procured them in action; but had also
the penetration to discover, that they were emmently serviceable in the
preservation of health. The words of Vegetius are remarkable. "R^i militari^
periti, plus quatidiana ^^morum exercilia ad sanitatem militum putaverunt
prod^sse, quam medicos." I made the same remark during the time that I attended
a regiment in America, without knowing that it was supported by so great
authority. I observed, when the men were in the field, sometimes even
complaining of hardship and fatigue, that few were reported in the list of the
sick: when removed to quarters, or encamped for any length of time in one
place, the hospital was observed to fill rapidly. This observation was
uniformly verified, as often as the experiment was repeated.

An idea has been long entertained, that the Euroropean constitution cannot
bear hard labor in the sun, or perform military exercises with safety, in the
hot climates of the West Indies. Hence a plan has been suggested, and in some
degree I believe adopted, that regiments serving in those countries, he
furnished with people of color to do the drudgery of the soldiers. But this
appears to be an innovation which ought to be admitted with extreme caution. It
will evidently serve to increase sloth and idleness, and unless the persons of
color can perform the military duty in the field, their services will go but a
short way in preserving the health of the troops. A soldier, notwithstanding he
may have received the King's pay for twenty years or more, remains in some
degree a tyro till his body has been inured to fatigue, and prepared to bear
without danger the effects of the climate, in which he may be destined to
serve. This is a part of the military discipline, indeed, no less necessary
than a knowledge of the use of arms, and though it is a part of it, difficult
to be accomplished, there is still room to believe, that it may be effected,
even in the so (...) dreaded climate of Jamaica. It is a common opinion, that
the fatigues of an active campaign in the West Indies, would be fatal to the
health of the troops; but the opinion has been assumed without fair trial. The
exertions of a single day have often been hurtful. This was frequently the case
in America, where the soldiers had remained for some time in a state of rest;
but bad effects from the greatest exertions, in the hottest weather of summer,
were extremely rare in that country, after the campaign had been continued for
a few days. But that I may not seem to rest an opinion of so great importance
on a bare analogy, I shall beg leave to observe, that young European planters
undergo greater fatigues, and remain daily exposed for a longer time to the
heat of the sun, than would fall to the lot of soldiers in the actual service
of the field. I might likewise (...) confirm the opinion, that an Englishman is
capable or sustaining fatigue in the West Indies, equally well with the
African, or the native of the islands, by mentioning a journey which I once
performed myself. I lived about four years in Jamaica, during the greatest part
of which I believed that death, or dangerous sickness, would be the consequence
of walking any distance on foot; but I afterward learnt that this apprehension
was vain. I left Savanna la Mar in the year 1778, with the design of going to
America; but having embarked in a hurry, and forgot a material piece of
business, I found a necessity of being put ashore, after having been two or
three days at sea. I was landed at Port Morant, in St. Thomas's in the East,
from which I went to Kingston by water, where learning that there was a vessel
at Lucca, in the Western extremity of the island, nearly ready to sail for
New York, I set out directly, that I might not lose the opportunity of a
passage. My finances not being in a condition to furnish horses, I left
Kingston on foot, about twelve o'clock, and accomplished a journey before it
was dark of eighteen miles. I did not find I was materially fatigued and still
persisting in my resolution, traveled a hundred miles more in the space of the
three following days. It may not be improper to remark, that I carried baggage
with me, equal in weight to the common knapsack of a soldier. I do not know
that so great a journey was ever performed on foot by an European, in any of
the islands of the West Indies; not so much I am convinced from inability, as
from idea that such exertions are dangerous. But as it appears from the above
fact, that the European constitution is capable of sustaining common military
fatigues in the climate of Jamaica; so I may add that it ought to be a
principal object of military discipline, that soldiers be practiced with
frequent marching, and the performance of other exercises of exertion, if it is
actually meant that they should be useful in times of war. The fate of battles,
I might observe, depends oftener on rapid movements, in which the activity of
the limbs is concerned, than on the expert handling of arms, which is acquired
by the practice of the manual. I observed formerly, that abstemiousness and
temperance were among the best means of preserving health, or obviating the
danger of the diseases to which troops are liable on their first arrival in hot
climates; but the rules of temperance are little regarded by English soldiers
at any time, and almost constantly transgressed wherever extraordinary labor
is required of them. To such causes of excess, joined with the great heat of
the sun, we may perhaps impute many of the bad effects of marching, or of
moderate fatigue in the West Indies. In the journey which I have just now
mentioned, I probably owe my escape from sickness to temperance and spare
living. I breakfasted on tea about ten in the morning, and made a meal of bread
and sallad, after I had taken up my lodging for the night. If I had occasion to
drink through the day, water or lemonade was my beverage. In the year 1782, I
walked between Edinburgh and London in eleven days and a half; and invariably
observed, that I performed my journey with greater ease and pleasure, where I
drank water, and only breakfasted and supped, than when I made three meals a
day, and drank wine, ale, or porter. In the following summer I carried the
experiment farther. During the months of July and August, I traveled in some
of the hottest provinces of France. I generally walked from twenty-five to
thirty miles a day, in a degree of heat less supportable than the common heat
of Jamaica, without suffering any material inconvenience. I breakfasted about
ten o'clock on tea, coffee or syrup of vinegar, made a slender meal of animal
food in the evening, with a great proportion of sallad and vegetables; but
never drank the weakest wines without dilution. The great refreshment which I
found from syrup of vinegar and water, convinces me, that the Romans had good
cause for making vinegar such an essential article among the provisions of
their armies. -- The state of luxury and our depraved appetites, unfortunately
do not suffer it to be adopted by the English. I ought perhaps to make (...)
apology to the reader for introducing my own experience on the present
occasion: but I must add, that I have only done it, because it enables me to
speak from conviction, that an English soldier may be rendered capable of going
through the severest military service in the hottest islands of the
West Indies, and that temperance will be one of the best means of enabling him
to perform his duty with safety and effect.

I mentioned before, that the military exercise of the English army is ill
calculated to excite a spirit of emulation among the men. It is in fact
considered only as a piece of drudgery, in which there are few who have any
ambition to excel. It has little effect in improving the activity of the limbs,
or hardening the constitution of the body; so that it may better sustain
hardship and fatigue. But feeble as its effects are in the view of increasing
exertion, or preserving health, it is generally almost entirely discontinued
when troops arrive in hot climates; a practice, which has arisen from a
superficial and mistaken view of the subject. Sloth and indolence are the bane
of a soldier in every climate; exercise and action are the greatest
preservatives of discipline and of health. It would be reckoned presumption in
me, and it does not belong to this place to point out those exercises which
might be proper for the forming of soldiers. But every one knows that walking,
running, wrestling, leaping, fencing and swimming, are often called into actual
use in the practice of war. These are such exercises likewise as excite
emulation, and are practiced with pleasure by the individual. They harden the
body, increase the power of the limbs, and by furnishing the officer with a
view of the different degrees of activity, may often enable him to place his
men in the ranks, according to the uniformity of their exertions; a more useful
mode of arrangement in time of action, than uniformity of exterior form. I may
add in this place, that sea-bathing will be extremely useful in most cases, in
increasing the vigor and preserving the health of soldiers serving in warm
climates. There no doubt will occur many cases, in which it is improper; but in
general it may be employed with great benefit. I chiefly impute it to this
cause, that I did not experience a single day's indisposition, during the four
years that I lived in Jamaica.

It has been known for many ages, that the cause of intermitting and remitting
fevers, the most formidable diseases of hot climates, owes its origin to
exhalations from swampy and moist grounds. It often happens likewise, that
those low and swampy grounds are the most accessible parts of a coast or that
towns and settlements have been placed near them -- to attack or defend which
falls to the lot of the soldier. It not being therefore in the power of a
military commander to remove the natural disadvantages, which I have mentioned;
it is only in his power to show his judgment and attention, by applying the
best remedies to obviate their effects. It is certainly an object of the utmost
consequence to preserve troops in a state of health fit for action: and no
person will deny, that every care ought to be employed in choosing the best
situations for quarters, or even temporary encampments, that the nature of the
duty will permit. We learn from experience that fevers are little known in
rough and hilly countries, where water flows with a rapid course; while we
likewise know, that they are common in low and champaign countries, where water
stagnates, or has only a sluggish motion: independent of which, those
situations which are in the neighborhood of swamps, or near the oozy banks of
large rivers, have always been observed to be particularly liable to such
diseases. If therefore the circumstances of the service do not forbid, no room
can be left to doubt about the propriety of stationing troops in the mountanous
or hilly parts of a country; while I may likewise add, that where necessity
confines them to the plain, the sea shore will in general be found to be the
most eligible. But besides the above general character of local situations
there are likewise some subordinate circumstances, which deserve to be
particularly attended to in choosing the ground of encampments. It is very
commonly believed that high and elevated situations are the most uniformly
proper for this purpose; but this in fact is not, by any means, a general rule.
A high and dry situation does not contain any thing hurtful in itself; but it
is more than others exposed to the effluvia which are carried from a distance.
It is the peculiar nature of exhalations to ascend as they proceed from their
source; in confirmation of which truth I have had several opportunities of
witnessing, that this cause of disease was carried to rising grounds in a state
of great activity; while it apparently passed over the plain or valleys which
lay contiguous, without producing any material effects. From the knowledge of
this fact we are furnished with this obvious remark, that it will be proper to
interpose woods or rising grounds to the progress of those noxious vapors; or
where such natural advantages do not exist, it might be serviceable to burn a
chain of fires in a temporary encampment, or even to raise a parapet wall to
over top the barracks, where necessity requires a more permanent station. -- It
would be a matter of utility, could we determine with any certainty to what
distance from its source, the noxious effluvia extend; but this is a question
which we cannot hope to ascertain very exactly. It is not uniformly the same in
all situations, depending on the concentrated state of the exhalation at its
source, the obstacles it meets with in its progress, and the nature of the
ground over which it passes, or to which it is directed. I have known its
influence very remarkable at the distance of a mile and a half, on the top of a
hill of very considerable elevation.

The conveniences of trade have often tempted colonists to place their towns on
the banks of rivers, without regard to the healthfulness of the situation. --
The choice of such spots, injudicious as it evidently is, has been greatly
approved of, and warmly recommended as preferable to others for the encampment
of troops, by a very celebrated medical authority. Sir John Pringle considers
the banks of large rivers as extremely proper for this purpose, on account of a
free circulation of air; but I am sorry to observe, that Sir John Pringle's
opinion on this occasion appears to have arisen from his theory, rather than
that his theory has arisen from observation. We have actual experience of the
unhealthfulness of the muddy banks of large rivers in hot climates; and we have
little cause to dread diseases, which originate from confined air in America,
the West Indies, or perhaps in any country where troops are employed in the
field.

I have just now observed, that the banks of large rivers, in the opinion of
Sir John Pringle, afford the most eligible situation with respect to
healthiness for the encampment of troops. I may add, that the same author has
likewise recommended open grounds, for this purpose, in preference to woods;
and that the same favorite idea, viz. a free circulation of air, has
influenced his advice. I will not contend, that open, dry and cultivated
grounds may not be preferable to grounds covered with wood, where the heat of
the climate is moderate; but I have no doubt in asserting, that encampments on
lands, the woods of which have been newly cut down, as is generally the case in
times of war, are of all others the most unhealthful. I have myself seen
several examples of it. Perhaps it is in a great measure owing to this cause,
that new countries are generally so fatal to the first settlers; as also, that
troops suffer so remarkably in carrying on the sieges of places which are
surrounded by woods: it being constantly observed, that effluvia from moist
lands, when first exposed to the action of a powerful sun, are always highly
pernicious. The Romans, whose observations on subjects which relate to war, may
be opposed with confidence to the authority of the most celebrated moderns,
were fully sensible of the advantages of encamping under the shelter of wood.
We learn from Vegetius, that their armies resorted to the cover of a wood, not
less carefully, than that they avoided the vicinity of swamps or marshes. There
are in reality various circumstances, which contribute to render such
situations both healthy and agreeable. If troops are encamped in the body of a
wood, the noxious effluvia, which may be carried by the winds from neighboring
swamps, are stopped in their progress; the lofty shade of the trees preserves the
air cool and more refreshing than the atmosphere of the open country; while we
know from experience, that moist and swampy lands do not send forth their
noxious vapors, in any remarkable degree, unless where they are acted upon by
the heat of a powerful sun.

I shall only further observe, with regard to the cause of intermitting and
remitting fevers, that a space of time almost constantly intervenes between
exposure to the noxious effluvia, and the subsequent appearance of the disease.
It is not indeed uniformly the same in all cases, appearing to depend not only
on the concentrated state in which the exhalation is applied to the body; but
on the general aptitude of the individual, and the various occasional or
exciting causes, which facilitate or resist its operation. It was in a few
instances only, that I saw the disease appear before the seventh day. It was
oftener the fourteenth, twentieth, or even longer. Upon the whole I may remark,
that septenary periods has a considerable power in influencing the time of its
appearance.

Having offered a few observations in the preceding pages, on the diet,
exercises and choice of the quarters or encampments for troops in hot climates;
I shall now add a few hints respecting medical care and management. It will
probably be supposed, that no attention with respect to this subject has been
omitted. Regiments are provided with surgeons, and armies have always been
furnished with ample hospital establishments. But this perhaps is not enough.
It is necessary that the duties of these stations be well executed, as well as
well designed. The office of surgeon to a regiment is an office of trust and of
primary importance; the appointment to it, however, does not seem in general to
be sufficiently attended to. The surgeoncies of regiments, till lately, were
allowed to be bought and sold; in consequence of which abuse, little other
qualification, came to be required, than the command of the purchase money.
Thus it often happened, that young men, who had attended a course of anatomical
lectures, or walked the rounds of an hospital for a few months, came at once to
be entrusted with the care of the lives of six or seven hundred soldiers, who,
as they are raised and maintained at a great expense, deserve, on the score of
economy, independent of every other consideration, to be well taken care of. It
would be superfluous to use any arguments to prove the prodigality of
committing the care of a regiment to men, who have not had professional
experience in any country, and who are totally unacquainted with the diseases
of the countries to which they are frequently sent. If we are disposed to
believe that there is any thing in medical treatment, we can scarcely avoid
making the conclusion, that many lives are lost from this cause. It must not be
understood, that I mean any thing direspectful to the surgeons of the army, by
this insinuation. I know that a regiment is an excellent school for medical
knowledge; and that the best practitioners have occasionally appeared in the
army; but I wish strongly to inculcate the propriety of obliging candidates for
this office, to produce evidence of their qualifications, before they are
admitted to such an important trust. It is not enough, that a young man, who
offers himself to take charge of the health of a regiment, should know to
perform an operation with dexterity. Handling a knife in reality is the least
part of a regimental surgeon's duty. The office of physician is his daily
employment, to execute which properly, both years and experience are required.
It certainly ought therefore to be an object of concern with those who are
entrusted with the office of superintending the medical appointments of the
army, that the candidates for surgeoncies be obliged to submit to such trials,
as may in some degree afford proofs of their abilities. It would be a proper
regulation, perhaps, that no man be permitted to propose himself for the
surgeoncy of a regiment, before he has arrived at such an age, as may have
furnished him with general experience; and further, that he give testimony of
actual abilities by the treatment of diseases in an hospital, under the
inspection of an able physician, to whom the duty will be prescribed to examine
the mode of practice with rigor. A trial of this sort might be better trusted
to than the recommendatory letter of a professor; or even the diploma of Oxford
or Edinburgh. There is not any thing chimerical in the proposal. Nothing in
short is more practicable; but it is scarcely to be expected, that men of
talents and education will give themselves so much trouble, that they may be
admitted into a service which holds out few advantages. The salary of
regimental surgeons is small; and it is perhaps no paradox to say, that this is
a cause of great expense to the nation. The bare subsistence, which the service
affords, furnishes no inducement for men of abilities to enter, at least to
remain any length of time in the army, which unfortunately has been considered
in no other light, than as a place, where surgeons may pass their noviciate;
but which they are generally disposed to leave, as soon as they are qualified
to execute the duty properly. Medical knowledge is gained only by experience
but independent of medical knowledge, an acquaintance with the habits,
characters and dispositions of soldiers is a matter of so great importance,
that old surgeons, even of inferior abilities as medical men, have generally
been observed to have a proportionably small list of sick in their respective
corpse. The qualities that are principally required in a regimental surgeon,
exclusive of medical learning and knowledge, are acuteness in discerning the
characters and dispositions of men, and above all, boldness and decision in the
application of remedies. Life is often lost in unhealthy climates, by the
dilatoriness and timidity of common practice.

Having mentioned just now, that there appears to be a remissness in examining
the qualifications that are requisite for the office of regimental surgeon, I
might perhaps, with equal justice, extend the remark to the appointments in the
general hospital. -- The power of appointing physicians or surgeons in the
hospital, has generally been lodged with the commanders in chief, and I might
say, without transgressing the bounds of truth, that merit has not always been
the best claim for promotion. It would be invidious to be more particular in
censuring what is passed. It is only hoped, that the subject will be enquired
into, and such remedies applied, as will preclude similar abuses in future. The
general hospital has ever been a heavy article in the expenses of war; and if
it were fair to form an opinion of the whole, from the part which I have seen,
I should not hesitate in declaring, that the establishment is in a great
measure superfluous. I have no doubt, in obtaining the suffrages of people of
experience, that general hospitals are ruinous to military discipline; that
they promote sloth and indolence, the worst disease to which a soldier is
liable, and that they extinguish very speedily the ardour for the service of
the field. -- There is in fact no exaggeration in the assertion, that the man,
who has spent two or three months in a general hospital, is less of a soldier
than when he was first recruited. It is only I may add by habits of exercise,
even by toils and fatigue, that men at last attain the properties of good
soldiers: while it is only by constant practice of such discipline, that they
are preserved in a state fit for the performance of their duties. These active
qualities are speedily extinguished by the habits of sloth and indolence, which
prevail in general hospitals; but besides this, it is likewise certain, that
cures are often there protracted to months, which might have been accomplished
in the course of a few days, if circumstances would have permitted the men to
remain with their regiments. -- Regimental surgeons have many inducements to
exert themselves in restoring their men speedily to health, which act only with
feeble power on those who have the management of general hospitals. The former
likewise possess some advantages, of which the latter are destitute. They know
the habit and dispositions of the patient; they see the disease in its first
beginnings, and are enabled to seize the most favorable moments for acting
with decision. The above are considerations, which ought to make us backward in
removing sick soldiers to general hospitals; I may add, that such is the nature
of military diseases, that there does not, perhaps occur one case in twenty,
which might not be treated properly by the surgeon of the regiment, if
attention, and a very little expense were bestowed in providing necessary
accommodation. But besides that, the diseases of soldiers are seldom of such a
kind, that they might not (...) properly by regimental surgeons, if government
were at the expense of supplying a few conveniences.

I may farther observe, that together with the indolence naturally attached to
general hospitals, and uniformly hurtful to military discipline, there is often
actual danger to life, by removing men in critical situations, or by the
necessary intermission of medical assistance, where continual and vigorous
exertions are required The diseases of hot climates, particularly the fevers of
the West Indies, are often most acute and rapid in their course. The surgeon of
a regiment perceives the approach of danger, and, sensible that his situation
does not enable him to do justice to his patient, determines to remove him to
the general hospital. But time is lost before this can be accomplished. It is
seldom that any thing is done after it is deemed proper to send a sick man
away; neither does it commonly happen, that any thing material is attempted on
the day on which he is received. Thus one day at least, sometimes two are
completely lost in cases, where every moment is of consequence. Time is
precious in the fevers of hot climates; and the decision or neglect of an hour
often determines the fate of a patient.

It is an observation, which cannot fail of having frequently occurred to
people who have served any time in the army, that it would be a very great
advantage to the service, if sick soldiers could always be taken care of by the
respective surgeons of the regiment. I have endeavored to show, that the plan
is practicable and easy; and I may further add, that the expense necessary for
such an arrangement, would not amount to one third of what is usually spent in
general hospital establishments. If this idea were adopted, nothing more would
be required, than that proper lodgings, proper provisions, and a sufficient
supply of medicines, were furnished for the sick; that the surgeon of the
regiment be well qualified for his station; and that an inspector be appointed
for a certain portion of troops, to take care that the duty be well and
diligently executed. By this means a general hospital, as far as regards
medical treatment, might be abolished, or at least greatly abridged. Where
fighting was expected, extra-surgical assistance would still be necessary. Such
an inspection of regimental hospitals, as that I have mentioned, seems to be
perfectly sufficient for the care of the health of an army, in ordinary
occasions. The greatest precautions, however, ought to be taken, that the
inspection does not degenerate into a nominal duty. The inspector ought to
visit the different quarters, examine minutely into every article of the
management of the hospitals, and order that general reports be published
annually; and that some mark of approbation be bestowed upon those surgeons,
who appear to have executed their duty with the greatest diligence and ability.
It ought to be a concern of government, however, that no person be appointed to
inspect regimental hospitals, who is not well acquainted with the diseases of
the climate, in which the troops happen to serve.

NOTES.
CHAP. I.
THOUGH I have described the endemic fever of Jamaica as distinctly as is in my
power; yet as I have often observed that we attain more accurate ideas from the
detail of a particular history than from general description, I shall select
from my notes two or three cases which may serve to give a clearer view of the
different species of the disease. And in the first place I shall describe an
instance of fever, which was distinguished through the whole of its course by
symptoms of the general inflammatory diathesis.

(1) Lennox, a soldier of the 60th regiment, aged 40, of a firm and compact
habit of body, was seized on the 3d of December, between eight and nine in the
morning, with a slight horror or shivering, preceded and accompanied by other
usual marks of fever. The symptoms of coldness and shivering went off in the
course of eight or ten minutes. A hot fit succeeded, with a good deal of
headache, hurried respiration, considerable thirst, a strong, full, and
frequent pulse. After a continuance of four or five hours, sweat began to
appear on the head and breast, which extending gradually to the extremities
brought with it a tolerable distinct remission of the fever. 2. The fever
appeared to be gone off very completely by ten o'clock at night. The patient
rested well during the night, and continued in this same state of ease till
about five o'clock in the evening. He then became uneasy and restless, with
headache and a slight feverish heat. 5. The feverish indisposition declined in
the course of the night. He became easier toward morning, and about seven
might be said to be in a state of remission. About nine a paroxysm commenced,
similar to the paroxysm of the first day, though with a still slighter degree
of horror and shivering; the hot fit ran still higher, with much headache,
thirst, and a strong vigorous pulse. The sweating at last made its appearance,
and the violence of the fever declined: there still however remained some
degree of headache, pain of the back, and thirst, with an aversion to food, and
a more than natural frequency of pulse. 6. Rested tolerably; but still is not
free from headache and pain of the back: the tongue is dry and foul, and the
coat which covers it is smooth, but of considerable thickness, and of a cream
color. About four in the evening the paroxysm of a fever made its appearance,
similar, in some degree, to the paroxysm of the fourth, but of a much greater
degree of violence. It continued for eight hours, and declined gradually
toward morning. 7. There were no perceivable marks of fever at seven in the
morning. A little after nine, however, a paroxysm commenced, similar, in every
respect, to the paroxysm of the fifth. 8. About three in the afternoon a
paroxysm began similar to the paroxysm of the sixth, but still more violent. It
declined after the usual duration, and was succeeded on the ninth by another
paroxysm similar to that of the seventh. The remission which succeeded appeared
to be still more perfect than any of the preceding; the sweat was even more
copious, and the pulse became softer and more expanded after it than it had
hitherto done. 10. A paroxysm returned about half past two, similar to the
paroxysm of the eighth, but not less violent in degree. It terminated, however,
in a more fluid and universal sweat; the pulse and the state of the skin
returned perfectly to what they were in health; the mucous coat separated from
the tongue; the eye and countenance assumed their natural serenity, and
unequivocal marks of final crisis appeared on the morning of the eleventh. The
above case is an instance of the double tertian; the fever of the even day
terminated the disease; and the pulse through the whole course was vigorous and
strong, or marks of inflammatory diathesis, in a moderate degree, were
constantly present.

(2) Henley, a soldier of the 60th regiment, was seized on the 6th of May,
about five in the evening, with a nausea, or unpleasant affection at stomach,
marks of great languor and debility, a slight feeling of coldness and horror, a
very weak and frequent pulse, headache, pain of the back, and other symptoms
which are usual in the accession of fevers. After a continuance of ten or
twelve hours, these symptoms were so far gone off, that the patient was
considered to be in a state of remission. 7. The exacerbation of the fever
returned again about the same hour in the evening at which it had first come
on, though without marks of preceding coldness or shivering. The pulse was
small, obscure, and extremely frequent; the heat of the body was not increased
very materially; the thirst was only in a moderate degree, but there was much
nausea, an aversion to food, a disposition to faint in an erect posture, deep
and heavy sighing, tremor of the tongue, and a sad and desponding state of the
eye and countenance. 8. The symptoms of fever abated toward morning, and a
remission, though by no means a distinct one, took place. The pulse became
somewhat slower and more expanded; the sighing and anxiety abated a little, and
there was evidently a state of greater ease; though there still remained marks
of great debility, and signs of spasmodic stricture on the surface of the body.
The heat was lower than it usually is in health. About five in the evening the
symptoms, which had prevailed in the former paroxysms, returned again, but with
considerable aggravation. The head was affected with delirium, and there was a
considerable degree of tremor and starting. 9. Easier in the morning, though
the remission was in no degree more complete than the former. About the usual
hour in the evening the same symptoms returned with aggravation. 10. The
remission as the former; the heat of the body below natural; the pulse obscure
and frequent; the signs of debility very great. The exacerbation returned again
at the usual hour; the paroxysm appeared to be somewhat more violent; the
delirium was higher, the heat greater, and the pulse acquired rather more
strength and fullness. 11. Easier in the morning, with a remission in every
respect as complete as the former; the pulse distinct, and rather more
expanded; and, upon the whole, an appearance of rather more vigor. The
paroxysm was renewed in the evening as usual. 12. Remission in the morning
rather more complete: more vigor in the pulse. The exacerbation as usual. 13.
In the morning, instead of the usual remission, there appeared marks of a
complete and final crisis; the sighing, which had been troublesome throughout
the course of the disease, vanished; the eye and countenance assumed their
usual serenity and cheerfulness, the pulse became slower, softer, and more
expanded; and the tongue parted with its coat or covering. The above is an
instance of fever with symptoms of nervous affection.

(3) Sergeant Negli, on the 2d of November, about eight in the morning, was
seized with horror, shivering, and other Symptoms, which are usual in the
accession of fevers. The not fix did not run very high, and before evening the
paroxysm was considerably abated. 3. This patient is now in the state of
remission, the heat of the body is not greater than natural; but the case seems
to be attended with some symptoms which are not very common in the fevers of
this country. The countenance is clouded, dark, and grim; the appearance of the
eye is sad and desponding; and he expresses an uneasiness in his feelings which
is not easily accounted for. 4. The paroxysm returned about four in the
morning. It was greatly more violent than the preceding; and though it might be
said to remit very completely, if we judge by the heat of the body and state of
the pulse; yet there still remained some uncommon and unpleasant feelings. The
eye and countenance were not only dark and desponding, but the tongue was
covered with a slimy mucous coat, through which the red surface appeared
obscurely; there were strange and unaccountable twitchings of the stomach and
bowels, disturbed sleep, frightful dreams, and foreboding apprehensions. 5. A
paroxysm came on this evening near twelve hours sooner than it was expected.
After expressing an easiness at stomach, and throwing up some matter of a dark
color, he was suddenly seized with a stupor and insensibility, from which he
could not be roused by all the applications of art. He died in about sixteen
hours. This case affords an instance of fever with marks of a peculiar
malignity. The appearances of danger were sudden and unexpected; and, as it was
among the first instances of the kind which I had seen, I was disappointed, and
in some degree confounded at the event.

(4) Thomson a young man aged twenty, after more than usual exercise in the
heat of the sun, was seized with sickness, shiverings, and other signs of
fever, about nine o'clock in the morning of the 3d of February. The pulse was
hard, frequent, and irritated; the eye was sad, and sometimes glistening; the
countenance flushed, but rather dark and overcast; the respiration hurried;
nausea was troublesome, with a good deal of anxiety and restlessness. The
paroxysm continued long, and did not indeed go off very perfectly at last. 4.
Rested but indifferently; is now somewhat easier, though the remission is far
from being perfect; the thirst is considerable; the tongue dry and foul, the
stomach loathes all sorts of food; and he seems to be much distressed with
flatus and ructus; the stools are dark-colored and foetid; the pulse is more
frequent than natural, hard and irritated, and the skin is only partially
moist. 5. An exacerbation of fever happened about nine in the morning. The
symptoms were of the same kind as in the first paroxysm, only somewhat more
violent in degree. The anxiety at stomach was particularly distressing, and
there appeared still more evident marks of putrescent tendency in the
alimentary canal, 6. An uneasy night: an imperfect and obscure remission; the
gums redder than they naturally are: the eye has a glistening appearance, and
the countenance is still confused and clouded: the tongue is dry; the thirst
great; and ructus and flatus are very distressing: the pulse still irritated
and quick: there is not any very remarkable disposition to faint in an erect
posture: the stools foetid. 7. The exacerbation returned about the same hour as
on the fifth, and with still greater aggravation: the symptoms of distress in
the stomach and bowels were particularly alarming; with nausea, ^idorose
belchings, and large watery foetid stools. 8. Somewhat easier in the morning,
though the remission can only be said to be obscure. 9. The exacerbation
happened at the same hour as on the seventh, and continued for nearly the same
length of time. 10. Instead of obscure remission, marks of final crisis are now
evident; the pulse is returned nearly to its natural state; the eye and
countenance have assumed their usual serenity; the skin is moist, and gives no
marks of remaining spasmodic stricture; the anxiety and ructus have ceased; and
the state of the stomach and bowels appears to be almost natural. The above is
an instance of fever, in which there were very evident signs of putrescent
tendency in the alimentary canal; even some obscure marks of its progress in
the general system, complicated, however, with an irritated state of the
vascular system, or such symptoms as might be considered as belonging to the
apparent inflammatory diathesis.

(6) Cunningham, a sailor, aged twenty-five, was seized on the 5th of July,
about five in the evening, with sickness, shiverings, headache, and the other
usual signs of the remitting fever of the country. Its more distressing
symptoms were nausea and vomiting. 6. The remission is tolerably distinct; but
there is still a good deal of headache, thirst, and signs of debility; the
tongue is dry, and the pulse is more frequent than natural. The paroxysm
returned about five in the evening with increased violence, accompanied with
severe retching, and copious vomiting of bilious matter. 7. Better in the
morning; the vomiting has ceased, and the remission is tolerably distinct. The
exacerbation returned at the usual hour, with the same distinguishing symptoms
of copious bilious discharges. 8. Remission in the morning as usual; the
exacerbation in the evening as the preceding, with distressing and severe
vomiting. 9. The usual remission in the morning. The paroxysm likewise recurred
in the evening about the usual time, but not with the usual symptoms. Instead
of vomiting of bilious matters, there was some degree of delirium, tremors,
startings, and other symptoms of nervous affection. 10. These symptoms remitted
in the morning, but there still remained signs of great irritability and
weakness. The same train of symptoms returned again in the evening: the
delirium and tremors were still in a higher degree; the pulse was small and
frequent; and there was occasionally a great disposition to faint in an erect
posture. 11. Better in the morning, though there are not yet any marks of
crisis. The exacerbation returned again in the evening, with symptoms similar
to those of the preceding paroxysm. 12. Remission in the morning similar to the
former. Exacerbation in the evening rather more violent. 13. Remission as the
former; the pulse however appears to be rather fuller than it has been since
this change happened in the circumstances of the disease. The paroxysm returned
at the usual hour still more violent, though with greater marks of vascular
excitement. 14. Evident marks of crisi^^ the tongue begins to part with its
covering; the eye and countenance appear clear and animated; the pulse is
slower and fuller; and the state of the skin does not give any indication of
existing spasmodic stricture. This case presents an instance of fever, the
first part of the course of which was distinguished by uncommon bilious
discharges during the time of the paroxysms; the latter part of it by affection
of the nervous system.

CHAP. II.
1. As I mentioned before that we attain more accurate ideas from the detail of
particular cases than from general histories; I therefore relate the method of
cure, which was pursued in those examples which are described in the sixth
chapter.

1. Lennox. -- On the 4th of December, or second day of the disease, the
solution of salts with a small portion of emetic tartar was given by a wine
glass full at a time, till it operated plentifully. 5. Some powders of nitre
and camphire. 6. Two scruples of bark were given every two hours during the
remission, with an injunction that the nitrous powders be repeated during the
time of the paroxysm. 11. The above plan was persisted in till marks of crisis
appeared. Not more than one ounce of bark was given during all the remissions.

2. Henley. 7. The usual solution of salts was given, but without any addition
of emetic tartar. It operated plentifully. 8. The bark was begun this morning,
with injunctions that it be administered every two hours during the remissions.
9. A blister was applied to the back of the head and neck, with a bolus of
camphire, opium, and valerian. Wine was ordered, together with the bark, as
soon as the remission should begin to appear. This plan was persisted in till
the crisis arrived, which was on the 13th.

3. Negli. The patient was purged on the 3d with the usual solution of salts,
to which was added so considerable a portion of emetic tartar, that it likewise
operated by vomit. 4. Bark was given in the usual quantity, and at the usual
intervals. 5. As soon as the fever came on, blisters were applied to the head,
and likewise to the legs; but they produced no perceivable effect. The patient
died, and probably fell a sacrifice to the disease, from my not having early
enough perceived the malignity of its nature.

4. Thompson. 4th, The solution of salts with emetic tartar was administered in
the present case as it had been done in the others. It operated plentifully,
but had no material effect upon the disease. 5. Saline draughts in the state of
effervescence were given frequently. Bark and wine were ordered in the
remissions, with as much lemonade as the patient chose to drink. 9. Glysters of
cold water, impregnated with fixed air, were employed two or three times with
apparent benefit. 10. The bark, wine, and saline draughts were given liberally,
yet notwithstanding, the disease seemed to complete its natural course.

5. Cunningham. -- 6. The nausea and vomiting were so distressing in the first
paroxysm, that, in compliance with the patient's earnest entreaties, I
consented to give an emetic. 7. The symptoms were aggravated, and the emetic
was repeated but without advantage. 9. Anodynes were given during the paroxysm
with saline draughts in the act of effervescence. They moderated the vomiting
but did not entirely remove it. Blisters were applied to the head and legs;
bark and wine were given in considerable quantity; but the disease continued
till the 14th without material alteration.

CHAP. III.
1. As the cold bathing, which I have so strongly recommended in the cure of
fevers, has an exterior appearance of being a rash and hazardous remedy, I
shall relate some cases which may enable the reader to judge more precisely of
its real effects. Cold-bathing I may remark, appears to have been occasionally
employed by the Greek and Roman physicians, after the time of the Emperor
Augustus; but I was only a young man when I went out to the West Indies, and
cannot pretend to say that I was acquainted with the writings of those
physicians, or that I possessed much knowledge of diseases, except the little
that could be retained from a cursory hearing of university lectures. The first
hints of this practice were therefore accidental, and arose from a conversation
I had with the master of the vessel, in which I went passenger. This person
commanded a transport in the war 1756, and was present at the siege of the
Havannah. As he was talking one day of the state of the fleet, he mentioned
accidently, that some men were sent aboard of his ship ill of fevers; several
of whom, he observed, jumped into the sea during the dilirium which attended
the paroxysms of the disease. Some of them, as might be expected, were drowned;
but the most part of those who were recovered from the waves appeared to be
greatly benefited by the ducking. The fact, which, from the veracity of the
man, I thought I could depend upon, struck me strongly, and I resolved, in my
own mind, to bring it to the test of experiment as soon as an opportunity
should offer: neither was it long after my arrival in Jamaica, that I had
occasion to visit a sailor whose situation seemed to justify such a trial. The
poor man was aboard of a ship, which lay at anchor about a mile from the shore.
He had been ill two days; the delirium (...); his eyes were red and inflamed;
his respiration was hurried; he was anxious and restless in a high degree,
whilst together with those marks of excitement, he was occasionally languid and
disposed to faint. His skin being dirty furnished an ostensible excuse for
trying this remedy. But it was previously thought proper to draw some blood
from the arm; which being done, some buckets of salt water were dashed on the
shoulders. He was now laid in bed: a copious sweat ensued, succeeded by a
distinct remission, and a total change in the nature of the symptoms. The
success I met with in this instance was more than I had expected; I was
therefore encouraged to try the same mode of bathing in a person who came under
my care some weeks thereafter, and who had been ill of a fever six or seven
days. This patient had been bled and blistered; -- emetics and cathartics had
been likewise employed, and bark had been given in the usual manner, for the
three last days. The fever, however, had now in a great measure lost its type.
The man was low and languid; his eyes were dim; his vision indistinct; -- his
pulse was small and frequent, and, when the head was raised from the pillow,
not to be felt. Though it did not appear that he could reasonably be expected
to live long, I still wished to get him conveyed to the deck, that a trial
might be made of the effects of cold bathing; but the situation was so
ticklish, that I felt some uneasiness in setting about it. At last he was
lifted through the hatch-way in a blanket, though I must confess that I was not
without apprehensions that he might die under my hands. Some wine was then
poured down his throat; and he was sprinkled with cold salt water, as he lay on
the deck. Appearing to be somewhat invigorated by this process, he was raised
up very gently, and several buckets of the seawater were dashed about his head
and shoulders. He was then laid in bed; the pulse soon became large and full. I
left him in a copious sweat, and was agreeably surprised next day to find him
sitting on the deck, to which he had walked on his own feet. I shall only
mention another instance of the good effects of cold bathing in the fevers of
the West Indies, which is perhaps more decisive than either of the former. A
boy, aged fourteen, had been ill of a fever seven or eight days. Nothing had
been omitted, in point of treatment, which is usual to be done in similar
cases. Bark and wine had been carried as far as could be serviceable, or even
safe; yet death seemed to be approaching fast. The success of cold bathing, in
some instances similar to the present, so far exceeded my expectation that I
was induced to make trial of it in the case before me, though I was not
altogether without apprehensions that death might be the consequence of the
attempt. The business, however, was accomplished without accident; and next day
the boy was able, not only to sit up in bed, but even to walk over the floor.
After instances so unequivocal as the above, it would be superfluous to mention
any others. I shall only add, that I have tried the remedy, in various
situations, always with safety, generally with astonishing success; so that I
cannot forbear recommending it even at an early period, in the fevers of the
West Indies. It communicates tone and vigor to the powers of life, and
diminishes irritability in a degree far superior to all other cordials or
sedatives. The bathing was managed in the following manner: the water, which
was required to be of a refreshing degree of coolness, was generally dashed by
means of a bucket on the head and shoulders. It was likewise found that its
good effects were heightened, in some cases, by previous bleeding, and by the
previous use of warm bathing. This may seem a rash practice to those who argue
without experience; but, setting aside the authority of the ancients, we find
it confirmed by the example of a person who was not a physician, and who,
therefore may be supposed to be less under the influence of a favorite opinion
from which he might be led to disguise the truth. Busbequius, who was sent on
an embassy to Soliman the Great, was obliged to travel to Amasia, where the
Sultan then sojourned. In his return home he was seized with a continued fever,
and very severely harrassed by it. The disease gained so much ground during the
journey, that he found it necessary to stop at Constantinople to attend to the
recovery of his health. The practice which was adopted to effect this may
appear to be singular, and by many, perhaps, will be thought to be hazardous
and rash. He mentions, that, after enjoying the luxury of warm bathing, he was
suddenly sprinkled with cold water. His words are, "Idem, scilicet,
Quaquelbenus me a balneo exeuntem frigida perfundebat, quae res etsi erat
molesta, tamen magnope^^ juvabat." (Iter. Constant. p.) His physician,
Quaquelbenus, who seems to have been a man of excellent judgment and careful
observation, had probably learnt the practice in his travels in Asia, as it
does not appear to have been commonly known in Europe at that time.

CHAP. IV.
1. But besides these testimonies of physicians, in favor of the practice of
drenching with cold water, the memoirs of Baron Trenck furnish us with a
curious and very convincing proof of the efficacy of this remedy, in
extinguishing, almost like a charm, the violence of a burning fever. The Baron,
when ill of a fever in the prison at Madgeborough, unfortunately broke the
pitcher which contained his daily allowance of water. The fever was violent,
and he suffered the most inexpressible torments of thirst, for the space of
twenty-four hours. When the usual supply was brought to him next day, he seized
the pitcher with eagerness, ^^d drank the water with such a^^dity, and in so
great quantity as is scarcely credible. The consequence was a total removal of
the disease. To this I might add an instance, which happened to myself at
Savanna in Georgia, in the year 1779. In the excessive hot weather of the month
of July, I was seized with the endemic of the country, in a more violent degree
than was commonly seen. In the third paroxysm of the disease, my desire for
cold water was ravenous. A pitcher of it was drawn from the pump, which I drank
off instantly without the least abatement of the thirst. The draught was
repeated in a few minutes, in quantity not less than a quart. The thirst was
effectually quenched, and the fever seemed to vanish. But though the fever
appeared to be extinguished as it were by a charm; yet the stomach and
hypochondria became distended, yellowness of the eye and countenance succeeded,
with a considerable degree of debility which remained for two or three days. I
must, however, remark with regard to this case, that the effects were not the
same as they have been usually reported to be by authors. The fever was
extinguished; but neither vomiting, sweat, or any other sensible evacuation
ensued. The ancients, I may further observe, seem to have administered cold
drink only in the advanced state of fever, when signs of coction began to
appear; in which case, it is impossible to form a certain opinion of its
precise success. That cold water may be employed with effect, it is necessary
that the thirst be intense, perhaps that it be purposely provoked, and that it
be fully and complete^y satiated. If managed in this manner, it probably will
not often fail of extinguishing the fever; yet I must not omit to mention, that
unless it is managed with a great deal of caution and judgment, it may also
often irrecoverably extinguish the powers of life.

2. In support of this opinion, I shall mention a case, which fell under my own
observation about a twelvemonth ago. I was called to a young man, a sailor, ill
of a fever of a very dangerous and alarming kind. It was the (...) day of the
disease before I saw him. He had not been hitherto in the least benefited by
any thing that was tried; neither did any remedy which I could think of, though
employed with almost desperate boldness, in any degree check the progress of
the disease. The power of speech was lost, and even swallowing was performed
with difficulty; the eye was languid, nay almost without motion; the
countenance was ghastly; and many livid spots, some of them nearly the size of
a sixpence, made their appearance on different parts of the body. I proposed
bathing, and the friends of the young man, considering the situation as
desperate, consented that I should make a trial of it; more, perhaps, to comply
with my desire, than from expectation of any benefit that might result from it.
But in setting about it, it unfortunately happened, that an utensil proper for
the purpose could not be procured, so that we were compelled to be contented
with a general fomentation. This was applied in as complete a manner as
circumstances would permit. A blanket was soaked in warm salt water, and the
body was wrapped in it from head to foot. In a short time the skin became soft
and warm, sweat began to flow; the eye and countenance began to resume their
animation, which had been almost extinguished, the pulse rose; swallowing was
performed with less difficulty; and next day the color of the spots was
evidently brighter. So far the change was favorable; but a regular supply of
wine and cordials having been neglected during the following night, the pulse
sunk, and things returned nearly to their former situation. The fomentation was
again repeated, in consequence of which the extremities and surface of the skin
became warm and moist, an effect which was no sooner produced, than the blanket
was suddenly removed, and the face and breast, particularly, were sprinkled
with cold water, in which a large portion of salt was dissolved. The cold had
the effect to cause the patient to shrink at the first, yet in a short time he
appeared to be refreshed very remarkably. The powers of life grew gradually
stronger; though the marks of crisis were not very evident for several days. To
the above I might add some other instances, where effects were similar; but I
avoid swelling the notes to too great extent, by entering into particular
details. I shall therefore only observe in general, that cold bathing was
usually of service. It imparted general tone and vigor to the powers of life,
and by increasing the activity of the vascular system, probably sometimes
rendered the crisis complete, where it naturally would not have been so; but I
cannot venture to say that I ever carried it so far that the disease could be
said to be precipitately extinguished by it.

NOTES TO THE CHAPTER UPON YELLOW FEVER.
( a) IN compliance with the language of medical authors, I have described the
following disease under the name of Yellow Fever, though I am perfectly
sensible, that the appellation is not by any means proper. There are some
instances of the disease perhaps where yellowness does not at all appear, and
in no one does it ordinarily show itself till the latter stages. I know also
that most of the practitioners of Jamaica consider it only as an aggravated
species of the remittent; the common endemic of hot climates. It appeared to me
I must confess in a different light; but I shall attempt to describe the two
diseases accurately, and leave it to the reader to judge for himself. It may
not however be improper in this place to take notice of the opinion of Dr.
Moseley. Dr. Moseley has lately written a treatise on this disease, and
endeavored to persuade us that it is no other than the (...) or ardent fever
of the ancients. But the yellow fever of the West Indies, by Dr. Moseley's own
confession, is in some manner peculiar to strangers newly arrived in tropical
climates. The (...) we are informed, made its appearance in the islands of the
Archipelago, and on the coasts of the contiguous continents indiscriminately
among men and women, natives or foreigners: in fact it has not, as far as I can
perceive, any claim to be considered as a distinct species of disease. If I
rightly understand the spirit of Hippocrates, or the description of the still
more accurate Aretaeus, (...) in reality is only an accidental condition of the
common endemic of the country, where the force of the fever is chiefly exerted
upon the stomach and alimentary canal. In this manner it appears frequently in
Jamaica, and in the southern provinces of America. In the hot months of summer,
it appears occasionally in every climate: and is not necessarily accompanied
with, nor does it depend upon a general inflammatory diathesis of the system
for its existence.

6. Authors seem generally to have attributed the black color of the vomitings
observed in this disease to blood effused into the cavity of the stomach; but
the falsity of this opinion is sufficiently proved by the appearances which are
observed on dissection.

THE END.
BOOKS PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY ROBERT CAMPBELL, No. 54, South Second-Street.
A SYSTEM OF SURGERY.
By Benjamin Bell, Member of the Royal Colleges of surgeons of Ireland and
Edinburgh, one of the Surgeons to the Royal Infirmary, and Fellow of the Royal
Society of Edinburgh, in four vols. illustrated with 100 copperplates. Price 4
dollars 50 cents.

A TREATISE ON THE THEORY AND MANAGEMENT OF ULCERS,
With a dissertation on White Swellings of the Joints, to which is prefixed an
Essay on the Chirugical Treatment of Inflammation, and its Consequences. By
Benjamin Bell, F.R.S. Ed. etc. etc. Price 1 dol. 50 cents.

FIRST LINES OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
By William Cullen M. D. late Professor of the practice of Physic in the
University of Edinburgh, etc. etc. in 2 volumes; with practical and explanatory
notes, by John Rotherham, M. D. To which is prefixed the Life of the Author.
Price 3 dols. 75 cents.

THE ART OF PREVENTING DISEASES AND RESTORING HEALTH,
Founded on rational principles and adapted to persons of every capacity. By
George Wallis, M. D. S. M. S. editor of the last edition of Motherby's Medical
Dictionary, and Sydenham's Works with ^otes, etc. etc. Price 2 dols.

A TREATISE
On the management of Female Complaints and of Children in early infancy. By
Alexander Hamilton. M. D. etc. etc. Price 1 dol.

THE LIFE OF BARON FREDERICK TRENCK.
Containing his adventures, his cruel and excessive sufferings during ten years
imprisonment at the fortress of Magdeburg, by command of the late King of
Prussia; also anecdotes, historical, political, and personal. To which is now
added his adventures in France. 1 dol.

THE SEASONS.
James Thomson, Price 75 cents.

THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF Dr. GOLDSMITH;
Containing his essays and poems. Price 75 cents.

MENTORIA, OR THE YOUNG LADY's FRIEND.
By Mrs. Rowson, of the New Theater, Philadelphia, author of the Inquisitor,
Fille de Chamber, Victoria, Charlotte, etc. etc. Price 75 cents.

A SIMPLE STORY.
By Mrs. Inchbald. Price 1 dol.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BIBLE,
Or a description of all the beasts, birds, fishes, insects, reptiles, trees,
plants, metals, precious stones, etc. mentioned in the Sacred Scriptures,
collected from the best authorities, and alphabetically arranged. By Thaddeus
M. Harris, librarian of Harvard university, Cambridge. Price 87 cents.

THE LADIES LITERARY COMPANION,
Or a collection of essays for the instruction and amusement of the female sex.
Price 50 cents.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURAL HISTORY.
By William Smellie, member of the Antiquarian and Royal Society of Edinburgh.
Price 2 dols.

THE SORROWS OF WERTER.
A German tale. Price 62 cents.

THE BEAUTIES OF HISTORY.
Two volumes. Price 2 dols.

A TREATISE CONCERNING RELIGIOUS AFFECTIONS.
In three parts. Part I. -- Concerning the nature of the affections, and their
importance in religion. Part II. -- Showing what are no certain signs that
religious affections are gracious, or that they are not. Part III. -- Showing
what are distinguishing signs of truly gracious and holy affections. By
Jonathan Edwards, A. M. and pastor of the first church in Northampton. Price 1
dol.

HISTORY OF REDEMPTION.
On a plan entirely original: exhibiting the gradual discovery and
accomplishment of the divine purpose in the salvation of man: including a
comprehensive view of church history, and the fulfillment of scripture
prophecies. By the late Rev. Jonathan Edwards, president of the college of
New Jersey. To which are now added, notes, historical, critical, and
theological; with the life and experience of the author. Price 2 dols.

A SERMON
On the freedom and happiness of the United States of America, preached in
Carlisle, on the 5th of October 1794, and published at the request of the
officers of the Philadelphia and Lancaster troops of light horse. By Robert
Davidson, D. D. pastor of the Presbyterian church in Carlisle, and one of the
professors in Dickinson college. Price 20 cents.

THE MILLENNIUM;
Or, the thousand years of prosperity promised to the church of God in the old
(...) and in the new; shortly to commence, and (...) be carried on to
perfection. Price 1 dol. 25 cents.

SERMONS,
By Hugh Blair, D. D. F. R. S. Edinburgh, one of the ministers of the high
church, and professor of rhetoric and belles-lettres, in the university of
Edinburgh, 2 vols. Price 2 dols.

Same book, vol. 3rd, being the same as the 4th volume of the British edition.
Price 1 dol.

BEAUTIES OF HERVEY;
Or, descriptive, picturesque, and instructive passages, selected from the
works of this deservedly admired author, viz. Meditations among the tombs --
reflections on a flower garden -- descant on the creation -- contemplations on
the night -- the starry-heavens, and a winter piece -- the most important,
interesting, and picturesque passages from Thereon and Aspasio -- letters and
sermons -- miscellaneous tracts -- religious education of daughters, and
remarks on lord Bolingbroke's letters. To which are added -- Memoirs of the
author's life and character, with an elegiac poem on his death. Price 80 cents.

WATTS's PSALMS AND HYMNS,
Bound together and separate; bibles, testaments, spelling-books, primers, etc.
etc. all of which will be sold by wholesale and retail, on the very lowest
terms.

R. CAMPBELL, has in the press and speedily will be published, Bell on the
Venereal Disease: in one vol. 8vo. Price, neatly bound, 2 dols.


