A LETTER FROM ONE OF THE SOCIETY OF FRIENDS, RELATIVE TO THE CONSCIENTIOUS
SCRUPULOUSNESS OF ITS MEMBERS TO BEAR ARMS.

FROM THE PRESS 1795.

THE Writer of the following Letter, may be surprised to meet with it in Print,
without having been previously consulted, and his Permission obtained for the
Publication of it; but his Correspondent hopes, that the Motive of his
committing it to the Press (that of offering the Sentiments and Observations of
one of the Society of Friends, upon a Subject, in which their religious Rights
are supposed to be implicated, to the perusal of those, who are to decide upon
it, at the ensuing Session of Congress) may obtain him the Excuse of the
Author.

LETTER, etc.
ESTEEMED FRIEND.
THE desire thou intimatedst to me, to see something written by one of the
society of friends, in favor of the exemption from military service, which we,
from religious motives, feel it our duty to adhere to, and upon principles of
(...) right, to expect will not be denied us, in the United-States of America;
and the satisfaction I derive from conferring with thee on subjects of serious
import, prompt me to address thee at this time.

To do justice to the subject, is what I do not pretend; nor shall I enter into
a consideration of the soundness or fallacy of the reasons, which dictate to
us, the observance of this conduct -- Theological controversy, or an attempt to
confute the religious tenets of any sect, is, in my opinion, improper. Let
every one have free access to every source of human information in religious
concerns, of which mankind is possessed; and practice without control, those
precepts, which he believes it is his duty to observe. If this be conceded, it
necessarily follows, that it would be equally improper for me, to insist upon
the orthodoxy of a practice, which thy sense of religious obligation does not
enjoin thee to, in order to convince thee of the expedience of leaving me to
the exercise of it.

It is not, therefore, upon the ground of our scrupulousness, in this respect,
being well founded, that we require to be exempted, (though it be the real one
for our refusing to do military service,) but, upon the ground of unrestrained
FREEDOM of OPINIONS, which is the BIRTHRIGHT -- the CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT of
EVERY CITIZEN of THESE STATES, whether in religious or other concerns: to enjoy
which, was the leading object of the grant for the territory of Pennsylvania
being obtained from Charles the second, by William Penn, under whose auspices,
our ancestors migrated thither, and first began to feel the blessings which
their inoffensiveness, and mortal and religious habits were suited to afford
them, under the benign influence of religious liberty -- blessings, in the
enjoyment of which we were (though a British colony) up to the late revolution
in America. -- And will the citizens of this new born nation, place us in a
worse situation than we were before, and debar us from continuing to enjoy
them? Would it be consistent with the spirit which actuated them to undertake,
and in accomplishing that revolution? Every one who has learnt the political
creed of 1774, knows that it would not. -- The constitution of the union, which
is intended to secure to the citizens, as well quakers, as others, those
blessings, which they acquired by the revolution, declares that it is not:
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
PROHIBITING THE FREE EXERCISE THEREOF."

I am aware, that it has been tauntingly observed by some, that it is from the
impulse of fear and cowardice, and not from a sense of religious duty, that we
desert the scenes of human bloodshed, and renounce the laurels which adorn the
hero. This observation, however, I am persuaded, obtains belief with few, if
any, who have had an opportunity of associating with many of the society of
friends; and those who have never had such an opportunity, are incompetent
judges of the truth of the observation: -- The ardor of youth, ambition, and
other powerful springs, which exist in the human breast, it may be reasonably
supposed, are common to the members of our, as well as to those of every other
society; but it is the early and assiduous care, which is bestowed upon the
formation of our minds, and the direction of our ideas, which first initiates
us into the habit of restraining our ambition, and other passions; and finally
deters us from engaging in the field of battle: and permit me to add, that true
bravery as assuredly exists, where fortitude and humanity reside, as that, the
man who can restrain the force of his passions, is possessed of no small share
of those qualities.

The effects of conscientious scrupulousness upon a religious mind, can not be
better exemplified, than they were in William Penn: -- the sacrifices, which
were made by him, in the spring of his life, can not be accounted for, upon any
other ground, than that of a religious sense of duty; unless they be attributed
to an eccentricity of mind, or a dereliction of his senses: causes, to which
the uniformity of his subsequent conduct, the consistency and success which
distinguished his arduous and philanthoropic enterprises and writings, and (if
I may be allowed to add) the patronage of his sovereign, unite to forbid is
from ascribing the great and deserved respect and fame, which wait upon, and
perpetuate his memory.

And yet some of those very precepts of this great and worthy christian, have
been occasionally the sport of many, and the cause of much suffering and
distress to individuals of the society, imposed on them too, by parliamentary
authority; until they have sunk their professors below the level of public
vengeance, or private scorn; and again have acquired to them, the respect and
esteem of most, and been adopted by many.

The scruples of friends are several, and it may serve to evince the
materiality in which we hold an observance of them, to enquire whether we
relaxed or grew less tenacious in adhering to them, either from the sufferings
to which they subjected us, or from the progressive elapse of time.

One of them respects the conforming to the taking an oath. Friends hold the
truth obligatory on them always, and that the true intention of a corporal or
external ceremony, preparatory to speaking it on occasions of moment; is to
make the person, by solemnly undertaking to adhere to it, in any particular,
liable to incur the legal penalties, which await a violation of it, in that
particular: but we refuse to impart solemnity to a ceremony of that kind, as
frequently practiced, by making an appeal to, and use of the name of the Deity:
from a conviction, that to do so, is profane, and repugnant to the text, which
enjoins to "swear not at all;" though we object not to an innocent form of
submission to be punished, if we violate the truth. This form I need not tell
thee, is by oral affirmation; for which we were persecuted under the statute of
13 and 14 C. II. Chapter 1. and by the magistracy of that time, in a manner which
is equally disgraceful to the government of England, and officers under it.
Although branded with infamy, for refusing the oaths of allegiance, supremacy
and abjuration, and subjected to lingering confinements, loathsome prisons,
without necessary subsistence, or the communion of friends or relatives, under
pretext that our refusal proceeded from disaffection to the royal family, to
the renunciation of papal authority, and to the government of Great Britain,
yet the steady and inflexible perseverance of the society, in not complying,
surmounted and survived parliamentary opposition, and magisterial tyranny.

After the society were exposed to and experienced these evils during many
years, for supposed criminality, resulting from the mistake, perhaps
intentional, on the part of government, of attributing the conscientious
scrupulousness of the quaker, to the disloyalty of the subject, they were
mitigated by the act of 8 G. I. Chapter 6: the effects of which however were but
little felt in the courts of justice in England, until the 22. G. II. Chapter 46
36. To this day, in that country, a quaker is not admitted to affirm in
criminal cases, to serve on juries, or bear any office of profit under
government.

Friends scrupled also to pay tithes, rates, or other payments, for the stipend
or maintenance of hireling ministers or curates; on which account, in England,
the society have labored under much imposition, from the mode in which they
are distrained for, and collected. The annual amounts of these are set forth,
in the epistles from the yearly-meetings of friends, and amount to a far
greater tax than they would do, were they paid voluntarily; notwithstanding
which, the payment of them is refused to this day.

Thus, the government of England imposed upon the quakers, penalties for
dissenting from the regulations and doctrines of its church, as soon as the
society made its appearance, which was about the restoration; at the same time,
that the same government were exercising the like discretion or privilege, in
denying the dogmas of the church of Rome, and resisting the papal authority,
which they had, for between eight and nine centuries, before acknowledged and
submitted to.

In America, our society is relieved from the grievances to which it is
subjected in Great Britain, in these respects -- nor do I see why religious
liberty should be limited to these privileges only -- it is to be hoped, and
reasonably to be expected, that we shall not be compelled to suffer so much in
America, before we attain to the enjoyment of the same share of discretion in
carrying arms, as we suffered in England on account of our scrupulousness to
swear, and to contribute to the maintetenace of the ministers of other
religious societies; that arbitrary acts of congress will not be passed in
imitation of the statute of Charles II. to take away the freedom of the mind in
religious concerns, whilst the liberty of political opinions, which are more
apt to affect the harmony of social compacts, be preserved inviolate and
unlimited.

The dust of time, would never hide the stain which such a measure would throw
upon the national character of this country -- it has tarnished, and will
tarnish for ever the luster with which Great Britain once excelled every
contending rival; though it may be remembered, that the statute of Charles
originated whilst, and where witchcraft and sorcery, enchantment and
conjuration, were seriously prohibited, and severely punished, by legislative
interference -- but, as the minds of men are more enlarged and enlightened by
the progress of science, experience and civilization, the opinions, and tenets,
and, it is to be hoped, the scruples of each other become more and more
generally respected, though more variant and diverse; as the clouds of
superstition pass from over the heads of the majority of the people, these
phantoms of ignorance vanish from their minds, and the rigor of penalties,
inflicted upon difference in opinions, is moderated and done away -- the
illiberal and prejudiced state, in which minds so bewildered must have been, is
the best excuse that can be made, for the persecuting spirit with which they
pursued the few who dared to dissent from the generally received opinions of
the nation, an excuse, however, which could never be offered for the imitation
of such an example in this country.

That the infliction of fines, or other punishments, would be as ineffectual in
recconciling quakers in America, to carry arms, as they proved in prevailing
upon them in England to make oath; there is no reason to doubt.

It is therefore, with much uneasiness, that I learn from the 17th clause of
the militia bill, which is postponed until the next session of congress, that
such citizens as are conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms, are to be
exempted from doing so, upon paying a fine -- to pay a fine, in lieu of bearing
arms, would be as repugnant to the principles of friends, as the performance of
the service, from which it were to exempt them; and for reasons synonymous to
those, which deter them from contributing to the support and maintenance of
hireling ministers -- to collect these fines, therefore, the subordinate
magistracy of the country must interpose their authority, which will put it in
their power (and their inclination to exercise it in general cannot be denied)
to impose upon and distress the unfortunate victims of their rapacity, to
a-degree far beyond every benefit, which the country could derive from such a
source of revenue. The molestation and disturbance of that class of the
citizens, denominated quakers, which constitutes too, in some places, the more
considerable part, would, as well as be unjust and unconstitutional in itself,
serve to interrupt the harmony, and to destroy the wholesome effect, which the
decorous and judicious discipline and regulations of that society, are
calculated to produce to every class of a community; and which candor cannot
but acknowledge, are distinguished excellencies in the pacific department of
municipal science. The advantages which the community derive from these, would
be felt no more: and the amount of the fines, after being extorted, would not
compensate the loss of them. It is a maxim, that the law ought not to require
impossibilities; and it is the language of reason, and religion, that a man
should not be forced to wrong his own conscience: and a quaker must either do
the latter, or be incapable of complying with the requisites of this clause of
the bill -- it would be tantamount to the taxing the opinions of one class of
the citizens, in exclusion of every other. To tax a man for not doing a
particular service, which his conscience forbids him to do, in order to make up
for that omission, is as unreasonable, as it would be to extra-tax the members
of a community, who possess one kind of property, to make their contribution
equivalent to that, which the public coffers receive from those who possess
another kind of property.

Why then should friends be prohibited the exemption from military service
which they claim? Let us proceed to enquire into some of the reasons which are
assigned against it.

One of them, and which is said to display the absurdity of the claim, is, that
if such a scruple were to prevail in the breasts of a large majority of a
nation, self defense must be dispensed with, and the nation submit to the
injustice and will of their invaders.

I might safely admit the reason, so far as it is applicable to this subject,
without receiving any injury from its force -- for, though a majority of the
people view a religious tenet as ridiculous or absurd, yet the voice of the
majority cannot, consistent with the federal constitution, forbid the exercise
of it: otherwise, a majority would establish a national religion. But I think
no such absurdity is apparent, and without soliciting thy acquiescence in my
reasons for thinking so, I will barely state them.

Let me first take the objection, upon the largest possible scale; and suppose
the principle of friends in this respect, to be observed by every nation in the
world -- in this point of view, the objection vanishes. The energy of the
principle, itself, becomes the bulwark of self-defence -- no violence would be
offered to the rights of each other, to require opposition; but this mode of
reasoning, however just, were mankind as they ought to be, regardful of the
rights of one another, is objectionable on account of the inapplicability of
it, to the actual state in which mankind are -- then, the question results to
this: viewing the states of human societies, as they really exist, might the
invasions of the rights of nations or states, which take place, be prevented or
adjusted without having recourse to arms? For and against this question, much
metaphysical and theoretic reasoning might be adduced -- but as thy own
ingenuity may suggest, and thy own judgment decide upon it, perhaps as well
without, as with many comments of mine, I shall do little more than recur to
the test of experience for the solution of the query.

Experience teaches, that man can effect more by the powers of his mind, than
he can by those of his body. The latter, form the first and chief dependence of
man, in a state of nature, as well to support, as to protect and defend
himself. But, they barely enable the savage to obtain a scanty nourishment for
his body, whilst the citizen, by the former, is put into the full enjoyment, of
not only the necessaries, but all the elegancies and luxuries of life. However,
to protect and defend ourselves, in the enjoyment of these advantages, we seem
to remain in a natural state, resorting to violence and oppression against the
invader; adhering to the same system, which man, in a barbarous and rude state,
is impelled to observe, for the purposes of abstract self-preservation. Little
doubt exists with me, but that an alternative may always be found out, if as
much ingenuity were expended for the purpose, as there usually is to excel in
arts of cruelty; and which might be as superior to the use of arms, as the
civilized pursuits of agriculture, commerce, and navigation, are to the robust
toils of the chase, for the acquirement of the necessaries and comforts of life.

It is inconsistent with christianity to resort to arms -- one crime will not
justify another. The lex talionis is not a part of the christian religion, and
the using of arms, to resist an attack, is returning violence for violence, and
opposing force with force; involving ourselves in the like criminality; and
making ourselves as deserving of chastisement as they are on whom we inflict
it, for imitating the evil example which incurs our displeasure. Even, if in
this instance, the rules of religion were inconsistent with the exigency of the
occasion, the latter ought to submit to the former; but such an exigency cannot
exist, for it were to create a dilemma in the mind of a christian, to render it
necessary for him to do that, which it is his duty not to do -- indeed, I
think, this has teen fairly tried and evinced, in the settlement of
Pennsylvania.

That country was inhabited by, and in the possession of the aborigines, at the
time that William Penn landed there. They regarded the soil as their own. They
were in a savage state, disposed to be inimical to whoever attempted to settle
upon their lands, and to oppose the encroachments of European emigrants. But
the measures of William Penn were not those of force, not the use of arms, not
the exertion of power, he sought not to entwine his temples with the trophies
of conquest, or to reader himself terrible -- he shaded his brow with the
olive, and distributed its branches among the belligerent tribes -- his
measures were at once adequate to the attainment of every object that he had in
view, and were calculated to establish and preserve harmony with, to acquire
the friendship of, and to do justice to those, who were the prior occupants of
the soil. No bloodshed, no stratagem, no outrage took place, but the security
of the colony, rested upon the confidence of the Indians, and was preserved by
a due adherence to justice and humanity.

Contrast the progress and occurrences on this occasion, with those of the
colonization of New-Spain, and say, what benefit was there which was derived by
the Spanish settlers, which was not enjoyed by the companions of William Penn?
And yet, the former conquered by massacre, whilst the latter subdued the
savage, by contributing to the alleviation of his necessities. The former
triumphed by the arts of war, the latter, by those of peace. Hence, I think, it
may be inferred, that the impracticability of effecting by pacific measures,
all that violent ones are capable of, is at least very problematical, if not
improbable.

The same spirit which dictated the policy of states and nations to decide
differences between them by arms, it may be reasonably believed, suggested
those sanguinary codes of criminal jurisprudence, which prevail, in most, for
the preservation of tranquillity and order among the individuals of each, and
for the punishment of such as transgress, the municipal regulations of them.

The injustice and cruelty of these codes, have, of late years, been greatly
deprecated, and owe their continuance in a great measure, to a belief, that
more moderate ones would be found less adequate to the prevention of crimes.
But this opinion grows weaker and weaker every day; and the state of
Pennsylvania, has set an example, in trying the experiment of a reform in this
respect, the excellencies, and success of which, render it worthy of imitation
in every civilized country.

Another objection, which is made to the exemption of friends from military
service, is the unfairness and unreasonableness of a part only of the citizens,
being compellable to perform it. But, if this be a natural, a constitutional
right, reserved to the citizens of that description, with which however all
dispense, who come not within the already cited clause of the constitution, no
unfairness, or unreasonableness exists, because it is the free and voluntary
act of those, who do not claim the exemption, which imposes upon them the
performance of such service: or, if this were not the case, ought not the
degree in which friends contribute to the preservation of tranquillity and
order, in a state, and the rarity of its laws, being violated by members of the
society, to entitle them to some indulgence of their conscientious
scrupulousness to enter into military service?

That such an exemption would not afford an opportunity to others, who might be
desirous of eluding military service; to avoid the performance of it, will
appear manifest to every one, who makes enquiry into the rigid discipline of
the society, in identifying those, who are entitled to membership in it, and of
particularly disclaiming the pretensions of such as are not. But as thou art,
though not one of the society, sufficiently informed on this point, it is
unnecessary for me, to enter into a detail of the regulations and rules of the
society, to display the impossibility of such an evasion becoming practicable.

I therefore dismiss the subject here, nor shall I detain thy attention longer,
with assurance of personal regard, persuaded as I am, that it is unnecessary
for me to express, with how much esteem and sincerity, I continue thy friend,
and well-wisher,

FIFTH MONTH, 12, 1795.

