TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF MARY KINNAN, WHO WAS TAKEN PRISONER BY THE
SHAWANEE NATION OF INDIANS ON THE THIRTEENTH DAY OF MAY, 1791, AND REMAINED
WITH THEM TILL THE SIXTEENTH OF AUGUST, 1794.

ELIZABETHTOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK M.DCC.XCV.

THE SUFFERINGS OF MARY KINNAN, etc.
WHILST the tear of sensibility so often flows at the unreal tale of woe, which
glows under the pen of the poet and the novelist, shall our hearts refuse to be
melted with sorrow at the unaffected and unvarnished tale of a female, who has
surmounted difficulties and dangers, which on a review appear romantic, even to
herself.

Her history will not, perhaps, be without its use. It will display the
supporting arm of a Divine Providence: it will point to the best and surest
support under danger and adversity: and "it will teach the repiner at little
evils to be juster to his God and to himself."

It would be unnecessary and tedious to describe the first part of my life, as
it exhibited nothing which is not daily observed in the common walks of
mankind. Suffice it to say, that, blessed with the affections of the best of
husbands, and the love and esteem of the most dutiful of children, my days
passed sweetly on, and I had scarcely one single wish ungratified. Happiness
smiled on our cottage; -- content spread her influence around; -- the voice of
grief was not heard; -- and old age crept imperceptibly on. Alas! how soon was
my horizon obscured by the dark clouds of misfortune! -- how doubly poignant
were rendered succeeding miseries by the recollection of such exalted happiness!

The thirteenth day of May, 1791, will never be effaced from my mind. Although
since that memorable period, four years have almost rolled their ample round,
still at the recollection, my bosom heaves impetuous; the cold sweat of fear
stands on my brow; and the burning tear of anguish glistens in my eye. Our
house was situated in a beautifully romantic and agreeable place, called
Tiger's Valley, in Randolph County, State of Virginia. Here I would mark nature
progressing, and the revolutions of the seasons; and from these would turn to
contemplate the buds of virtue and of genius, sprouting in the bosoms of my
children. Employed in such a pleasing occupation, on that evening, I was
startled by the bursting open of the door: I turned my affrighted eyes, and
leapt with terror at the sight of three armed Indians. I saw the flash of the
musket! -- I heard the groan of my husband! Quick as thought, I seized my
youngest child: fear added wings to my flight, and I ran with the swiftness of
the wind. Alas! scarcely had I time to congratulate myself on my good fotune,
before I was again caught; desperation gave me strength, and I again broke
loose. I scarcely touched the ground as I coursed over the plain, when the cry
of my child, supplicating me for help, arrested my ear. The yearnings of
maternal affection extinguished my prudence; forgetting my imbecility, I flew
to assist her, and was taken. A third time I attempted to escape, but was
knocked to the ground with a tomahawk; I then made signs of submission, and was
carried to the house. Gracious God! what a scene presented itself to me! My
child, scalped and slaughtered, smiled even then; my husband, scalped and
weltering in his blood, fixed on me his dying eye, which, though languid, still
expressed an apprehension for my safety, and sorrow at his inability to assist
me; and accompanied the look with a groan that went through my heart. Spare me
the pain of describing my feelings at this scene, this mournful scene, which
racked my agonizing heart, and precipitated me to the verge of madness.

In happier times, I should have thought that my heart would cease to beat, and
my pulse forget to throb under such an accumulated weight of misery. But the
soul often acquires vigor (...) fortune, and by adversity is led to the
exertion of faculties, which till then were not possessed, or at least lay
dormant. Thus it was with me; I have supported in reality what, in idea, had
appeared impossible.

After plundering the house of the most valuable articles, and pinioning my
arms behind me, they departed; with them I too was forced to go. Under the most
favorable circumstances, this journey would have been painful: how much more so
was it now, when the arrow of calamity was rankling in my bosom; when I was
faint through loss of blood; and without refreshment, without rest. Nature too
seemed to conspire against me: the rain descended in torrents; the lightnings
flashed dreadfully, and almost without intermission; whilst the thunder rolled
awfully on high. We rested not during the whole of that night, "Wherein the
cub-drawn bear would couch,
"The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
"Keep their fur dry."


It was on Friday night that I was taken; on Saturday night they rested, and
trimmed their scalps. Ah! what did I not feel at the sight of these memorials
of savage cruelty. I became indifferent to my existence; I was willing to bid
adieu to that world, whence all the lovely relatives of life were borne before
me; and, had I not been restrained by the spirit of Christianity, I had
terminated my existence by my own hand. I appeared, as it were, insulated to
the civilized world -- nay, worse than insulated, for the poor lonely mariner,
who is shipwrecked on some desert coast, has far greater cause to rejoice than
I then had.

(...) next day we continued our march over the more rugged rocks and
mountains, wet and slippery with the rain which had so lately fallen. Nature
was now so far exhausted, that I could not advance, except in a very slow
manner, when, instead of compassionating my sufferings, my weariness, and
misfortunes, I was beaten severely for not performing impossibilities. About
this time they frequently threatened me with death; though I recked not his
approach in genuine form, yet, I must confess, my soul shrunk from him, when
thus clothed in vengeance, too much for man to bear.

In this manner we continued our journey, sorrow and fatigue still making
increased ravages on my constitution, when one of the Indians was bitten by a
snake. We were obliged to stay nineteen days, before he was cured and able to
proceed: during this period I again recovered spirits and health sufficient to
follow my savage conductors. In this accident I beheld and blessed the good
providence of God, thus eminently exerted in rescuing me from that world, "from
whose bourn no traveller returns."

In a few days after this we arrived at the Ohio. Dark and rainy was the night
in which we formed a raft, and crossed the river: dangerous as was the passage,
we arrived in safety at the opposite bank; -- the period of my misfortunes had
not yet arrived; many bitter calamities were yet to be felt.

After this we traveled for two days through the gloomy ridges of pine.
Although their extreme wetness subjected us to many inconveniences, not to say
dangers, yet the Indians were fearful of being discovered, if they made a fire,
and, of consequence, remained without one. From these we passed into a fine
country, where we had plenty of venison, and other game; nevertheless so deeply
was I afflicted that I cared not for the food, which was absolutely necessary
to preserve life, and I was compelled by their threats of death, in its most
horrid form, to eat those victuals for which I had no relish.

On the 29th of June we approached the Shawanee towns; when we arrived within
about half a mile of them they fired their guns, stripped the bark from five
trees, painted themselves and me in a most horrid manner, and commenced the
scalp-whoop: never did I hear a sound so calculated to inspire terror: my blood
curdled within me at the sound, and fear took possession of all my faculties.
This they repeated five times: they then seated themselves, until a vast number
of people, attracted by the well-known and pleasing sound, came from the town
and shook hands with them: each person then struck me with great violence over
the head and face, till I could not see, and till I finally dropped down
senseless. They then recovered me and assisted me to walk into the town having
previously explained to me, that all the abuse which had been so liberally
bestowed upon me, was to welcome me amongst them.

During my journey, the sense of present danger, blunted the remembrance of
past misery, and prevented me from indulging in gloomy anticipation of future
woe; -- but now the whole weight of my affliction pressed heavily on my heart.
The picture of my life was deeply, too deeply dashed with shade, and but a few
faint strokes of light were intermingled with the numerous touches of the
sombre pencil. But when my spirits were surcharged with sorrow's dew, I
breathed out a fervent prayer to heaven, and relied on the beneficence of the
Father of All. Uniformly my efforts were successful, and a calm resignation
diffused itself through my frame, or the rays of hope danced sweetly round my
heart.

I lived during four days with the sister of the savage who tore me from my
peaceful home, and often contemplated with a sigh the depth of degradation, of
which the human character is capable. On the third of July I was bought by a
Delaware squaw, and by her was put to the most menial and laborious offices.

One of the principal objects of my attention, whilst I lived amongst the
Indians, was the humiliating condition of their women. Here the female sex,
instead of polishing and improving the rough manners of the men, are equally
ferocious, cruel, and obdurate. Instead of that benevolent disposition and warm
sensibility to the sufferings of others, which marks their characters in more
civilized climes, they quaff with extatic pleasure the blood of the innocent
prisoner, writhing with agony under the inhuman torments inflicted upon him --
whilst his convulsive groans speak music to their souls.

With my new mistress I continued until the defeat of St. Clair; then another
scene was presented to me, which opened afresh the sluices of sorrow. The
numerous scalps of my unfortunate countrymen, which were then exhibited to my
view -- the rejoicings which took place on that lamentable occasion -- and the
brutal scenes which were then transacted, sorely wounded my bosom, already
pierced so deeply by misfortune's shaft. -- Still my sufferings were not
alleviated; fed in a very scanty manner, I was forced, nevertheless, to chop
and carry wood to a considerable distance: in this occupation I had my feet
frozen, and this added one more to my already long list of woes.

In the spring, for fear of my countrymen, the Indians removed from the Miami
towns to Grand Glaize, a most beautiful place. Here my sufferings became still
more aggravated, although they had before appeared at their highest possible
height. A new piece of ground was now to be cleared, and my heart grew more
heavy in proportion as I was separated from my beloved country.

About this time there were prospects of peace. Hope, at all times easily
enkindled, blazed forth at this prospect, and gilded my solitary footsteps: but
the year passed away, and the devastations of war still continued. At this time
an Indian trader engaged to convey a letter from me to my friends in
New Jersey, which he did by my direction, and this was the first news they had
heard of me since my captivity, and, in the end, was the means of procuring my
escape.

The succeeding year commissioners came from the United States to conclude a
treaty; they departed, however, without attaining their object. The Indians,
finding peace was not to be expected, turned out very generally for war, and
left me, a prey to all the gloomy horrors of despair. In a short time they
returned, bringing with them some horses and two prisoners; one of whom, Peter
Tuttle, was afterward redeemed -- the other was killed by one of their chiefs.

In November the Indians began to be weary of war, and, in the beginning of
January, sent in a talk to General Wayne by a Robert Wilson, an Indian trader,
together with three Indians. General Wayne insisted, as a preliminary article,
that all the prisoners should be delivered up: accordingly they came home, and
collected a great number of us, unfortunate sufferers, and prepared to set out
the next day to General Wayne at Fort Jefferson. But previously to our
departure, one of the British agents came to them, and persuaded them, that
perfidy was a leading trait in the character of the people of the United
States; that they had placed ambuscades for them; and that they would never
return alive. By these and other arts, they persuaded the Indians to persevere
in their warfare, and we were again dismissed to our laborious occupations.

O Britain! how heavy will be the weight of thy crimes at the last great day!
Instigated by thee, the Indian murderer plunges his knife into the bosom of
innocence, of piety, and of virtue; and drags thousands into a captivity, worse
than death. The cries of widows, and the groans of orphans daily ascend, like a
thick cloud, before the judgment seat of heaven, and "Plead like angels,
trumpet-tongued,
"For your damnation:
"And pity, like a naked, newborn babe,
"Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin, horsed
"Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
"Shall blow your horrid deeds in every eye,
"That tears shall drown the wind."


I had by this time witnessed so many disappointments, that I yielded myself up
entirely to despondency, and endeavored to stifle the few scattered rays of
hope, which faintly twinkled, like the glimmerings of a lamp just ready to
expire. -- In consequence of these impressions, I fell dangerously ill of a
fever, which was accompanied by an excessive pain over my whole frame. The
Indians now abated, in some degree, of the rough treatment which I had before
experienced: but what contributed principally to my recovery was a letter,
which I received from my brother, Jacob Lewis, mentioning that he was at
Detroit, but that he dared not at present come to assist me because of the
antipathy which the Indians evidenced against him, on account of his being a
native of the United States. To know that I was not immured beyond the
knowledge of my friends and relalatives; that they still entertained for me a
warm, impassioned affection, was a delicious cordial to my drooping spirits. In
return to this letter I wrote, that as it would be in the highest degree
dangerous to come to the place where I then was, I advised him still to
continue at Detroit, and if it were possible by any means to ameliorate my
condition, I made no doubt he would exert himself to the utmost of his power.
For six months, we enjoyed the pleasure of each other's correspondence, being
but one hundred and forty miles distant, and enjoying a constant communication
by means of the Indian traders. In the darkest and most gloomy seasons, his
letters inspired me with comfort; and whilst I traced in them with joy the
sentiment of friendship, and the warmth of fraternal affection, I would for a
time forget my griefs in the extacy of delight.

On the first day of August, 1793, we heard of the approach of General Wayne's
army. Fearful and perturbed, they immediately started for the Rapids of the
Miami; taking only those things with which they could not dispense, and hiding
or burying the rest. On the tenth I had resolved to make my escape; my plan was
thoroughly matured, and I waited with impatience the approach of night to put
it in execution. But how frail and uncertain are the schemes of mankind! how
easily are even their best projects overturned! Going out on that day to get a
tent-pole, I accidentally cut my foot in a most dangerous manner; this being at
the distance of eighteen miles from the Rapids and being unable to walk, I was
obliged to be carried thither on a horse.

Soon after I arrived I heard from my brother who had joined a party of British
traders, and was coming down to the Rapids that he might see and perhaps assist
me to escape. He sent a Frenchman to me, who behaving in a manner which
displeased the Indians, I requested him not to come again. He returned, and in
a short time my brother came himself. As he was passing through the Indian camp
I accidentally saw him: my joy was so great that I involuntarily gave a scream
of pleasure: -- the Indian who was with me, surprised at this singular
behavior, viewed me with an inquisitive eye; I fully comprehended the meaning
of his look, and excused myself in a manner which, I believe, dissipated his
apprehensions.

In order to concert some means of escape, my brother sent a friend to exchange
bread for milk. After performing this errand he opened to me his real business,
and appointed a tree where I might meet my brother that night. According to
these directions I went, and how great was my surprise and disappointment to
find nobody there. But the person who had previously appointed the tree as a
place to meet, explained to me the next day the reason why we missed of each
other, we having gone to different trees. The next night, however, the Indians
having fallen asleep, I stole out about eleven o'clock. I found the brother of
my heart anxiously expecting my arrival: after those congratulations which
might be expected from two so dear to each other, who had been so long
separated, we started and ran two miles to the British camp. I then, with a
beating, fearful heart, crept into a brush-heap, where I lay during all that
night, and on the next day my brother came and carried me from the place where
I was lodged, on board a vessel, which was about to descend the Miami river,
the captain of which he had interested in my behalf -- having previously dressed
me in one of his own suits of clothes and tied an handkerchief over my eyes, in
order, as much as possible, to conceal my features. When we came to the mouth
of the river, we anchored in full view of the Indians, who had come to the
Lake, as well to avoid General Wayne, as to receive their provision, which was
given them at this place. In this situation I remained some time, fearful of
being recognized and re-claimed by some of the Indians: but finally, I
prevailed with the master of a batteau, who was going to Turtle Island in Lake
Erie, to carry me thither with him. When we arrived there we went on board a
ship which was then lying at anchor there, bearing twelve guns, and were
strictly examined by a Commodore Grant, who, when informed of my sufferings,
used his interest to have me taken on board a brig going to Detroit. Having
arrived at this last-mentioned place, I was so overcome by the joy which I felt
at my delivery and the fatigue which attended it, that I continued unwell and
unable to proceed for eight days. At the expiration of this period, I crossed
Lake Erie and came to Niagara, where I was again examined, and having produced
the pass given us by Commodore Grant, obtained another from Simcoe to the
United States. We descended in a batteau to the Genesee river, and thence
traveled to New Jersey, where I arrived amongst my friends on the eleventh day
of October, 1794.

If my history has been marked with woe-worn incidents; -- if I have been in a
peculiar manner the child of misfortune; -- if my cup of life has been deeply
mixed with gall; -- if despair has brooded over my soul, with all its horrors;
-- and finally, if I have been obliged to dismiss even dear delusive hope,
having so often felt "what kind of sickness of the heart that was, which
proceeds from hope deferred:" -- yet, by these very woes, I have been led to
place my dependence on the beneficent dispenser of good and evil, and to
withdraw my affections from that world, where the ties by which mankind are in
general so firmly bound are indissolubly broken. Since the consequences of my
affliction have been so beneficial, I repine not at it; ye, who are pierced by
the darts of misfortune, imitate my example, and like me recline on the bosom
of your Father and your God.


