SPECIMEN OF THE PATRIOTISM OF THE JACOBINS IN FRANCE OR, THE TRIAL OF JEAN
BAPTISTE LACOMBE, LATE PRESIDENT OF THE MILITARY COMMISSION AT BOURDEAUX;
CONDEMNED TO DEATH AS AN EXACTER, AN EXTORTIONER, A PREVARICATOR, A CORRUPTER
OF MORALITY AND OF THE PUBLIC MIND, AND, AS SUCH, A TRAITOR to his COUNTRY. ON
THE 27th THERMIDOR, SECOND YEAR OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, ONE AND INDIVISIBLE.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE TRANSLATOR, BY ORMROD and CONRAD, at the Old
FRANKLIN's HEAD, No. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1795.

THIS TRANSLATION IS MOST SINCERELY AND MOST THANKFULLY DEDICATED TO CITIZEN
GENET, THE FOREMOST JACOBIN IN THE NEW WORLD, BY A FRENCHMAN, INDEBTED TO
JACOBINS, (AS SO MANY THOUSANDS ARE) FOR HIS DISTRESS AND THAT OF HIS FAMILY.

THE TRIAL OF JEAN BAPTISTE LACOMBE.
IN THE NAME OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, ONE AND INDIVISIBLE.
The Special Military Commission, established at Bourdeaux, by a decision of
the Representative of the People YSABEAU, bearing the date of yesterday, in
order to try LACOMBE, and his Accomplices -- has passed the following Sentence:
to which have assisted, Citizens LATASTE, President; A. FRIGIERE, SEGUY,
AZEVEDO, and CLOCHARD, members of the said Commission.

THEY brought to the bar, a man who called himself Jean Baptist Lacombe, a
native of Toulouse, having his domicil in Bourdeaux, district of the same in
the department of Bec d' Ambe's; the said man about 35 years old; formerly a
schoolmaster, and president to the late military commission at Bourdeaux.

Citizen DEREY, war commissary and public accuser, said:

CITIZENS,

Lacombe, is accused of having perpetrated the most horrid crimes, and that
under the mask of all virtues. The papers of the process will prove, that
nobody ever betrayed so boldly the confidence of the people, and of its
representatives; that the discharge of judicial duty, was never so shamefully
abused, these papers will prove that a greater criminal, did never fix upon
himself the attention of Justice.

These papers are numerous; time has been short to read them, and to compare
together the facts they contain. I could scarcely copy the result of them; but
the public is consumed with the thirst of justice; it is important to yield to
its impatience; this impatience is that of republican virtues: The people want
a great example of severity, let this example be granted.

The papers were read, after which the public accuser spoke again as follows:

CITIZENS,

You have just heard the reading of the documents of the process; they exhibit
to you the most hideous picture; you see thereby Lacombe, to be successively a
shark, a prevaricating magistrate, a counter-revolutionist, and always a
hypocrite.

Let us follow him in the three periods of his life, in order that we may form
to ourselves a just idea of his baseness, and of the wickedness of his
disposition.

What has been his conduct previous to the revolution? How did he behave
himself since the revolution, and before his getting in the office of president
of the military commission? How did he behave himself in the various
emergencies of this duty?

What has been his conduct previous to the revolution? He himself informs us
that he was born in Toulouse; he says that he followed there the line of a
teacher, and that he came to settle in Bourdeaux, about ten years ago.

Lacombe a tutor! What man is this to teach youth the principles of morality,
to unfold in their minds the seeds of the virtues therein sowed by nature!

He was twenty eight years old when he came to Bourdeaux: He was married. His
wife declared that they were poor at Toulouse, and that, on their arriving at
Bourdeaux, they had got but a little money along with their clothes. What! --
Lacombe who had been successful at Toulouse in the line of a teacher, was
deprived of almost everything when he arrived at Bordeaux.

But, citizens, a fact which ought to have fixed your attention, inspires us
with the most unfavorable suspicions concerning his fame in Toulouse. He left,
doubtless, Toulouse on the only account of his being there too publicly known,
and he came to Bourdeaux, because the population, commerce and opulency of this
important city, unhappily warrant to an intriguing man more resources and more
means to conceal the baseness of his actions, and to impose upon others: Recall
to your minds the declaration of citizen Merzeau, one of the most ancient, of
the most sincere and most virtuous republicans. You have seen Lacombe to
partake of the theft of a carriage from Colineau, a coach-maker on
Tourny-walks; you have seen him to partake of a theft of books 1800 livers
worth from Ducot a bookseller; you have seen him accompanied by a fellow, who
acted the part of an English Lord, in order to impose more easily both upon the
coach-maker and bookseller; you have afterward seen him stealing linens, worth
800 livres, from citizen Merzeau; and how did he steal these linens? In order
to impose upon citizen Merzeau, he sent his wife, elegantly dressed in a coach,
and she picked out and carried away these linens. It is thus that this tutor,
who had obtained great successes in Toulouse, did ground his new successes in
Bourdeaux; it is thus that he taught his family the art of craftiness and
knavery; it is thus that, by misusing the weakness of his wife, he made her an
accomplice of his criminal baseness! These facts, and a thousand others, with
which the public voice reproaches him, show clearly enough what man Lacombe
was, previous to the revolution. Let us see what he has been since that epoch.

Every one is sensible that there are every where intriguers, imposters and
atrocious men, who took up the revolutionary mask to veil their plots, to
deceive the people and its representatives, to get in the public offices, and
to crush liberty to pieces.

There is no liberty without virtue; there is no liberty where licentiousness
is; but alas! How shall we have this republican principle adopted by men, whose
whole country's love consists but in the violence of their declamations! By men
who cry aloud for the only purpose of imposing upon the candor and credulity
of a generous and trustful public; by men who are always speaking about
republicanism, and who shelter in their hearts all the furies of despotism; by
men who speak of virtue, and have their hearts stained by the most hideous
vices; by men who talk of liberty, to fetter and slave their fellow-citizens?

In the year 1790, Lacombe kept a boarding-school, in a house rented to him by
citizen Lisleferme; he bought from a widow woman, six or seven tuns of wine,
for the use, said he, of his boarders. That wine had not been paid for, and it
became necessary for Lacombe, to draw both his wine and himself from the
prosecutions of the widow. He contrived to suppose a sale of the wine, to a man
by the name of Poireau, a writing master, and to declare that Poireau had paid
for it beforehand; this wine was carried away, and Lacombe removed to another
house; insomuch that the widow, who had a claim to make for the price of her
wine, was, for a while, at a loss to know what had become both of her wine and
Lacombe.

Luckily for her, Poireau pretended that the sale agreed upon between Lacombe
and him was sincere. Lacombe behaved himself violently toward Poireau; this
was the motive which carried the two knaves before the municipal officer; they
were giving to one another the name of rogue, when they arrived before him;
they were both put under arrest, but as they were together in a room, these
honest people adjusted their differences.

The municipal officer repealed the order of their arrest; but, as he suspected
that their reconcilement had been made at the expense of the widow, he caused
her to be informed of it; and she seized upon her wine in the dwelling house of
Poireau. This seizing of the wine, gave place to a suit before the justice of
St. Seurin, who compelled both Lacombe and Poireau to pay for the wine; thus
the shame of this robbery remained alone with these two men.

Lacombe has therefore given himself up to the excesses of the basest cupidity,
as well since, as before the revolution.

Endowed with some talents, but rather a prattler than a thinker, Lacombe
seemed to throw himself headlong in the revolution; he was, according to
himself, the scourge of aristocracy; he succeeded effectively in dazzling
patriots.

He went to St. Foi, and opened a school there; but it is probable that neither
his behavior nor his manners could obtain him the good will of the
inhabitants; his undertaking proved abortive.

He has been bold enough to say that he had left St. Foi, on account of that
place abounding with aristocrats and moderates. Citizens, this is a forgery
which he has contrived to veil the true motives of his coming back to
Bourdeaux. St. Foi, is classed among the towns which have constantly proved
patriots; we have seen, and we even now behold, very worthy citizens from that
community, trusted with public offices, and justifying more and more by their
equity, humanity and other republican virtues, the choice made of them by the
representatives of the people.

The ill fate of Bourdeaux, raised up in its bosom some wicked men who, in
concert with the intriguing deputies from the Gironde, abused even the deluded
patriotism of the citizens of this large city, in order to hurry them into
liberticide measures. These traitors aimed at federalism, and they cloaked
their plots under their oaths of the unity and indivisibility of the republic,
and of their attachment to the National Convention.

The National Convention, justly irritated, proposed to employ no means, but
the justice which they are indebted for to the French people, as well as to
their own dignity; the National revenge threatened then a multitude of citizens.

It was at that time that Lacombe left St. Foi, and reassumed his residence at
Bourdeaux; as bold and apt to all that could forward his fortune as he was, he
joined with those he had before dazzled by his speeches about his own virtues
and patriotism. The citizens whose testimony he might have dreaded, were struck
with sorrow and terror; they did no more show themselves. Lacombe profited by
this instant of terror; he dreads no more the language of truth; he well knew
how to imitate both the discourses and manners of patriotism; they proclaim him
the most inexorable enemy to aristocracy and federalism; his supporters praise
his talents and virtues; they are nearly supposing him to be endowed with the
manners of a Spartan; both people and their representatives are imposed upon,
he is trusted with the office of president to the military commission.

Such a man was Lacombe from the epoch of the revolution, to the unlucky
instant when by his intrigues he got in the station of president to the
military commission; he was alternatively contemptible and impudent; he was
never a patriot; is it possible to be so with a corrupted heart? He returned to
Bourdeaux, only when he had a certainty to profit by the terror and silence of
patriots, and to be at liberty of speaking here about his virtues and
patriotism, without the least fear of being contradicted.

Let us now follow him into the discharge of his duty, as president to the
military commission.

It is here that he entirely pulls off his mask; he appears fierce and humane
successively: The rich counter revolutionist may be certain to secure his life
by giving up his purse to him; the guiltless, if he wishes to be discharged,
shall be obliged to put his money by his innocence; the papers of the process
have exhibited to us the proofs of these odious bargains! It is thus that
Lacombe, by prostituting the sacred duty of a judge to his cupidity, hastened
the steps of the counter-revolution; by plundering together the
counter-revolutionist, and the patriots, he strengthened the tyrannical hopes
of the former and reduced the latter to despair.

Let us fix our attention upon some of the facts, which are proved by the
papers of the process.

We have seen the relations of Journu-Aubert, determined to do all in their
power to save their relative who was outlawed; they went so far as to offer
300,000 livres: Bizat, formerly a lawyer, was charged to make the same offer to
Rey, a baker, the friend of Lacombe and the manager of the pecuniary proposals
made to him, and of the out-bidding of the discharge of his duty. Rey asked for
a delay of two days after which he answered to Bizat that his offer had been
accepted; assignats to the amount of 205,000 livres were therefore delivered,
and they deposited bills for the residue of 95,000 livres.

Mean while Journu-Aubert, who was ignorant of the steps made in his behalf by
his relations, having proved with the representative of the people, both his
innocence and patriotism, was restored to law. Such an event was calculated to
disappoint our intriguers. The relations of Journu claimed again the 205,000
livres they had paid; it was impossible to detain this money; the justice just
done by the representative Ysabeau, to a well known patriot, stopped that of
Lacombe; he felt therefore himself driven to the necessity of repairing the
money; but he delayed more and more; he gave it back again by little and
little; and as if he had supposed that the relations of Journu ought to be
grateful for his having been kind enough to accept a sum of one hundred
thousand crowns, he has kept for himself a sum of about 70 or 75000 livres.

The very declaration of Bizat informs us that Bory, a brother-in-law of
Journu, had agreed to give up 55,000 livres, as a reward for the pains which
had been taken.

But remark the cunning of Lacombe and his associates; they masked this
shameful extortion under the name of a fine, to which, said they, Journu could
possibly be condemned; as if a fine was to be deposited with the president of
the tribunal, as if a fine was to be paid beforehand, as if Journu was to be
condemned before being heard and before the reading of his justification; as if
the judges forming the tribunal together with Lacombe, ought not to perceive
and judge but by his eyes.

Almost every day is marked out by some new prevarication. -- He extorted 7200
livres from citizen Chapel.

He extorted 48,000 livres for his releasing citizen Beaux. -- 32,000 livres
from citizen Perayre, viz. -- 20,000 livres before the arrestation of his
brother, by promising that none of the two brothers should be arrested, and
12,000 livres after the one being arrested. Citizens, perfidy and a wanton
outrage to the liberty of citizens, are found here by the most impudent
concussion.

He extorted 160,000 livres from citizen Lechangeur, and as the emissary of
Lechangeur, cried out upon so excessive an extortion, (for Lacombe would at
first have 200,000 livres,) Lacombe answered to him, who would thou have to
pay, if monied people do not! I have got children, I must secure them a
fortune. Wicked man! did thou not perceive that the most precious inheritance
to be left to our children, is the remembrance of their father dying in a state
of indigence; they then have, at least, the certainty of their property being
not stained by any crime.

He extorted 58,000 livres from John Tarteyron.

He had extorted 60,000 livres from citizen Castarede, and 13,200 livres from
the female citizen Dubergier. Lacombe, whom remorse had not been able to
attain, was afraid some days since to be discovered; he caused therefore the
sum of 13,200 livres to be returned to citizen Dubergier, as well as that of
60,000 livres to citizen Castarede, some days previous to his being arrested.

The cupidity of Lacombe and his associates, acted upon trifling sums, as well
as upon considerable ones. The wife of Bujac, having but an indifferent estate,
gave 1200 livres with the hope of saving her husband: And notwithstanding that,
Buzac was condemned to death.

The brothers Pimentel, gave some laces to the wife of Lacombe; some days
after, Lacombe supposing to be in want of 6,000 livres, addressed himself to
citizen Beraud, that he should borrow for him this sum from these merchants.
The money was accordingly borrowed by Beraud; but Lacombe who, without doubt,
wished to appropriate the sum to himself without being exposed to any
prosecution on that account, urged citizen Beraud to bind himself toward
Pimentel; Beraud refused and Lacombe did not receive the money.

Lacombe was possessed of considerable sums; he would lodge that of 52,000
livres with citizen Perayre; on his refusal, this sum was lodged with citizen
Aequart.

Lebrun, a director to the National Custom-House, was arrested; his friends
offered to give 100,000 livres, but it was too late; Lebrun had now been
brought before the military commission. Lacombe fearing therefore to be
suspected, answered the offers by saying that they had been delayed too long,
and Rey added, that Lebrun would otherwise have been saved; it is thus that the
lives of citizens became, with Lacombe, an object of speculation without
troubling himself about distinguishing republicans from aristocrats.

Citizens, I hurry this recital, unsufferable for righteous men.

You have seen the female citizen Bujac, giving 1200 livres as the price of
saving her husband, Bujac, who was condemned.

Another deed of the same kind, but more important, another crime more
deliberately atrocious has been perpetrated.

The wife of Dudon, as did that of Bujac, wished to buy the life of her
husband; she gave one hundred louis' in specie: By receiving them Lacombe
exclaimed against the smallness of the sum, saying that he wanted at least one
thousand louis'; Rey reported these words to the wife of Dudon, she objected
her impossibility of procuring so large a sum; her answer was related by Rey to
Lacombe, and this odious judge cried out, "she will repent of it;" he then
charged Rey, to tell the woman that she must find out this sum in three days;
she could not, Dudon was sentenced, and Lacombe kept up the one hundred louis'
he had received. What a horrid prostitution of his duty, of the life of men and
of the laws!

But the mind is overwhelmed, at the recital of such horrors! do I want,
citizens, to retrace here all the crimes which Lacombe has perpetrated? Is it
not enough of what I said, to raise up your indignation, and to arm you with
the sword of the laws?

He denied these facts at first in the examination he underwent; but as he
found himself urged on account of the assignats discovered in some tin boxes,
which he had hidden in the garret of his house, he said that some aristocrats,
the enemies which his faithful discharge of his duty bad raised up against him,
had probably and wickedly brought these assignats into his garret; such a
ridiculous evasion would betray sufficiently his crime, but his brother and
Rey, who were his agents, have asserted that the assignats, this shameful
offspring of his extortions, had been brought into the garret but in compliance
of his directions.

But he has afterward confessed several of his exactions; he declared that he
had given to Ducasse, another of his agents, a sum of 3,000 livres out of that
he had received from the female citizen Dubergier.

He has confessed that Rey had delivered to him a sum of 6,000 livres out of
the 48,000 livres exacted from citizen Beaux.

Should we be reduced to these two confessions, they would be a full proof of
his concussion.

But he made other avowals, which justice ought to preserve carefully; he said
in a letter to citizen Plenaud, that he had been misled by a desire to have his
family rich; to which he added that he had denied every thing in his
examination on account of two very natural motives; the one a desire to conceal
his weakness, the other on account of the indignation he felt, at the odious
and artful calumnies of the infamous Rey.

He had therefore denied every thing, and this avowal from his own, is a proof
of the sincerity of Rey's declaration.

He says that he had denied every thing, in order to conceal his weakness; he
therefore confesses to have perpetrated those concussions of which he is
accused: We differ, he and I, but about words; he calls weakness, what I call a
horrid crime. A judge trusted with the most rigorous duty, that of punishing
the enemies of the republic, and, with the utmost impartiality, of discerning
them from its sincere friends, such a judge trading about justice, is a monster
whom the world ought to get rid of! Such a judge is a declared enemy to the
republic, for we now are in a state of revolution, and it is only by his fully
executing the revolutionary laws and by his practicing the virtues which are
the order of the day, that a judge can manifest himself a true friend to the
revolution.

He denied the facts too, said he, because he wished to conceal the indignation
he felt, at the odious and artful calumnies of the infamous Rey.

The infamous Rey! But, since Rey is an infamous man, what epithet shall we
affix upon Lacombe? Is it not manifest, that it is he who has employed Rey, as
his agent?

Recall again, citizens, to your minds the odious ascendency he had assumed
upon Rey. Sometimes he threatened him with the guillotine, in case he should
dare to unveil his mysteries, adding that he had power enough to cause citizens
to be imprisoned, without imparting it to the committee of surveillance, to
cause them to be sentenced, and to pull off the head of whomsoever would be
daring enough to inspire him with any fears. When Rey communicated to him his
apprehension for their common fate, No, no, said Lacombe, no punishment will
reach me in the station I am in; thou would certainly be exposed, if it were
not for thy complying with what I prescribe to thee. Thou art the master of my
secret, said he once to Rey, but I am the master of thy life.

Lacombe, however confesses himself guilty, but of weakness only; he likewise
calls Rey an infamous man; we must suppose him to be very familiar with crimes,
and his mind to be strongly subjected to his heart, to a heart essentially
vicious, as well as to that egotism which compelled him to trample upon the
most sacred duty; which, before his eyes, gives to his crimes the physiognomy
of weakness only, and that of crime to the condescensions, to which he was
artful enough, to drive a man who has, at least, the merit of sincerity.

Citizens, facts numerous enough, have convinced you, and the denials of
Lacombe will not shake your conviction; but he shall be compelled himself to
give up that crafty justification. He has been examined by the committee of
surveillance; he has been confronted with Rey and Bizot, who had before given
their evidences and declarations. Rey and Bizot have maintained to him, before
the committee, the truth of all the facts they had declared, and no one of
those who have witnessed those debates, in which Lacombe unfolded the whole art
of falsehood and hypocrisy, entertains no doubt of his being guilty.

What is the consequence of these facts?

Lacombe, at the happy epoch of the revolution, behaved himself, as did many
others whose element was corruption. Recall again, citizens, to your minds the
theft, of about six or seven tuns of wine, and how he was reprimanded on that
account by the municipal, who discharged then the duty of policy. Lacombe had
before vehemently talked about liberty! Virtue and a regeneration of manners;
but he uttered a language, which was a strange one to his heart; he pretended
himself to be at the height of liberty, and he was in reality creeping in the
mire of corruption.

That spirit, with which he was inspired did not fail him, when he was promoted
to the office of president to the military commission. Behold his crimes, they
all partake of his propensity to the most infamous cupidity; it was that
cupidity which, almost always, put his passions into movement, which prompted
him into the most odious bargains, which induced him to weigh in the same scale
with gold, the lives of citizens. It was that cupidity, which induced him to
place in the same scale the aristocrat and patriot, which pursuaded him to
spare the enemy of the revolution, provided he would pay the money exacted from
him, and to keep fainting in the anguish of terror the patriot, who has no
money to give, or who would blush in giving it as a price for his innocence and
patriotism.

We are sensible that those who have been sentenced to death, did, generally
speaking, merit it; either they were aristocrats, or they had a share in
tyrannical measures; but by entering into bargains with them, by his striving
to save them for money, he plainly partakes of the crime of counter-revolution,
concealed in the hearts of such men; it mattered him but very little whether
liberty should be destroyed, provided he could acquire riches.

But a thing which makes humanity tremble, is, to behold Lacombe, entering into
contracts with the enemies to the revolution, sentencing them to death, and
notwithstanding keeping their money from them. What a speculation! What a
horrid and cool-blood temper!

Let us observe, citizens, that the revolutionary circumstances we are now
under, want on behalf of every public officer, a revolutionary behavior; let
us particularly observe that Lacombe was a president to a military commission,
specially calculated to guide, and to hasten the steps of the revolution. The
crime of a prevaricator, ought, therefore, to be looked upon as a crime of
counter-revolution; the public functioner who contrives means to save a
counter-revolutionist should be looked upon as a counter-revolutionist himself,
and must undergo the punishment which the law directs against the declared
enemies of the republic.

Citizens, the public opinion was some time since rising against Lacombe; the
representative of the people Ysabeau, was on the point to order his being
arrested, when his powers were repealed by the committee of public safety.

Lacombe himself was affrighted, there is the motive for his, on one side,
informing the representative Ysabeau, that it would be imprudent for him to
stay any longer at Bourdeaux, and, on the other side, for his delivering back,
to those who had given them to him, the sums and jewels he had received.

The representative Garnier of Xaintes, was not long before he became
acquainted with the disposition of Lacombe, the report of his prevarications
reached him, and Lacombe was arrested.

Citizens, I saw you trembling at the recital of so many crimes; You have asked
yourselves, how such a man could have been committed to discharge the duty of a
revolutionary justice.

It is to your misfortunes, to your errors, to that unlawful federalism, to
which Bourdeaux was driven, that you are indebted for such a scourge, the
representatives of the people sent to restore this important city to the
principle of the unity and indivisibility of the republic, could find any
where, but men branded with federalism. Lacombe artfully profited by this
emergency. Generous people are trustful; the representatives were imposed upon
and Lacombe was chosen. The wicked and counter-revolutionary designs of Lacombe
succeeded the righteous and benevolent designs of the representatives. The
terror with which he inspired every one, unhappily constrained for a long time,
the complaints of citizens. But truth has reached the representatives of the
people; justice and humanity will be triumphant, both the republic and
citizens, will be revenged.

In consequence of the proofs resulting from the papers of the process, I
demand that Jean Baptiste Lacombe, lately a schoolmaster and the president of
the military commission established in Bourdeaux; be condemned to death, and
that in conformity to the law passed on the 27th of March 1793; that he in
consequence be given up to the executioner, and carried to the national square,
in order to undergo the said punishment; I likewise demand, that his estate be
declared forfeited to the benefit of the republic, and that the sentence passed
upon him be printed, published and posted up every where it shall be requisite.

(SIGNED) DEREY.

The military commission, after hearing the public accuser, and the reading of
the papers of the process, as well as the replies of the party accused; the
judges having given in their votes aloud, the president has delivered the
sentence as follows:

THE MILITARY COMMISSION, Convinced that Jean Baptiste Lacombe, lately a
schoolmaster and the president to the former revolutionary commission, has
been guilty of sundry exactions, concussions, prevarications, as well as of the
most odious corruption of manners and the public mind, declares him to be a
traitor to his country, and an enemy to the people; in consequence of which it
condemns him to the punishment of death, agreeably to the law, bearing date the
27th of March 1793, (old style) and from which the following is an extract:

The National Convention, on the proposal of one of its members, declares its
firm resolution to give no quarter, or peace to aristocrats, or any other
persons who are the enemies of the revolution, and it decrees that they are
outlawed.

( First article of the decision above mentioned.)

There shall be established in Bourdeaux, a new military commission, specially
and singularly charged with trying the offenses said to have been perpetrated
by the late president of the tribunal, which existed under the same
denomination, as well as by his accomplices:

Directs further the said commission, that this present sentence, shall be
directly put into execution in the national square; that it shall be printed
and posted up every where it will be requisite; declares the estate of the said
Lacombe forfeited to the benefit of the republic.

Done at Bourdeaux, in sitting on the 27th Thermidor, the second year of the
French republic, one and indivisible.

(SIGNED ON THE RECORD,) LATASTE, PRESIDENT, Members of the Commission.
FRIGIERE, SEGUY, AZEVEDO, CLOCHARD,
SICARD, SECRETARY.


PRINTING, IN ITS VARIOUS AND EXTENSIVE BRANCHES, EXECUTED WITH ELEGANO,
EXPEDITION, AND ON MODERATE TERMS, BY ORMROD and CONRAD, AT THE OLD FRANKLIN's
HEAD, NO. 41, ON THE NORTH SIDE OF CHESNUT-STREET, N. B. THE TYPES AND
MATERIALS WHICH COMPOSE THEIR OFFICE, ARE ENTIRELY NEW, AND FROM THE NEW
Boundaries.


