A TREATISE ON CATTLE: SHOWING THE MOST APPROVED METHODS OF Breeding, Rearing,
and Fitting for Use, ASSES, MULES, HORNED CATTLE, SHEEP, GOATS, and SWINE.


WITH DIRECTIONS FOR THE PROPER TREATMENT OF THEM IN THEIR SEVERAL DISORDERS:
To which is added, A Dissertation on their Contagious Diseases.

Carefully collected from the best AUTHORITIES, and interspersed with REMARKS.

By JOHN MILLS, Esquire. Fellow (...) Royal Society of London, Honorary Member
(...) Dublin Society, of the Royal Societies of (...) at Paris and Rouen, of
the Oeconomical (...) Berne, and of the Palatine Academy of Scien^^ and
Belles-Lettres.

BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD, NO. 55, MARLBOROUGH-STREET.
1795.

IN THE PRESS, And speedily will be published, by WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD, BOSTON,
MILLS's MODERN SYSTEM OF FARRIERY; Comprehending all the most valuable
PRESCRIPTIONS and approved REMEDIES, accurately proportioned and properly
adapted to every known disease to which the Horse is incident; together with
the most approved methods of breeding, rearing, and fitting them for use; also
directions how to judge of Horses.

To which is added, A successful Method of treating the CANINE SPECIES in that
destructive Disease called the Distemper.

By JOHN MILLS, Esquire. Author of the TREATISE ON CATTLE, etc.

CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of ASSES. Page 1 BOOK II. Of MULES. Page 10 BOOK III. Of HORNED
CATTLE. Page 15 CHAP. I. Of the general Properties and Uses of Horned Cattle
ibid. CHAP. II. Of the Choice of Cattle, and of fitting them for Tillage Page
23 CHAP. III. Of Feeding, Fattening, and Tending of Cattle Page 28 CHAP. IV. Of
the Propagation of Cattle, Care of the Cow whilst pregnant, and Management of
the Calf, till fit for Slaughter, or for Work Page 39 CHAP. V. Of the Diseases
of Horned Cattle Page 46
BOOK IV. Of SHEEP. CHAP. I. Of the Qualities and different Kinds of Sheep Page
53 CHAP. II. Of the Management of Sheep Page 65 CHAP. III. Of the Propagation
of Sheep Page 91 CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of Sheep Page 95 SECT. I. Of
cutaneous Diseases in Sheep Page 100 SECT. II. Of Diseases of the Head and
Throat Page 103 SECT. III. Of Coughs and Shortness of Breath Page 104 SECT. IV.
Of Diseases of the Belly Page 105 SECT. V. Of Diseases of the Liver ibid. SECT.
VI. Of the Dropsy Page 107

BOOK V. Of GOATS. Page 111 BOOK VI. Of SWINE. Page 118 CHAP. I. Of the
Character, Properties, and Uses of Swine ibid. CHAP. II. Of Feeding and
Fattening of Hogs Page 121 CHAP. III. Of the Propagation of Swine Page 124
CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of Swine Page 128
BOOK VII. Of the CONTAGIOUS DISEASES of CATTLE Page 129 Of the Causes of the
contagious Diseases of Cattle Page 151 Of the Cure of the contagious Diseases
of Cattle Page 159 Additional Observations on the Diseases of Cattle, and on
their Cures; by the Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris Page 182 On the
Symptoms and Cure of the late contagious Distemper among the Horned-Cattle in
England; by Peter Layard, of Huntington, M. D. and F. R. S. Page 211

A TREATISE ON CATTLE.
BOOK I. Of ASSES.
FAR from deserving the contempt in which he is generally held, the ass is, in
fact, one of the most necessary animals about a farm-house. He costs hardly any
thing to keep, and does a great deal of work, such as carrying corn to the
mill, provisions to the market, or to laborers in the field, with numberless
other useful offices; for, in proportion to his size, he will carry a heavier
load than perhaps any other animal. In some countries too, he is made to till
the ground where the soil is light, to draw a cart, and even to serve instead
of a horse for riding post: nor is there any more easy going, or surer footed
creature. The milk of the female is an excellent medicine to man, particularly
in consumptive and gouty cases; and the skin of these animals is rendered
serviceable and profitable after they are dead; for of it, being very hard and
very elastic, are made drums, sieves, etc. The merit of the ass's skin
pocket-books is well known; and in many parts the peasants make good strong
shoes of the tanned skin of the ass's back. It is also with the hinder part of
the ass's skin that the Orientals make the sagri See Thevenot's Travels, tom II
p. 64.
, which we call shagreen The best is made with the sk^^ that covers the rump
and buttocks of the wild ass. It is prepared in Syria, and comes from
Constantinople.
. The dung of asses is an excellent manure for strong or moist lands.

Is it then, as M. de Buffon compassionately asks on this occasion Histoire
Naturelle de l' Asne.
, that men extend their contempt of those who serve them too well and too
cheaply, even to animals? The horse, continues he, is trained up; great care is
taken of him, he is instructed and exercised; whilst the poor ass, left to the
brutality of the meanest servant, and the wantonness of children, instead of
improving, cannot but be a loser by his education. Most certainly, if he had
not a large fund of good qualities, the manner in which he is treated, would be
sufficient to exhaust them all. He is the sport, the butt, the drudge of
clowns, who, without the least thought or concern, drive him along with a
cudgel; beating, over-loading, and tiring him. It is not remembered, that the
ass would be, both in himself and for us, the most useful, the most beautiful,
and most distinguished of animals, if there were no horse in the world. He is
the second, instead of being the first; and for that alone he is looked upon as
nothing. It is the comparison that degrades him. He is considered, he is judged
of, not in himself, but relatively to the horse. We forget that he is an ass;
that he has all the qualities of his nature, all the gifts annexed to his
species; and think only on the figure and qualities of the horse, which are
wanting in him, and which he could not have without ceasing to be an ass.

By his natural temper, he is as humble, as patient, and as quiet, as the horse
is proud, fiery, and impetuous. He bears with firmness, and perhaps with
courage, blows and chastisements. He is sober, both with regard to the quantity
and quality of his food; contenting himself with the harshest and most
disagreeable herbs, which the horse and other animals disdain to touch. In
water, indeed, he is very nice, drinking only of that which is perfectly clear,
and at brooks he is acquainted with. He is as temperate in his drinking as in
his eating, and does not plunge his nose into the water, from a fear, as is
said Cardanus, de Subtilitate. l. x.
, of seeing the shadow of his ears; and to this also, some, with great seeming
reason, impute his being less subject to the glanders than the horse Quadrupeds
do not all drink in the same manner, though all are under the like necessity of
stooping their heads to the water, because they cannot otherwise reach it; the
monkey and some few others excepted, which, having hands, can drink like a man
out of a vessel given them; for they put it to their mouth, and inclining the
vessel, pour out the liquor, which they swallow merely by the motion of
deglutition. The dog, the aperture of whose mouth is very large, and furnished
with a long and slender tongue, drinks by lapping; that is, licki^g up the
water, and forming with his tongue a cup, which being filled every time, brings
up a pretty large quantity of liquor. This method he prefers to that of wetting
his nose. Whereas the horse, having a l^ss mouth, and his tongue too thick and
short to form a large cup, and which, besides, drinks eagerly, thrusts his nose
to some depth into the water, which he thus swallows plentifully by the simple
motion of deglu^ition. But this very circumstance obliges him to drink all at a
breath; whereas the dog breathes freely all the time he drinks; and so does
likewise the ass, who only just touches the water with his lips.
. As no one bestows upon him the pains of currying, he often rolls himself on
the grass, on thistles, or on fern; and, without minding his load, he lies down
to roll as often as he has an opportunity, as if to reproach his master with
the little care taken of him; for he does not welter like the horse in mud and
water, but is cautious even of wetting his feet, and turns aside to avoid any
dirt: accordingly, his legs are drier and more cleanly than those of the horse.
He is susceptible of education In Persia they are taught to amble* to which
purpose the fore and hind legs of the same side are tied together with cotton
lines, at a greater or less distance asunder, according to the step the
creature is to make in ambling. These lines are fastened to the girth at the
place of the stirrup: a sort of grooms ride them morning and evening, and
habituate them to this pace. Their nostrils are slit to give them the more
wind, and they go at such a rate that there is no keeping up with them but on a
gallop. Voya^es des Chev. Chardin, tom. II p. 26* 27.
, and some have been trained in such a manner as to be shown for a curiosity
Aldrov^nd, de Quadruped. soliped. l^b. I. p 308.
. Regular currying and rubbing down would undoubtedly much improve the look of
the ass, and be of service to its health.

In his early youth he is sprightly, and not void of prettiness, agility, and
good humor; but he soon loses these good qualities, either through age or ill
treatment, and becomes sluggish, untractable, and obstinate; eager only for
pleasure, or rather so mad after it, that nothing can restrain him; nay, some
have been known to be so violent, as to die within a few minutes after
copulation; and as his love is a kind of frenzy, so he has also the strongest
affection for his issue. Pliny assures us, that if the dam be separated from
her foal, she will rush through flames of fire to rejoin it. The ass is also
fond of his master, though generally ill treated by him. He smells him at a
great distance, and distinguishes him from every other man. He likewise knows
again the places where he has been used to live, and the roads which he has
traveled. His sight is strong, and his smell is surprisingly quick, especially
with regard to the effluvia of the she-ass. He is very quick of hearing, which
has contributed to his having been ranked among the timid animals, who are all
said to be very quick of hearing, and to have long ears. When over loaded he
hangs down his head and drops his ears; when too much vexed, he opens his mouth
and draws back his lips in a very disagreeable manner, which gives him a
sneering and derisory aspect. If his eyes are covered, he stands motionless;
and when lying on his side, if his head is placed in such a manner that one eye
rests on the ground, and the other eye be covered with a stone, or piece of
wood, he will continue in that posture, without shaking himself, or attempting
to rise. Like the horse, he walks, trots, and gallops; but all his motions are
short and much slower. Though he may run at first with some swiftness, he can
do so but for a little way and a short time; and whatever pace he takes, he
soon gives over if hurried.

The horse neighs, and the ass brays, which last is done by a very long and
highly disagreeable and discordant cry through alternate dissonances, from the
grave to the acute, and from the acute to the grave. He hardly ever makes this
noise but when stimulated by lust or by hunger. The voice of the she-ass is
clearer and shriller than that of the male. A castrated ass brays but weakly;
and though he seems to make the same efforts, and has the same motions with the
throat, his cry does not reach to any great distance That judicious
investigator of the works of nature, M. de Buffon, thinks it a rule without
exception, that in all quadruped animals, the voice of the male is stronger and
deeper than that of the female; though some of the ancients tell us, that the
cow, the ox, and even the calf, have a deeper voice than the bull Certain it
is, that the bull has a far stronger voice, as being heard to a much greater
distance than either of them; and what gave rise to a belief of his voice being
less deep, probably was his manner of lowing, which is not a simple sound, but
composed of two or three octaves, the last of which most affects the ear; and
if we listen to it, we shall perceive a sound more hollow than that of the ox,
the cow, or the calf* whose lowings are also much shorter. It is love only that
causes the bull to low; the cow oftener lows from fear than love; and when the
calf lows, it is from grief, hunger, or a desire to be with its mother.
. Of all hairy animals, the ass is the least subject to vermin. He is never
troubled with lice, probably owing to the hardness and dryness of his skin,
which is indeed harder than that of most other quadrupeds; and this also
renders him less sensible than the horse, to the whip, and the stinging of
flies.

At the end of two years and a half, the ass sheds his foal-teeth, and next the
other incisories, which dropped out, and are renewed in the same order as those
of the horse. The age of an ass is also known by the teeth; and the third of
the incisories, on each side, is denoted as in the horse.

The ass is capable of generating so early as at the age of two years. The
female is even sooner ripe than the male, and full as lascivious; for which
reason she is a bad breeder, ejecting again the seminal fluid she had ^ust
received in coi^ion, unless the sensation of pleasure be immediately removed by
loading her with blows; the only method of preventing the consequences of her
amorous convulsions. This is a precaution without which they would very seldom
retain. The most usual times of her heat are in the months of May and June.
After pregnancy, her heat is soon over, and in the tenth month the milk appears
in her teats. In the twelfth month she foals; and seven days after parturition,
the heat returns, and she is again fit to receive the male; so that she may, as
it were, be kept continually engendering and nourishing her young. There is
hardly an instance of her having two foals at a time. At the end of five or six
months the foal may be wained; and it is even necessary that it should, if the
dam be pregnant, in order that the foetus may have proper nourishment. At the
age of three years he should be accustomed to work, and it will be right then
to shoe him with a light shoe, particularly to guard the fore part of his hoof.

To have good ass's milk for medicinal uses, the she-ass must be sound, in good
case, and one that has foaled lately, and not been covered since. The foal that
she then suckles must be taken from her; she must be kept clean, and fed with
hay, oats, barley, and herbs whose salubrious qualities are adapted to the
disease. This milk must not be suffered to grow cold, nor should it even be
exposed to the open air, because in either of these cases it soon spoils.

A stallion-ass should be chosen from among the largest and strongest of his
species. He should be at least three years old, and not exceed ten. His legs
should be long, his body full, his head erect and airy, his eyes lively, his
nostrils large, his neck longish, his breast broad, his back fleshy, his ribs
broad, his rump flat, his tail short, and his pile glossy, soft, and of a dark
gray. The most common color in asses is the mouse gray; but there are also
glossy greys, and gray mixed with dark spots, as well as some of a dun color,
some brown, and others black.

There are different breeds amongst asses, as well as amongst horses; but the
former are less known, because they have been least attended to. That they all
came originally from hot climates, is a fact scarcely to be doubted. Aristotle
De Generat. Animal. lib. II.
assures us, that in his time there were no asses in Scythia, nor even in Gaul,
where, he says, the climate is somewhat cold; to which he adds, that a cold
climate disables them from propagating their species, or causes them to
degenerate: and we have Lin^^us's testimony Fauna Su^ca.
that they have not been long known in Sweden Neither asses nor horses were
found in America when the Spaniards first discovered that country, though the
climate, especially that of the sou^hern parts, agrees with them as well as any
other. Those carried over thither by the Spaniards, and turned loose in the
large islands, and on the continent, have increased so considerably, that in
several places wild asses are seen in troops, and they are taken in toils, like
wild horses.
. In fact, they seem originally to have come from Arabia, and thence to have
passed into Egypt, from Egypt into Greece, from Greece into Italy, from Italy
into Spain and France, and afterward into Germany, England, and lastly into
Sweden, etc. in all which countries it is to be observed, that the colder the
climate is, the weaker and smaller the asses are.

The Spanish asses are by far the finest of any now in Europe. The climate, and
the care that is taken of them, render them such; for, undoubtedly, on account
of the badness of their roads and the sure-footedness of these creatures, the
Spaniards, who make great use of them and of mules for traveling, feed and
treat them well, and thereby render them beyond compare more gentle, active,
and docile than they are with us. So great is the estimation in which they hold
these animals, that a large, stout he-ass frequently sells for sixty guineas on
the spot; and if it be suspected that he is to be carried out of the country,
he will not be parted with for less than a hundred. In Auvergne too, where
indeed the cold is felt as much as in any province of France, they have large
and high-priced asses; and as they thrive as well, work as hard, and live as
long in all parts of this island as they do in any other country whatever, it
cannot be doubted that they would likewise do as well here in all respects,
with proper management. The present goodness of our roads in general, and the
great plenty we have of all sorts of horses, may indeed, in some measure,
account for our neglect of asses; but do we not carry that neglect too far? A
little attention might perhaps discover purposes for which these animals are
peculiarly proper; such as their traveling safely over high and stony
mountains, passing securely through narrow winding paths in mines, and in the
working of machines, for which they seem perfectly qualified by their natural
steadiness.

The ass, which, like the horse, requires three or four years to attain its
full growth, lives also, like that animal, twenty-five or thirty years: but the
females are generally said to be longer lived than the males; a consequence,
perhaps, of their being a little more tenderly used, on account of their being
often pregnant; whereas the males are worked and beaten without intermission.

Asses sleep less than horses; and if ever they lie down to sleep, it is only
when they are quite spent with labor. The stallion-ass also lasts longer than
the stallion-horse. His eagerness seems to increase with his age; and in
general the health of this animal is much more steady and confirmed than that
of the horse. He is far more hardy, and subject to a much less number of
diseases. Even the ancients mention few, except the glanders, and this is very
rare. As to the rest, the diseases of these animals are to be treated in the
same manner as those of horses.

BOOK II. Of MULES.
THE mule is a beast of burden, begot by a male ass and a mare, or by a
stallion horse and a female ass. There are both male and female mules, and both
of them are very eager for copulation; but they do not breed, at least in
climates like this. Some think it is because they proceed from two different
species of animals: but others say positively that they do breed in hot
countries. All animals which owe their origin to creatures of different species
are generally termed mules, and accounted bar^en: but* though it does not
appear that mules, proceeding from the ass and mare, or from a stallion-horse
with a sh^-ass* produce any thing either among themselves, or with those from
whom they are derived; yet, as M. de B^ffon observes in his Natural H^story of
the Goat, this opinion is perhaps ill ^ounded: for the ancients pos^^ively
ass^rt that the mule is able to procreate at seven years* and that he does
actually procreate with the mare Mulus septennis implere pot^st, et jam cum
equa conjunctus hinnum procreavit. Arist (...). Animal ^ib VI. cap. xxiv.
. They also tell us, that a mule is capable of conception, though it never
brings its (...) to ma^u^^ty I^^que concipere quidem aliqu^ndo ^ula potest.
quod jam factum est* sed enu^ri^e atque infinem (...) potest. Mas genera^e
(...) potest. Arist. de General. Animal. lib. II. cap. vi.
. These things, which throw a veil of darkne^s over the real distinction
between animals and the theory of generation, should therefore either be
confuted or confirmed. Besides, had we ever so cl^ar a knowledge of all the
species of animals around us* yet we know not what a mixture between
themselves, or with foreign animals would produce. We are, continues this
judicious writer, but little acquainted with the jumar, tha^ i^, the produce of
the cow and the ass, or the mare and the bull. We know not whether the zebra
wou^d not copulate with the horse or the ass: whether the thick-tailed creature
known by the name of the Barbary ram, would not produce with ou^ ewe: whether
the c^^mois be not a species of wild goat* whether it would not with our goat
form some intermediate breed: whether monkies differ in real species, or
whether like dogs they are all of one and the same species, but varied by a
number of different breeds: whether the dog can produce with the fox and the
wol^: whether the stag produces with the cow, the (...) with the buck, etc. Our
ignorance with regard to all these facts, is almost invincible; the experiments
by which alone they can be decided, requiring more time, and more attention and
expense, than the life and fortune of a common person will admit of.
In France, where many mules are bred, they are not suffered to couple, because
that renders them vicious and spiteful.

Mules live a long while, often above thirty years. They are very healthy, and
partake of the qualities of the animals from which they proceed; that is to
say, they have the strength of the horse, and the hardiness of the ass. They
seem born for carrying heavy burdens, for carrying them gently, and for
lasting a long time. They hardly ever stumble. Their sense of smelling is
uncommonly quick. They are very fantastical, and apt to kick, and their
obstinacy is become proverbial. We know not of any wild ones.

In Spain, almost all the carriages are drawn by mules: they carry the baggage
and equipages of princes and officers, and are of excellent service,
particularly in mountainous places. Traders and millers use them there to carry
their merchandise and their corn: they are even made to plow the ground, and to
thrash the corn by treading it out.

They are also much used in Italy; and in Auvergne they are employed for every
thing that is usually done elsewhere by horses and oxen, of which there are but
few in that province of France. They form a part of the parade of great
personages abroad when they make their public entries: and it is not long since
the magistrates in France rode upon mules to their courts of justice, and
physicians to visit their patients. The Flemings used formerly to breed from
their large sized mares considerable numbers of very stately mules, some of
them sixteen and some seventeen hands high, and they were very serviceable as
sumpter-mules in the army: but since the Low Countries have ceased to bear the
Spanish yoke, they breed fewer mules. They were also much more common in this
country in former times than they are at present, being often brought over
hither in the days of popery by the Italian prelates. They continued longest
here in the service of millers, and are yet in use among them in some places,
on account of the great loads they are able to carry. We also ^e^d some to the
West Indies, where they are much used and esteemed. Poitou, and the Mirebalais,
in France, still continue to breed great numbers of mules, but Auvergne yet
more, and these last are most esteemed The Spaniards have long had such a
predilection for mules, that it raised the price of she-asses to the high
degree before mentioned, and produced an absolute prohibition of exportation.
It has also less^ned their regard and attention to horses; insomuch that the
studs of Andalusia formerly esteemed the finest in Europe, have lost their
credit, and future ages will hardly believe what has been truly said of the
Spanish horses. To remedy this, the government have more than once thought of
restricting the use of mules to ecclesiastics and women.
.

To have handsome and good mules, the stallion-ass should be in his full
vigor, and therefore above three years old, and not more than ten: he should
be of a good breed; for in the studs of mules, which are not uncommon in
foreign countries, a stallion-ass of a good breed is worth sixty or seventy
pounds, whereas a middling one will not fetch above eleven or twelve: he should
be well made, that is to say, large sized, with a stout, thick neck; strong and
broad ribs, an open and muscular chest, fleshy thighs, tight-made legs, and
above all well provided in his genitals, as those of the Mirebalais are
remarkably. As to the color, the plain black, or black speckled with a rather
lively red, or the silver-grey, or gray intermixed with dark spots, are the
most esteemed: the mouse-grey, which is the most common color of asses, should
be rejected.

The mares should be under ten years of age, and as near as can be of the same
color as the stallion, especially when one desires to have black mules, which
are the most esteemed. In the year 1689, it was enacted in France, that no
stallion-ass should be given to a mare under fourteen hands high, which is tall
enough to produce the finest mules; and the large, full-bodied mares in that
country, are reserved for the multiplication of this breed.

The stallion-ass becomes so furious at the sight of the mare intended for him,
that he must always be kept muzzled at that time, lest he should maim the
grooms who lead her to him.

It generally is from the middle of March to the middle of June that the ass is
given to the mares, in order that, as they go eleven or twelve months, the
mules may be born at a time when there is plenty of good succulent grass, fit
for the dam and her young one. The ass should be rested for a week before he
covers the mare, and during that time he should have oats once a day, and be
fed with good hay. Mares which have been covered by a stallion-ass go a whole
year, and they cannot suckle their young ones above six months, on account of a
pain they have in their teats after that time: these mule-colts must therefore
be weaned at that time, or made to suck another mare.

The mules begot by an ass and a mare, are better and handsomer than those
which come from a she-ass covered by a stone-horse: they are even two different
kinds. Also the male-mules are stronger than the female, and therefore
preferred for labor and long journeys.

A good male mule should have round and thickish legs, little belly, the body
firm, and the rump hanging down toward the tail. The female should also be
full bodied, but with small feet and dry legs, well spread buttocks, a wide
chest, a long and arched neck, and a small lean head.

The age of mules, both male and female, is known by their teeth, in the same
manner as that of horses. Many judge of the height they will be of by the
length of their legs. At three months the legs have attained their full growth,
and they are then half the height of the mule.

When three years old, they are broken and trained like colts; but much greater
patience is required here, because they are much more headstrong and
fantastical. Wine is said to familiarize them; and one of their feet is tied up
to the thigh to prevent kicking, and at the same time render them docile. They
kick only with their hind legs. Many do not use them for work till they are
five years old.

They are fed and managed in the same manner as horses, and are subject to the
same diseases; consequently the methods of cure as generally practiced for the
latter, are likewise to be recurred to for these animals. The Maison Rustique,
from whence I have borrowed the greatest part of this article, M. de Buffon not
having any where professedly spoken of the mule, says, Tom. I. part I. live.
III. chap. iii.
in addition to the treatment of their diseases, that a pint of red wine, in
which half an ounce of flour of brimstone, a raw egg, and a dram of myrrh have
been mixed, will, if given repeatedly for some time, in case of their growing
lean, restore them to their flesh and good appearance; and also, that the same
remedy will cure them of gripes and coughs.

BOOK III. Of HORNED CATTLE.
CHAP. I. Of the general Properties and Uses of Horned Cattle.
THE Ox is the most valuable of horned cattle. He costs but little to keep, and
yields a considerable profit: is very good for draught, and for the plough;
subject to few diseases, and those easily cured. He lives to a good age, and
requires but a trisle to harness him, though no creature turns up the earth so
well; and when he is worn out with service, he is fattened, and becomes
excellent food; or, if he breaks a limb he is killed, and his flesh is eaten.
His skin and his suet sell for a good price. Even his horns and his gall fetch
somewhat, and his dung is a good manure. In short, he may justly be styled, by
way of excellence, the animal; for, besides the great services which he renders
to man, he returns to the earth full as much as he takes from it; even
meliorates the soil on which he lives, and fattens his pastures; whereas the
horse, and most other animals, exhaust the richest meadows in a few years.
Without the ox, both rich and poor would find it difficult to subsist: the
earth would lie uncultivated; our fields, and even our gardens would be dry and
barren. He is a principal instrument in all works of husbandry, the most useful
servant in a farm, and the support of rural oeconomics; for on him depends the
most laborious part of agriculture.

Formerly the wealth of man consisted chiefly in his herds of black cattle, and
they still continue to be the basis of national opulence; for it is only by the
cultivation of lands, and the abundance of cattle, that a state can be
maintained in a flourishing condition. These are, alone, real goods: all
others, gold and silver not excepted, are only arbitrary; money and credit
having no other value than what they derive from the products of the earth.

That the ox is not so proper for carrying burdens as the horse, the ass, the
mule, the camel, and some other beasts, is evident, from the form of his back
and reins: but his thick neck and broad shoulders declare him to be perfectly
fit for draught; and accordingly it is with them that he draws to the greatest
advantage, though such is the absurdity of some men, and such their blind
attachment even to the most ridiculous customs, that he still is, in many
parts, and particularly in several of the provinces of France, made to draw by
his horns, on the shallow pretense of his being then most easily guided: a
custom almost as preposterous as was that of the Irish, who, till lately, used
to make their horses draw the plough by their tails. It may indeed be true,
that the strength of the ox's head is sufficient to enable him to bear
tolerably well this method of laboring: but certainly he performs his work
much less easily, and less well, than when he draws by the shoulders, which
nature seems to have formed purposely for the plough. The unwieldy magnitude of
his body, the slowness of his paces, the shortness of his legs, every thing,
even his quietness and patience in toil, evidently concur to fit him for
tillage, and enable him, beyond any other animal, to surmount the constant
resistance of the earth against his efforts. The horse, though perhaps equally
strong, is less proper for this use; his legs are too long, his paces too quick
and impetuous, and he soon frets and tires. Besides, by putting him to the
plough, we deprive him of all the agility and suppleness of his motions; of all
the beauty of his attitude and carriage: for this heavy work requires rather
perseverance than hard labor; rather strength than swiftness, and weight
rather than elasticity: and accordingly, wherever the comparison had been made
with any degree of accuracy between horses and oxen for the labors of the
field, and especially for ploughing, the difference has been found to be
considerably in favor of the latter, in every respect but that of speed; and
even in this article their inferiority amounts to nothing more than being two
hours in a day longer at work than horses: for they perform the same quantity
of work every day, and that too in a better manner. It is universally allowed
that they are cheaper in every sense; for they cost less when bought, are less
expensive in their food, their harness, and their shoeing; are subject to much
fewer disorders, require far less attendance, and at last remain fit for
fatting when their labors are over, as was before observed. Yet, strange
fatuity! notwithstanding all these advantages, they are so little used at
present for the works of husbandry in this kingdom, that, if we may trust to
the report of the author of the Six Months Tour through the North of England
Vol. IV. letter xxxii.
, and surely we may confide in what that gentleman says from his own personal
inquiries and observations on the spot, whole counties in England, which, not
many years ago, scarcely possessed a plough-horse, now have not a single
ploughing ox.

To account for this very extraordinary and every way highly detrimental
change, and at the same time to refute the groundless opinion of those who look
upon it as a kind of proof that horses are really preferable, the author here
referred to, Arth. Young, Esquire. F. R. S. very judiciously attributes it to the
great price which live cattle have yielded of late years. It is well known,
says he, that the regular course of business in the ox counties, used to be, to
keep three sets of beasts; one of young cattle that were coming into work; the
teams; and fattening cattle, that had been worked three years. But when cattle
came to be so very dear, as to cost when lean near as much as they sold for
when fat, the ox-farmers were tempted to sell their young stock before they
ploughed them; or at least to throw them directly to fattening, that their high
value might come in the sooner. And as horses, once bought, required no annual
addition, they by degrees increased with all poor farmers, to enable them to
sell their oxen at high prices. The great decrease of the use of oxen during
the period of live cattle selling so very high, gives some reason to suppose
this the cause of it. I need not, surely, add, that this, or any other reason
that can be offered, is, and must be, false and incomplete; and that the use of
them in tillage is much superior to that of horses. The avarice of the farmers
has alone driven them out of use, not for the sake of profit, but for raising
money at a future expense. The great farmers in Northumberland, who, we are
certain, are not poor, still continue to make much use of oxen, viz. half and
half.

If the above arguments are not sufficient, the following indisputable fact,
attested by the same observant writer, who relates what he himself saw, must
surely silence for ever the most prejudiced advocates for ploughing with
horses. In the Farmer's Tour through the East of England, vol. I. letter iv.


Wenman Cook, Esquire. of Longford, in Derbyshire, executes all his ploughing and
home-carting, which are very considerable, with oxen harnessed nearly in the
same manner as is practiced for horses, excepting that the collars open to be
buckled on, and are worn with the narrow end, which is the part that opens,
downward. The chains are fastened to them in the same direction as in a horse
harness, but much above the chest, and in a line almost even with their backs.
The beasts of course draw thus much higher than horses. He likewise finds that
they draw with much greater power in this manner than in yokes, that they move
much faster, are more handy and convenient, and that they perform their work at
much less expense than could be done by horses, as well as even more
expeditiously, as appears from Mr. Cooke's ploughing as much land in a day with
three oxen, as the farmers do with four or five horses. A disproportion so
amazingly great, that, as Mr. Young very properly remarks, it decides at once,
and in the clearest manner, the long contested point, whether horses or oxen
are the fittest for the plough. Mr. Cook feeds them in the summer on grass
alone, and in the winter on straw; on which last indeed, he works them only
moderately; but if hard, they then have hay, or some turnips. Mr. Young
declares that he saw a team of oxen, thus harnessed, drawing a heavy load of
bricks, and observed that not one horse-team in ten could have out walked them.
The drivers assured him, that they worked much better thus than when yoked,
that they were able to draw a greater weight, and were far more easily managed.
When oxen are yoaked, they move awkwardly, and often with such inequality
between the couples, that, as is well known to all ox-drivers, it is common for
one beast to make its companion bear the whole stress of the draught. This
inconvenience, as well as the objection that oxen trample the land too much
when they are yoaked together in ploughing, is totally removed in Mr. Cooke's
method, which seems in fact to be an improvement of M. de Chateauvieux's,
mentioned in the second volume of my system of husbandry Page 92 -- 94: where
is also a drawing of the ox-harness invented by that illustrious cultivator.
. The making of the oxen go in a single line instead of a double one, is also
extremely useful in some sorts of ploughing; and it has been proved by repeated
experience, that they may easily be rendered so tractable as to be guided by a
line like horses.

The cow may also be rendered fit for the labors of the field, and, though not
so strong as the ox, be made to supply his place: but when she is employed in
this service, care should be taken to match her as nearly as possible with an
ox of equal strength and size, in order to preserve an equality of draught
between them; for the less unequal they are, the more easily and readily the
tillage is performed. Stiff lands, especially such as turn up in large long
clods, often require six or eight oxen to plough them; whereas a sandy and
loose soil may be tilled with only two cows: and besides, in this last, the
furrows may be continued to a greater length than in the former. Among the
antient^, an hundred and twenty paces was the greatest length of a furrow which
the ox was to make by one continued effort, after which, say they, he is not to
be goaded farther, but allowed to breathe a while, before the same furrow is
continued, or another begun. But, among the ancients, agriculture was a
favorite study: they did not disdain to put their own hands to the plough; at
least, they countenanced the husbandman, and consulted both his ease and that
of the ox: whereas amongst us, they who enjoy the most of the products of the
earth are, in general, the last to esteem, encourage and support the art of
cultivation. There are few STUART MACKENZIES, sensible, like the immortal
SULLY, that tillage and pastures are the only real foundation of the lasting
prosperity of states.

The barren cow, which the country people call a free martin, has almost as
much strength, and is nearly as fit for the works of husbandry as the ox. Its
flesh too is said to be very nearly as good to eat We are told, but may perhaps
desire leave to doubt it, that when a cow brings a bull and a cow calf
together, the latter is always a free martin, and never bears. The Romans were
not unacquainted with the sterile cow, and call her taura. According to Mr.
Lisle's information, the head of the free martin is coarser made than that of a
heifer* her horns are wider spread, and her udder is smaller. He adds, that the
flesh of a fatted free martin will fetch a halfpenny a pound more than any cow
beef.
.

The principal use of the bull is to propagate the species; and though he also
may be subjected to the yoke, yet one cannot be sure that he will work quietly,
and the use which he may make of his prodigious strength is constantly to be
guarded against. He is naturally untractable, stubborn and fierce, and, in the
bulling season, absolutely uncontrollable, and often furious: but castration
destroys the source of these violent impulses, without diminishing his
strength. He also grows larger, heavier, and more unwieldy when castrated, and
thereby becomes the better adapted to the labor for which he is intended. This
operation likewise renders him more tractable, patient, docile, and less
troublesome to others. A herd of bulls could not be either teamed or managed by
all the skill and power of man.

Most country people know how to perform this operation: but the different
effects which will result from the various times of performing it have not
perhaps yet been sufficiently attended to. In general, the most proper age for
castration is that immediately preceding puberty, which, in horned cattle, is
eighteen months or two years; few of those that undergo the operation sooner,
long surviving it. It is true, indeed, that calves, whose testicles have been
taken out soon after their birth, become, if they survive the operation, which
is very dangerous at that early age, larger, fleshier, and fatter, than those
which are not castrated till their second, third, or fourth year: but in
return, these last seem to retain more spirit and activity; and those which are
not castrated till their sixth, seventh, or eighth year, lose little or nothing
of their other masculine qualities, being more impetuous and difficult to
manage than other oxen; nay, in their bulling season, they endeavor to get at
the cows, which must be carefully guarded against, because the copulation, or
even the bare touch of such an ox, produces in the vulva of the cow a kind of
carnosities or warts, which nothing but the actual cautery can destroy.

The horned cattle, of which we now speak, afford a proof that the heaviest and
most sluggish animals are not always those which sleep the longest, nor the
most soundly; for the sleep of these is short, and so unsound, that the least
noise awakes them. They usually lie on the left side, and the kidney on that
side is always larger, and has more fat about it than that on the right side.

CHAP. II. Of the Choice of Cattle, and of fitting them for Tillage.
OXEN, like other domestic animals, are of various colors. The dun is the most
common, and the redder it is, the more the creature is esteemed: the black are
also valued; and bay oxen are said to be vigorous and long-lived; whereas the
brown soon decay. The gray, the pied, and the white, are commonly deemed fit
only for slaughter; it being the general opinion, which by the bye I doubt,
that no pains can render them fit for labor. However, be that as it may,
whatever is the color of an ox's coat, it should be glossy, thick, and smooth
to the touch; for if it be harsh, rough, or thin, there is room to suspect that
the animal is out of order, or at least not of a strong constitution.

The age of the ox is known by his teeth and horns. The first fore-teeth, which
he sheds at the end of ten months, are replaced by others, larger, but not so
white: at six months after this, the teeth next to those in the middle, fall
out, and are also replaced by others: and in three years all the incisory teeth
are renewed. They are then even, long, and pretty white; but as the creature
advances in years they wear, and become unequal and black. It is the same with
the bull and the cow; so that, consequently, the growth and shedding of teeth
are not affected by castration, nor by the difference of sexes. Neither is the
shedding of their horns affected by either; for the ox, the bull, and the cow,
lose them alike at the end of three years, and they are alike replaced by other
horns, which, like the second teeth, remain; only the horns of the ox and cow
are thicker and longer than those of the bull. The manner in which these second
horns grow is not uniform, nor is their shooting equal. In the first year of
their appearance, which is the fourth of the ox's age, two small pointed horns
bud forth, neatly formed, smooth, and terminated by a kind of button toward
the head of the animal. The next year this button moves from the head, being
impelled by a corneus cylinder, which, also lengthening, is terminated by
another button, and so on; for the horns continue to grow as long as the
creature lives. These buttons become ^ings, or annular joints, which are easily
distinguished in the horn, and by which the age of the animal may at once be
known; reckoning three years for the point of the horn down to the first joint,
and one year for each of the other intervals.

A good ox for the plough must be neither too fat nor too lean; his head should
be short and thick; his ears large and shaggy; his horns strong, glossy, and of
a middling size; his forehead broad; his eyes full and black; his muzzle thick,
short and flat; his nostrils wide and open; his teeth white and even; his lips
black; his neck fleshy; his shoulders large and heavy; his breast broad; his
dew-lap hanging down to his knees; his reins very broad; his ribs broad, and
not close; his belly spacious and sloping downwards; his flanks firm; his
haunches large; his rump thick and very round; his thighs and legs large,
fleshy and nervous; his back strait and full; his tail reaching to the ground,
and well covered with thick and fine hair; his feet firm; his hide thick and
pliable; his muscles raised; and his hoof short and broad. He must also answer
to the goad; be obedient to the voice of his driver, and easy to govern: but it
is only gradually, and by beginning early, that he is brought willing to bear
the yoke, and be easily managed.

At the age of two years and a half, or at farthest three, it is time to begin
to tame him, and bring him under subjection; for if this is delayed longer, he
becomes headstrong, and often ungovernable. The only method of succeeding
herein is, by patience, mildness, and even caresses; for violence and rough
usage will only disgust him beyond the power of recovery. Stroaking him gently
along the back, clapping him with the hand, giving him occasionally boiled
barley, ground beans, and such other aliments as please him most, all of them
mixed with salt, of which he is very fond, will prove of the greatest use. At
the same time a rope should be frequently tied about his horns, and some time
after the yoke should be put about his neck, and fastened, first to a pair of
wheels only, and then to a plough, with another ox of the same size ready
trained: after this they should be tied together at the same manger, and be led
together to pasture, that they may become acquainted, and accustomed to step
alike. The goad should never be made use of at first, because it then would
only render him more untractable. He must also be indulged, and labor only at
short intervals; for till he has been thoroughly trained, he tires himself very
much; for which reason also he should then be fed more plentifully than at
other times. Also, when he is to work, especially if it be in stiff or stony
ground, and likewise when he is to go upon the road, he should be shod, or, as
the country people and farriers term it, cued. He should draw the plough only
from his third to his tenth year; for after this it will be advisable to fatten
and sell him, his flesh being then better than if he was kept longer.

It is said that oxen which feed slowly bear labor better than those which eat
faster; that such as have been bred in dry and high countries, are handsomer,
more vigorous, and more sprightly, than those of low and moist countries; that
dry hay strengthens them more than soft grass; that they cannot bear a change
of climate so well as horses; and that, for this reason, oxen for labor should
always be purchased in the neighborhood of the place where they are to work.

In general, countries somewhat colder than our own seem to agree better with
black cattle than those which are hotter; and they are larger and more fleshy,
in proportion as the climate is moister, and abounds in pasture.

The largest black cattle that we know of are those of Denmark, Podolia, the
Ukraine, and Calmuck Tartary. The English, Irish, Dutch, and Hungarian cattle
are also larger than those of Persia, Turkey, Greece, Italy, France, and Spain;
and the smallest we know of are those of Barbary, and our own islands of
Alderney and Man. The Dutch import yearly from Denmark numbers of large lean
cows, which, when improved by living in the rich pastures of Holland, yield a
great deal more milk and butter than our common breed of cows. Their calves are
also much larger and stronger; and, except four or five days before their
calving, they may be milked during the whole year. These cows, commonly called
Flanders cows, require excellent pastures, though they eat little more than the
common sort; but as they are always lean, the superabundance of their food
turns wholly to milk; whereas our common cows, after living sometime in
luxuriant pastures, become fat, and yield little or no milk. From a bull of
this kind and a common cow, is produced another breed, called bastard, which is
both more prolific, and abounds more in milk than the common breed. These
bastard cows often bring two calves at once, and also yield milk all the year
round. They constitute a large part of the wealth of Holland, which exports
every year butter and cheese to a very considerable amount. These cows give
much more milk than our common ones, as was before said, twice as much as those
of France, and six times as much as those of Barbary.

The best English oxen and cows, for largeness and neatness of shape, are bred
in the counties of York, Derby, Lancaster, Stafford, Lincoln, Gloucester, and
Somerset. Those bred in Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire, and Staffordshire,
are generally black, with large well-spread horns. Those of Lincolnshire are,
for the most part, pied, very tall and large, and fittest for labor. Those
bred in Somersetshire and Gloucestershire are generally red, and for shape much
like those of Lincolnshire. Wiltshire breeds large cattle, but with ill-shaped
heads and horns. Surry is famed for a breed of white cows, which are said to
yield an uncommonly rich milk; and it is added, that their flesh takes salt
more readily than that of any other breed. The black sort is commonly the
smallest, but at the same time very strong, and consequently fit for labor.
The cows of this color seldom yield more than a gallon of milk at a meal, as
it is called; but continue to bear being milked till within a very few days of
calving. The white and red sorts give, in general, near three times as much
milk as the black, but grow dry much sooner; especially the white. The red kind
is generally the largest of any sort we have in England, and is commonly
thought to give more and richer milk than those of other colors. Some likewise
say that they bring better calves, and therefore advise keeping this breed free
from mixture with any other. It may certainly be looked upon as a general rule,
that the cow which gives milk longest is best both for the dairy and for
breeding; and that the younger the cow is, the better will be the breed,
provided she be past her second year.

A gentleman will choose the cow that gives the best milk, in preference to one
which yields a larger quantity of less good; whereas the latter will answer
best to the farmer, for fattening calves, lambs, and his whole breed of swine.
The bullock of a moderate size will also be preferred by the gentleman, for
beef for his table, because its flesh is better relished, and finer grained;
and the larger size may be more prized by the farmer, because they fetch more
money at market, their flesh being most esteemed for salting, especially for
naval use; for it is found to shrink less, and to be less preyed on by the
salt, than the beef of smaller cattle.

CHAP. III. Of Feeding, Fattening, and Tending of Cattle.
THE ox eats fast, and takes in a short time all the nourishment he wants,
after which he ceases to eat, and lies down to chew the cud; whereas the horse
feeds both day and night, slowly, but almost incessantly. This difference in
their manner of feeding proceeds from the different make of their stomachs: for
the ox, whose two first stomachs form but one very capacious bag, can easily
swallow so large a quantity of herbage as soon to fill his maw, and that done,
he chews the cud afterward, and digests it at leisure; whilst the horse,
having but a small stomach, can put into it only a small quantity of grass, and
continue to replenish it as the food sinks and passes into the intestines,
where the decomposition of the aliments is chiefly performed: and accordingly,
upon inspection of these parts both in the ox and the horse, and the successive
effect of digestion, particularly the decomposition of hay, M. de Buffon saw
Histoire Naturelle de Bo^uf.
, that, in the ox, on its leaving that part of the maw which forms the second
stomach, it is reduced to a kind of green paste, like spinach minced and
boiled; that it retains this appearance in the folds of the third stomach; that
the decomposition is completed in the fourth stomach; and that what passes into
the intestines is only the husks and recrements: whereas in the horse, he
observed, that this decomposition is hardly visible, either in the stomach or
first intestines, where it becomes only more supple and flexible, having been
macerated and penetrated by the active liquor with which it is surrounded; and
that it reaches the coecum and colon without any great alteration; that it is
in these two intestines, whose enormous capacity answers to the maw in
ruminating animals, that the decomposition of a horse's aliment is chiefly
performed; and that this decomposition is never so perfect as that in the
fourth stomach of the ox.

From these observations, and the bare inspection of the parts, it is easy to
conceive how rumination is performed, and why the horse neither ruminates nor
vomits; whereas the ox, and all the horned cattle, with other animals which
have several stomachs, seem to digest the grass only by rumination, which is
nothing more than vomitting without effort, occasioned by the re-action of the
first stomach on the aliments it contains. The ox fills his two first stomachs
(the second being only a part of the first), and the membrane thus extended
re-acts on the grass within it, which has been but very little chewed, and its
bulk increased by fermentation. Were the aliment liquid, this contracted force
would make it pass into the third stomach, which communicates with the other
only by a narrow duct, the orifice of which is situated at the upper part of
the first, and but little below the aesophagus; so that no dry aliment can pass
through this duct, or at least none but the more fluid part of it. Thus the
drier parts necessarily ascend through the aesophagus, whose orifice is larger
than that of the duct into the mouth. Here the animal chews them again,
macerates, and once more impregnates them with its saliva; and thus by degrees
renders the aliment more fluid, till it is reduced to a paste of a prope^
liquidity to pass through the duct which communicates with the third stomach:
and here again it undergoes another maceration, before it passes into the
fourth stomach, where the decomposition of the food is completed, by being
reduced to a perfect mucilage.

What confirms the truth of this explanation is, that while these animals suck,
or are fed with milk and other fluid aliments, they do not chew the cud: and
that they chew the cud much more in winter, and when fed with dry food, than in
summer, when the grass is succulent and tender. In the horse, on the contrary,
the stomach is very small, the orifice of the aesophagus very narrow, and the
passage from the stomach to the intestines, or pylorus, very wide, which alone
would render rumination impracticable; for the food contained in this small
stomach, though perhaps more strongly compressed than in the large stomach of
the ox, cannot re-ascend, because it may so easily descend through the
capacious orifice of the pylorus. It is therefore owing to this general
difference in the conformation of the parts, that the ox ruminates, and the
horse cannot: but there is another particular formation in the horse, which
renders him not only unable to ruminate, that is, to vomit without effort, but
even hinders him from vomiting at all, though he should make the strongest
efforts so to do; and this is, that the duct of the aesophagus enters so
obliquely into the horse's stomach, that instead of opening by the convulsive
motions of the stomach, it becomes contracted. Though this difference, like all
the other differences of conformation observable in the bodies of animals,
depends on nature when constant and unvaried; yet, in the growth, and
especially in the soft parts, there are differences apparently constant, which
however may, and actually do, vary by circumstances: for instance, the capacity
of the ox's maw is not wholly derived from nature: it is not such by its
primitive conformation, but is gradually rendered so by the large bulk of the
aliments put into it; for in a young calf, or even in one that is older, if the
animal is fed only on milk, and never on herbage, the maw is much smaller in
proportion than in the ox. The very great capacity of the maw therefore
proceeds from the extension occasioned by the large bulk of aliments put into
it at one time; as M. de Buffon has clearly proved by the following experiment
See ibid.
. He caused two calves of the same age, and weaned at the same time, to be fed,
one with bread, and the other with grass; and at the expiration of a year, on
opening them, the maw of the calf which had lived on grass and herbage, was
become much larger than the maw of that which had been fed with bread. I have
been the more particular in the above account of the manner in which ruminating
animals are nourished, and of the causes why the horse can neither ruminate nor
vomit, because it may afford some satisfaction to those who might not, perhaps,
otherwise be able readily to assign a reason for their different ways of
feeding.

A general caution proper to be attended to on this occasion, is, that great
care should be taken not to over-stock a pasture with cattle; because the
greatest profit really arises from their being constantly kept in good
condition; especially those that give milk, and those that are big with young.
The stinted breed of cattle which we often meet with, and usually impute to the
poorness of the pasture, badness of the climate, etc. is in fact generally
owing to the mismanagement of their owners, who, through a very ill-judged
greediness, over-stock their pastures, and thereby disable the mothers from
giving sufficient nourishment to their young, either before or after they are
born: and this original stinting sticks by them through life, unless they
chance to get very early into a rich pasture; for then, indeed, they sometimes
soon outstrip their original breed; a circumstance which proves, that if they
were at all times equally well kept, the breed would be much mended.

As oxen are not worked much in the winter, good straw, and a little hay will
then nourish them sufficiently: but during the time that they do labor, they
should have a great deal more hay than straw, and even a little bran or oats
before they go to work* In summer, if hay be scarce, they may have grass fresh
cut from the field, or the young succulent boughs and shoots of ash, elm, oak,
and other trees; but these last should be given sparingly, because an excess of
this aliment, of which they are very fond, sometimes causes them to make bloody
urine. Clover, lucerne, sainfoin, burnet, when these can be had; vetches,
boiled barley, turnips, carrots, parsnips, cabbages, etc. are also excellent
food for these animals. There is no need to measure out the quantity of their
food, because they never eat more than they want; and it is therefore proper
always to give them more than they will eat Cattle, and all other animals which
chew the cud, have the singular advantage that they never eat more at once than
is sufficient for them; for they then lie down and chew the cud: whereas
horses, and many other animals, continue to eat as long as they are able to
swallow.
. They should never be turned into the pastures till about the middle of May;
because the first growth of the grass and other herbs is too crude, and though
they eat them greedily, they disagree with them. After they have spent the
summer in the pastures, they should be housed about the middle of October;
taking care that these transitions from green food to dry, and from dry to
green, be not done at once, but by degrees.

The custom of giving salt among the fodder is of an old date, for Columella
mentions it Lib. VI. c. iv.
as the practice of his time, and very properly recommends it much, as well
calculated to promote their appetite, and consequently to assist their
fattening. I have heard it observed by a gentleman from America, that the
desire for salt is much greater in cattle and horses at a distance from the
sea, than in the countries near it; owing perhaps to a greater freshness of the
water. Even in Switzerland, the native horses of that country are very fond of
salt, and it is a constant custom to give it them. There are in several parts
of America, distant from the sea, spots discovered by the wild beasts, such as
deer and buffaloes, where the earth is of a saline nature, to which these
creatures resort regularly, and lick the earth with their tongues. They are
called salt-licks, and are sometimes an hundred or an hundred and fifty feet
wide.

Salt mixed with hay, which has not been well got in, seems to act as an enemy
to that fermentation in the juices which raises the heat in the hay: for where
it is mixed with paste or other soft substances, it prevents putrefaction;
probably by hindering the necessary preceding ferment. Thus it becomes useful
in hay on a double account.

Though violent cold is very hurtful to these creatures, great heat is perhaps
still more so. For this reason, in the summertime they should be led to their
work by break of day, and when it grows very hot, be either sent home, or left
to feed under the shade of trees, and not returned to work again till three or
four o'clock in the afternoon. In autumn, winter, and spring, they may be at
plough from eight or nine in the morning, till five or six in the evening
without intermission. But I cannot, by any means, approve of keeping them
continually out of doors; especially for cows that give milk, or are with calf.
It is surely inhuman to expose a creature to a degree of cold which it is not
naturally fenced against.

Though oxen do not require so much attendance as horses, yet to keep them
brisk and healthy, it will be proper, especially when they work, to curry them
every day, to rub them down, wash them, clear their feet of gravel and dirt,
grease their hoofs, etc. They must also have drink twice a day, morning and
evening. The horse likes a thick and warmish water; but for the ox it must be
clear and cool. The pavement of their stables should be a little inclined, that
wet may not rest on it, and they should also have dry litter laid under them.

The age at which oxen are generally fattened is their tenth year, because
there is no certainty of succeeding therein afterward, nor is their flesh so
good when they are older. They may be fattened in any season of the year; but
summer is commonly chosen, because it is done then at least expense. If it is
begun in May or June, they are generally completely fattened before the end of
October. From the very beginning to fatten them, they must be taken from all
work, drink often, and have plenty of succulent food, sometimes mingled with a
little salt as before said; or, when a beast falls off his stomach, grass
dipped in vinegar will also restore his appetite, and consequently help to make
him fatten the sooner. They must not be disturbed while they are chewing the
cud; and during the great heats, they should sleep in the cow-house, or some
other shady place. By this means they will become so fat in four or five
months, as to be scarce able to walk; so that if they are to be sent to any
distant place, it must be by very slow journies that they are removed. Cows,
and even bulls whose testicles have been knit, may also be fattened: but the
flesh of cows is drier, and that of the knit-bull redder and tougher, than the
flesh of oxen; and that of the bull has always a strong, disagreeable taste.

Turnips are made to yield a great profit in feeding and fattening of cattle,
particularly in Norfolk, and, of late years, in several other counties in
England. When large, they should be sliced, as well to enable the beasts to eat
the quicker, as to prevent their choking themselves, which they would
otherwise be apt to do. Carrots are yet wholesomer, much more substantial, and
consequently more profitable food: besides which, they render the flesh of the
cattle that are fed with them firmer and better tasted, as the Flemings have
long experienced: but a yet more nourishing food is parsnips, especially for
m^^ch-cows, which, when fed with them, give more milk than with any other
winter fodder, and that milk yields better butter than the milk of cows
nourished with any other substance. Cattle eat these roots raw at first, sliced
lengthwise; and when they begin not to relish them, they are cut in pieces, put
into a large copper, pressed down there, and boiled with only so much water as
fills up the chasms between them. Our neighbors in Brittany reckon one crop of
parsnips, used for feeding cattle, equal in value to more than three c^^ps of
wheat Observations de la Societe d' Agriculture, de Commerce, et des Arts,
etablie par les Etats de Bretagne. Annees 1757 et 1758. p. 88.
. Potatoes are another good and very heartening food, and may, as has been
before said of parsnips, be parboiled when cattle like them best that way.
Buck-wheat makes very good fodder for cattle; and so does, in particular, the
yellow-flowered vetch. In Germany and Flanders, spurrey is preferred before any
other fodder, not excepting even corn, and is found to produce the richest milk
and best butter. Cabbages, especially the Scotch kale and the great American
cabbage, are reckoned preferable to turnips, in point of health as well speed
in fattening, and it is said, that one acre of them will go as far as three of
turnips: but it is to be observed, that in using them, especially for
milch-cows, the withered or decayed leaves should be thrown away, because they
are thought to give a bad taste to the milk.

Clover is undoubtedly an excellent food for cattle, and we are told that one
acre of it will feed as many of them as four or five acres of common grass: but
they should never be turned into it in wet weather, nor whilst the dew is yet
upon the plant, lest it should burst them. It should be given them sparingly at
first, till it purges them: for when it has produced this effect, the danger is
generally over. But of all the plants that are given to cattle for their food,
none is equal to lucerne, either for early, speedy, or good fatting; for with
this the grazier may begin fattening toward the end of April, and finish about
the middle of harvest, when meat generally bears an high price. A large fatting
ox may be allowed forty pounds, or perhaps more, of green lucerne each day The
ancient Romans allowed twenty pounds of lucerne-hay at ^ight to a large
laboring ox, that was not fatting.
. All cattle are remarkably fond of lucerne, and always prefer that which has
been cut a day or two, and stood twenty-four or forty-eight hours in a dry,
shady place. By this precaution too all danger of its swelling them, which it
might otherwise be apt to do, like clover and trefoil, is removed: only it is
to be observed, that more caution should be used in giving it to cows, than to
bullocks. When oxen or heifers are fed for the butcher with lucerne, the fat
will spread itself through the lean, like veins in marble; and the flesh will
be remarkably well flavoured.

Oil-cakes, meaning the residue of the seeds of lin, rape, or cole-seed, after
their oil has been expressed from them, are well known to be great fatteners of
cattle, especially if these drink plentifully with them: but they are apt to
render the fat yellow and rank. To remedy this, the cattle should be fed with
dry fodder, for a fortnight or three weeks before they are killed.

A beast is well-fed outwardly, that is to say, well covered with flesh, when
his huckle-bones appear round and plump, his ribs smooth, his flanks full, his
neck thick, his cod round, and, on feeling him upon the nethermost ribs, the
skin feels soft and loose; and if, besides the above marks, the setting on of
the tail feels thick, full and soft, and the navel round, soft, large and
plump, it is a sure sign that he is also well tallowed, that is, well fatted
inwardly*

All these creatures are very apt to lick themselves, when at rest, and this is
thought to be an impediment to their fattening. To prevent it, all the parts of
their bodies within their reach are rubbed over with their dung; without this
precaution, their tongues, which are very rough, abrade, or take off their
hair, which they swallow; and as this cannot be digested, it remains in the
stomach, gathers together there, and forms by degrees round balls, called
aegagropiles, which always hinder digestion, and sometimes grow so large as to
be very troublesome, and even to endanger the life of the animal. They are, in
time, covered with a brown crust proceeding from an inspissated mucilage,
which, by continual friction and coction in the stomach, becomes hard and
glossy. These balls are found only in the maw: for if any hair gets into the
other stomachs, it does not remain either there or in the intestines, but
probably gets off with the excrements. However, this subject, and the disorders
occasioned by these balls, will be treated of more fully in the fifth chapter
of this book, where I shall speak of the distempers to which these animals are
subject.

I cannot conclude this subject of the feeding of oxen, without adding M. de
Buffon's just remark, that animals which have incisory teeth in both jaws, such
as the horse and the ass, nip short herbage more easily than those whose upper
jaw is without incisories: and if sheep and goats cut the grass very close, it
is owing to the smallness and thinness of their lips; but the thick-lipped ox
can only crop the long herbage: and this is the true reason why he never
injures the pastures in which he lives. As he crops only the extremity of the
long herbage, he does not affect the root, and retards its growth but very
little; whereas the sheep and the goat, by biting the herbage very close, both
destroy the stem, and injure the crown of the root. The horse chooses the most
slender herbage, and leaves the larger, whose stems are hard, to seed and
multiply; whereas the ox crops those thick stems, and thereby destroys by
degrees the coarser herbage. Hence it is, that, after some years, the herbage
where a horse has lived becomes coarse; whereas that where the ox has fed
becomes a fine pasture.

CHAP. IV. Of the Propagation of Cattle; Care of the Cow whilst pregnant, and
Management of the Calf till fit for Slaughter, or for Work.
SPRING is the usual season for cows to be in heat. In this country, most of
them admit the bull, and become pregnant, between the middle of April and the
middle of July. Some indeed are more forward, and others more backward in their
heat. They go nine months, and calve at the beginning of the tenth;
consequently the regular season for calves is from the middle of January to the
middle of April: but there is no scarcity of them during the whole summer,
autumn being the time when they are least abundant. The tokens of the cow's
heat are not at all equivocal: it is known by her frequent lowings, which are
also more violent than at other times: she leaps on cows, oxen, and even bulls;
and the vulva is inflated so as to project outward. The time of this strong
heat should be particularly noticed, and the bull should be brought to her
then; for if she be suffered to cool, she will not so certainly retain
afterward.

The bull, like the stallion among horses, should be chosen from among the most
beautiful of the species, and between the age of three years and ten, as before
observed; but the nearer he is to three, the greater will be his vigor. He
should be large, well-made, and in good plight; his eyes should be black, his
look proud, his forehead broad and curled, his head short, his horns thick,
short and black, his ears long and shaggy, his muzzel large, his nose short and
strait, his neck thick and fleshy, his shoulders and breast broad, his reins
firm, his back strait, his buttocks square, his tail high-placed, long, and
full of hair, his thighs round and well trussed, his legs thick, short-jointed,
and full of sinews, his knees round, big, and strait, his feet far asunder, not
broad, nor turning in, but spreading easily, his hoof long and hollow, his hide
pliable, the hair of all his body thick, short, and soft as velvet, and his
walk firm and steady.

The cow should be high of stature, her horns well spread, fair and smooth, her
forehead broad and smooth, her body long, her belly round and large, and her
udder white, not fleshy, but large and lank, with only four teats; these having
been experienced to yield the most milk. She should also be young; and some
hold it to be most advisable for her to be of the same country as the bull,
and as near as can be of the same color.

The cow reaches the age of puberty at eighteen months, and the bull at two
years; but though they are at that age capable of generating, it is advisable
not to suffer them to copulate under three years. The time of their greatest
strength is from three to nine years, after which the best way of disposing of
them is by fattening them for slaughter. As they acquire the greatest part of
their growth in two years, the duration of life with them, as with most other
species of animals, is nearly seven times two years; and accordingly we seldom
find them live above fourteen or fifteen.

Cows often retain at the first, second, or third time of covering; and when
they are pregnant, the bull refuses to cover them again, whatever appearance of
heat there may be in them. Indeed, their heat generally ceases almost
immediately after they have conceived, and they themselves will not then suffer
the bull to approach them.

Cows require greater care when pregnant than at other times; particularly,
they should not then be suffered to leap over hedges, ditches, etc. or to do
any other thing by which they may strain themselves; for they are subject to
abortion: consequently they must not by any means be used for draught whilst in
that condition; but they should then he put into the richest pastures, provided
they be not too moist or fenny, and for six weeks or two months before they
calve, they should be fed more plentifully than usual; giving them in the
summertime grass in the cow-house, and in the winter bran, lucerne, sainfoin,
burnet, etc. During this time they must not be milked, that fluid being then
absolutely necessary to the nourishment of the foetus. Some cows, indeed, do
not yield any milk for a month or six weeks before they calve; but those which
have milk to the time of calving are both the best mothers and the best nurses;
though it is generally bad and in small quantity. The same care and cautions
must be observed at the delivery of the cow, as at that of the mare; or rather
more, the former seeming to be on this occasion more spent and weakened than
the latter. One indispensable point is, to put her in a separate stall, where
she must be kept warm, at her case, and on good litter. She must be well fed
for ten or twelve days after she has brought forth, with ground beans, corn, or
oatmeal, diluted with water in which salt has been dissolved, and with lucerne,
burnet, sainfoin, or good grass, thoroughly ripe. By this time she is usually
recovered, and may therefore by degrees be put to her common way of living, and
turned into the pasture; observing not to take any milk from her during the two
first months, that the calf may thrive the better; and besides, the milk is not
then of a good quality Good milk is neither too thick nor too thin; its proper
consistence is, when a small drop preserves its spherical form without
spreading: it must also be of a delicate white; that with a yellow or blue cast
being of little value. The taste of it must be soft, without any bitterness or
acridity; it must have a good smell, or none at all. It is better in the month
of May, and in summer, than in winter; and for it to be perfectly good, the cow
must be of a proper age, and in good health. The milk of heifers is too thin;
and that of old cows too oily, and in wintertime too thick. These different
qualities of milk have relation to the butyrous, caseous, and serous parts of
which it consists. Milk too thin abounds too much with serous particles; that
which is too thick has few or none of the (...) particles; and the to^ oily has
not a proper portion of butyrous (...) serous particles. The milk of a cow when
bulling is not good; nor that when the creature (...) near, or just p^st, the
time of her calving. Buffon, Not. Hist. du (...)*
.

As soon as the young calf is born, whilst the mother licks it, or to excite
her to do so, it is right to strew over it a couple of handfuls of salt and
crumbs of bred mixed together. This licking strengthens the calf, or at least
clears it of all filth, which could not be removed by any other means, because
the young creature is then too tender to be handled without danger; and at the
same time it should be made to swallow the yolk of a raw egg, likewise to give
it strength.

The young calf should be left with its dam during the first five or six days,
especially if it be in winter, in order that it may be kept constantly warm,
and suck whenever it pleases; and at the end of this time, by which it will
have gathered strength and have grown visibly, it must be tied up in a separate
pen at a little distance from her, that it may suck only when the keeper thinks
proper; for it would exhaust the cow if left continually with her. Two or three
times a day will now be often enough for it to suck; and when it has done
sucking, it must be led back to its pen and tied up as before. After the mother
is returned to pasture with the other cows, the calf should still be kept in
the cow-house, and there made to suck twice day before its dam goes out.

If it be intended to fatten the calf speedily, and at the same time render his
flesh fine and delicate, he should have every day about half a dozen raw eggs,
and crumb of bread boiled in milk. This, in four or five weeks time, will
render his flesh excellent. Calves intended for the butcher should therefore
not suck above thirty or forty days; but those designed for keeping should be
left with the dam two months at least, because the more they suck, the stronger
and larger they will be. The best for bringing up are those that have been
calved in the months of April, May and June; for those which come later seldom
acquire vigor enough to enable them to bear the inclemencies of the ensuing
winter; cold making them droop, and often killing them. Thus calves designed
for keeping should be weaned at two, three, or four months: but before they are
taken wholly from sucking, a little fine grass, or chopped hay, should be given
them from time to time, to accustom them to this new aliment; after being used
to which, they must be never suffered to come near their dam; either in the
stall or pasture. They themselves should be sent to pasture every day, and
remain there from morning to evening during the summer: but when the cold of
autumn begins to set in, they must not be let out till late in the morning, and
should be brought back early in the evening; and during the winter, the cold of
that season being extremely detrimental to them, they must be kept very warm in
a close cow-house, be well supplied with water, have sainsoin, lucerne, burnet,
etc. mixed with their common grass, given them in a cow-house, and be let out
only when the weather is very fine. A great deal of care is necessary to bring
them through the first winter, which is the most dangerous period of their
lives: for if they survive this, the following summer will strengthen them so
that they will have nothing to fear from the cold of a second winter.

It sometimes happens that a calf is troublesome to rear, because it will not
readily take the teat, but must have it held a considerable time in its mouth
before it will suck; and likewise some show for a long while a reluctance to
suck at all, which is a sign of their having pimples under the tongue; a
disorder to which young calves are subject, and which is easily cured by
cutting them off with a pair of scissars, and washing the wound with vinegar
and salt: others rub them with hog's lard and salt pounded very fine.

In Spain, and some other countries, they place near a young calf in a
cow-house one of those stones called salegres, which are found in the mines of
rock-salt: by licking this salt-stone whilst its dam is at the pasture, it
becomes so hungry and thirsty, that when the cow returns, the calf eagerly
seizes the teat and sucks his fill; and by this means he fattens and thrives
much faster than those to which no salt is given.

The clods of curdled milk which are found in the third and fourth stomach of a
sucking calf, are, after being dried in the air, the rennet made use of for
curdling milk. The longer it is kept the better it is: and a very little of it
is sufficient to turn a large quantity of milk, as is well known to all who
keep dairies.

As to the rest, the management of milk and dairies is a subject so generally
and so well understood, that it might be needless for me to enlarge upon it
here, any farther, perhaps, than just to observe in general, that the dairy
should be kept extremely clean and well aired, at a distance from all
disagreeable smells of any kind whatever, and that it should be so situated as
to be of as equal a temperature as possible during the whole year, and
therefore open to the north in summer, and to the south in winter. The
dairy-maids should not only be clean in their persons, but also such whose
perspiration is not rank. The vessels in which milk is now kept are generally
lined with lead, because it is a substance that cleans easily: but great care
should be taken that the milk do not remain in any leaden vessel till it
contracts the least degree of acidity; for if it does, it soon dissolves part
of the lead, a very little of which will be of extremely bad consequences to
health, by occasioning the most dangerous disorders in the stomach and bowels,
and often depriving people of the use of their limbs, as is daily seen in
painters, and in those employed in making white-lead.

CHAP. V. Of the Diseases of Horned Cattle.
THE treatment, as generally practiced, in the several diseases of horses is,
in similar cases, so applicable to the whole species of animals commonly
distinguished by the appellation of Horned Cattle, that little remains to be
added here, unless it perhaps be, to point ^ut some few particulars more
peculiarly relative to the management of these last. The Romans paid very great
attention to them, as sharing with man the labors of the field; and as the
climate of Italy is more kindly than that of England, surely whatever care was
necessary there, cannot be less requisite here. The writers of that country may
therefore properly become our guides again on this occasion.

Nature has clothed with thick furs, or warm covering, such creatures as she
intended to be exposed to the severity of the cold: but as cattle are not
sheltered with such defense, I really think it cruel to expose them too much to
the inclemencies of the winter, as many among us are apt to do For,
notwithstanding the very strong arguments used by M. de Buffon, in support of
his opinion, that these creatures are original natives of these climates; such
as, in particular, that they are not found beyond Armenia and Persia in Asia,
and Egypt and Barbary in Africa, (for he looks upon the buffalo, the aurock,
and the bisonet, as creatures of a different species); I cannot but incline
here to think somewhat differently from that great man, and that principally
for this obvious reason: nature, as is evident, throughout the whole creation,
gives to every animal a covering suited to the climate she intends it for; and
that of the ox is plainly calculated for a warm region. It therefore seems to
me not improbable, that our black cattle came originally from some more
southern part.
. Such was not the practice of the Romans, who very expressly enjoin, that the
ox, in particular, be defended from the cold by a warm stable, and if it can be
done, that there be a fire in it, which both Vegetius and Columella Lib. III.
c. i.
declare to be of great advantage to this animal, as he thereby breathes a dry
air, which carries off not only the exhalations from his own body, but also
other noxious vapors. According to them, the manger should be so contrived
that their food be not lost among their feet; and their stalls should be placed
on dry ground, with a gentle slope to carry off their urine, and kept
constantly clean with dry litter, especially for the laboring ox. How
different from these directions is the condition of too many of our farmers'
yards where the cattle often stand knee-deep in dirt!

When the ox returns from labor, his neck should be washed, and rubbed for a
long time; his whole body too should be freed from clay or dirt, especially his
feet, which should be well washed.

In summer, it is proper that cattle should stand in cool shades during the
heat of the day, and in the night in the open air; for they contract as many
diseases by suffering too great heat, as by being exposed to too much cold.

It is of great benefit to them to give to each, about once a week, a raw egg,
and some salt in a pint of wine or ale; and to this may likewise be added
bruised garlic, vervain, and rue.

Cattle do not require the clearest water, nor are they very much hurt by it if
it is dirty; nevertheless, it is the duty of the person who attends them, to
see that they drink the best water, and such as is clean, and that they be well
fed. There is no danger of their over-feeding themselves; for when nature is
satisfied, they lie down and chew the cud. Labor breaks, heat vexes, and cold
penetrates an animal that is empty and exhausted, sooner than one that has been
well fed: and surely no man will grudge them a sufficient, plentiful allowance
of food, who considers how far the price of oxen which perish through want,
exceeds the expense of that food.

If oxen are put upon running at their full speed, or if they are otherwise
over-fatigued, at any time of the year, but especially in the summer, either
they contract thereby a looseness, which proves pernicious to them, or slight
fevers: for this animal, being naturally slow, and rather adapted to easy
labor than that of swift motion, is grievously hurt, if forced to go beyond
his strength.

Neither swine nor hens should come near their cribs; for when an ox has
swallowed hen's dung with his food, he is presently tormented with violent
pains in his belly; and when he swells with it he dies. In case of his having
swallowed any, the best way is to give him three ounces of parsley-seed, half a
pound of cummin-seed, and two pounds of honey, mixed together, and poured warm
down his throat, to force him to walk, and to rub him heartily till the draught
moves his belly. The ashes of any wood well sifted, boiled in a sufficient
quantity of oil to render them liquid, and then poured down the ox's throat,
will also be of great benefit against the bad effects of this sort of dung.

But if an ox swallows hog's dung, or more especially the filth which a sick
sow has vomited, he is presently seized with so contagious a disease, that it
speedily affects a whole herd. When therefore there is the least suspicion of
this distemper, the cattle must be removed and separated to pastures where none
such have been fed, that so they may not hurt one another: for by feeding they
infect the grass, and the water by drinking of it. An ox, though otherwise in
perfect health, may perish by the smell and breath of the diseased blowing upon
him. When this happens, the dead carcass must be carried to a distance, and
buried deep, lest the sound be infected by it, and the negligence of the owner
be imputed (as is usually done by fools, says Vegetius) to the divine
displeasure. In the case here spoken of, he recommends half an ounce of squills
sliced thin, infused in a pint of wine, with about two ounces of salt, to be
given every morning to each creature thus infected. But as infectious diseases
will be the professed subject of the last part of this work, I shall not
enlarge upon them here, any farther than just to mention the similitude which
Mr. Osmer thinks there is between the distemper in horses and that amongst oxen.

To the best of my observation, says he, what is called the distemper amongst
the horned cattle, is exactly correspondent to the distemper amongst horses;
the symptoms in each animal being similar in all respects. The discharge from
the nostrils, etc. of the cow in these fevers, about the nature of which, and
of this distemper, there has been abundance of fine writing, is nothing else
but an extravasation of the serous particles of the blood, the effect of
inflammation; and therefore in obedience to the attempts of nature, our
business is to invent all the methods we can to carry off this extravasated
serum; and incisions made in the skin of the cow, as is done for horses with
the same sort of fever, produce in twenty-four hours a nasty, foetid, purulent
matter. By a number of these drains the parts will be unloaded, and the animal
relieved, as they do in all inflammatory fevers amongst horses; and I dare say
will too amongst the cows, answer nearly the same end and purpose as a critical
abscess. But when no critical abscess happens, or no artificial drains are made
use of, the natural ones not being sufficient to carry off the extravasated
serum, the viscera and more noble parts are, in time, affected, the blood and
juices deviate by degrees into a state of putrefaction and corruption, and the
animal dies a most wretched death.

If any man object and say, this distemper of the cows is infectious, and
therefore it is of the putrid, and not of the inflammatory kind; I answer, that
it does not appear to be infectious, because some cows, amongst a number of
infected ones, have escaped it. But allowing it to be of the putrid or
pestilential kind, and to arise from the air, infection, or both, these
artificial drains made in the skin will be very proper, because they will
answer in some measure the same end as the bubo or critical imposthume
befalling the human species in pestilential disorders, if they are properly
managed. And here it may be observed, that when distempered cows have escaped
death, it has been generally owing to some critical abscess; various instances
of which I have seen.

To these artificial drains should be added the use of cooling salts, and
laxative glysters, if needful.

It is necessary ever to remember, that bleeding the horse or cow will be
wrong, and must do harm, when a discharge from the nostrils, etc. is begun,
because it is contrary to the effort of nature; and so it is when there is any
swelling that is tending to matter, which kinds of swellings can be
distinguished by the skilful only.

Indigestion is very hurtful to oxen, and is know^ by the following signs:
frequently belching, loathing of their food, noise in the belly, heavy eyes*
the creature neither chews his cud, nor licks himself as usual. In this case,
pour down his throat two gallons of water as warm as he can bear it, and soon
after give him about thirty leaves of colewort boiled in water, and afterward
soaked in vinegar; and he must abstain from food for one day. Neglected
indigestion brings on colics, which is to be treated, as the same complaint is
in horses.

I shall here mention hoving, a disorder which is almost peculiar to the horned
cattle.

This disorder proceeds from a too sudden ferment in their green succulent
food, whereby the elastic air let loose by the fermentation, but confined by
the hard faeces which do not speedily enough give way to it, becomes highly
acrid, like the gass arising from fermented liquors, which often proves mortal
to those who breathe it. The method of cure should therefore be, clearing the
great gut of hard excrement, injecting a stimulating glyster, and giving
cooling things internally. This agrees with what M. Bourgelat proposes, when he
says Ecole veterinaire; Matiere Medicale, p. 112.
, Thus it is, for example, that with nitre given in half a glass of brandy, and
often even with emollient glysters only, we have saved considerable numbers of
oxen ready to expire in their pastures, after vain endeavors had been used to
ease them, according to the common practice, by many incisions made in the
skin, doubtless with an intention to disengage the cellular membrane from the
air that filled it, and of which carminatives would inevitably have increased
the disorder, and hastened the death of the beast.

Farmers are apt to fall into a great error when their cattle have got the
better of this disorder; and that is, by letting them become costive again, and
consequently liable to a return of the same danger when they next feed on
succulent plants; whereas were they to continue to give them green food after a
purging has been once brought on, no farther inconvenience could ensue.
Immerging them in cold water when thus distended brings on an immediate
purging, and thereby saves their lives.

The mouths and tongues of horned cattle are subject to the same sorts of
swellings as those of horses, and alike productive of an inability to eat.

These should also be cut off with a knife or scissars, and then rubbed with
salt and let heal. If they have no appetite to their food, and yet no signs of
indisposition appear; it will be proper to rub their chops with salt and garlic
beaten together, or with some other stimulating substance.

The cure of internal diseases in cattle is so nearly the same as for horses,
and the doses of their medicines so much alike, that a repetition of them here
seems needless. The causes of their lamenesses, and the methods of curing them,
are also similar; and the feet of both require so nearly the same cutting and
care of the hoof, that the least degree of intelligence will suffice to vary
them properly.

The castration of calves is likewise performed i^ the same manner as that of
horses.

BOOK IV. Of SHEEP.
CHAP. I. Of the Qualities and different Kinds of Sheep.
"SHEEP have golden feet, and wherever they set them, the earth becomes gold,"
say the Swedes, by way of expressing their high estimation of this animal. In
effect, there is not any one domestic creature which yields greater profit to
man than sheep do. Their flesh, their milk, their skin, their intestines, their
dung, in short, every part of them, is necessary for some use or other, and
turns to good account.

Though their flesh and milk furnish us with variety of excellent food, yet
their wool is the chief object, especially to a commercial nation; for of it is
formed, in Britain, the staple-commodity to which we owe the wealth and
grandeur that render us the arbiters of power in Europe.

At the same time that this creature is the most useful, it is also, in itself,
one of the most defenseless against enemies: providence intending, as it would
seem, that it should owe its very existence to our care, and be entitled to our
protection, in return for the means of enjoyment and wealth which it affords
us: for it not only wants protection but care also, more than any other
domestic animal. Sheep are of a very weakly constitution; much fatigue exhausts
them; they can ill bear extremes of heat or cold; their diseases are many, and
most of them contagious; and their yeaning is attended with difficulty and
danger.

They are said to be sensible to the charms of music, so as to feed more
assiduously, to be in better health, and to fatten sooner by the sound of a
pipe: but perhaps it may be more rightly thought, that music serves to amuse
the shepherd's tedious hours, and even that the origin of that art was owing to
this solitary life.

Sheep love their keepers and those who take care of them; they follow them,
and obey their voice. It must however be observed, that if the shepherd has not
a watchful eye over them, one or other of his sheep may easily stray from the
rest of the flock, wander into places it is unacquainted with, and there fall
down a precipice, or tumble into a hole or ditch, especially if the creature
has been frightened, which sheep very easily are; for when they have once lost
their way, they run strait on, without stopping, and always directly against
the wind, particularly if it blows hard, and they chance to be in an open
place, a wide road, or on the borders of the sea. They are very fond of light,
and never thrive well in dark places; and such is their fondness for society,
that frequently a sheep left alone will pine away, become emaciated, and quite
lose his strength.

The re-establishment of the best kinds of sheep in England, and greater care
of their fleeces, are objects well deserving the attention of government: for,
notwithstanding all our boasted improvements, it is certain that the quality of
our wool in general has been on the decline for some time past Mr. Lisle, whose
judgment and veracity in matters of this kind stand unimpeached, tells us, in
his Observations on Husbandry, article Sheep, that, even so late as his time,
and he has not been dead many years, the clothiers complained that our
Herefordshire wool, and particularly that of our great staple, was no longer so
fine as formerly.
. These useful creatures, which were the chief wealth of former ages, become of
still greater value as art and industry increase among us. One cannot,
therefore, but be astonished at the indifference into which this nation has
fallen with regard to her sheep, and especially too at a time when every other
country is exerting its utmost endeavors to improve its breed, and the manner
of managing its flocks. At this very instant, we are strongly called upon to be
particularly attentive to this great object, by the measures which the French
are indefatigably pursuing to improve the breed of their sheep, by introducing
those of every country where they excel.

We have no particular accounts of what our sheep were in ancient times; though
we may presume that our wool was always sought for by foreign manufacturers,
because our history informs us, that the duty paid on the exportation of it was
a considerable article of the royal revenue In former times, the wealth of the
nobility, gentry, and monasteries consisted chiefly in wool, which also then
made the bulk of private property at home. It was at the same time the prime
article in commerce. Aids to the crown was granted therein. It supplied the
demands for the support of ^^mies, the payment of subsidies, and all other
expenses incurred on the account of the public in foreign parts, says the
learned Dr. Campbell, in vol. II. p. 152, of his excellent Political Survey of
Great Britain.
.

If we take a general view of the whole of England, we shall find, that the
temperature of our climate, and the quality and almost perpetual verdure of our
pastures, render it one of the best situated countries in the world for raising
flocks of sheep. We are free from every discouraging circumstance with regard
to them. We have no armies of insects or reptiles that are enemies to them; no
wolves, nor any other animal whose nature is to prey upon them, if we except
foxes, of which again the numbers are scarcely more than suffice to give proper
healthy exercise to men, who might otherwise indulge themselves in too much
ease. Our frost and snow are generally of short continuance. Our extensive
downs, our hills, the sides of our mountains, and even our steep rocks, abound
in fine grass, which feeds a smaller breed of sheep; whilst our richer pastures
of Lincolnshire and Ely maintain those of a larger size: and we are surrounded
with a seacoast, the air of which is thought to be particularly favorable to
the health and thriving of sheep, as well as to the fineness of their wool. The
air of the sea is found to be so wholesome and favorable to sheep, that the
husbandmen who live at a distance from that element, find their advantage in
recruiting their flocks with sheep from near the sea.

Columella De re ^ustica, lib. VII. c. ii.
mentions the several kinds of sheep most in repute in his days, and gives an
instance of the judgment of his uncle, M. Columella, an excellent husbandman,
in mending the breed of his own sheep, by coupling with them rams brought from
Africa: and indeed it is highly probable, that the excellence of the Spanish
wool, now so justly valued, took its rise from combinations of this kind during
the long residence of the Moors in that kingdom.

Don Pedro IV. King of Castile, was the first prince who introduced the good
kind of sheep which they now have in Spain, by bringing thither the Barbary
breed. In two ages, they began to decline, when Cardinal Ximenes restored the
breed, by procuring a fresh supply of rams from Barbary, that is to say, of
rams bred by the Arabians, thereby exciting amongst the people an emulation
which continues to this day; and by fixing their attention to this object,
which has hitherto preserved the goodness of the Spanish wool The fines^ of the
Spanish wools are those of Castile, which are divided, according to the places
of their growth, into Segovians, Leo^^^as, Segovias, Sorias, and Molinas. The
wools of Arragon are less (...): these are Albar^zins, fine and middle, the
Cam^^^, and the ^lack wool of Saragossa. Portugal and Navarre produce also fi^e
wools. Our imports of wool from Spain have generally been of the prime of the
Castilian, used in making our finest cloths.
.

The memoirs of the Royal Society of Agriculture at Rouen say T^^e II. p. 58.
, that in the fifteenth century, our Edward IV. obtained a number of this race
from the king of Castile, which thro^^ very well, and laid the foundation of
the excellency of our wool. Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth, contributed much
to its perfection, by directing the attention of government to this great
national concern. Men of distinguished judgment and integrity were commissioned
to superintend the proper distribution and future care of the Castilian sheep.
How this commission has since come to be neglected, I know not. These
commissioners sent two Castilian ewes and one ram to every parish in which the
pasture was thought proper for them; and the care of them there was entrusted
to the yeomen and most considerable farmers, to whom peculiar privileges were
at the same time granted on this account. Farther, in order the sooner to have
a quantity of good wool, the finest native ewes were also singled out, and
covered by the Spanish rams, from whence proceeded a bastard race, much
superior in quality to those of that country. Shepherds were taught the art of
managing sheep, and written instructions were given them, which, I am sorry to
say it, are now lost Dr. Campbell, in his very valuable Political Survey of
Great Britain, (...). II. p. 152, treats the whole of this account of Edward
the Fourth's, ^^ any other of our kings, procuring sheep from Spain, to renew
or improve our breed, as a mere fiction, invented by P. Chomel, in his
Dictionnarie (...), to show how easily such a scheme might be executed in
France; and I confess that the Doctor's arguments seem to me next to absolutely
conclusive against it: indeed, if it rested solely upon the credit of Father
Chomel, I should not he^itate a moment to pronounce him right. But as it comes
to me from an infinitely more respectable quarter, from a society justly
revered by the whole world, some of whose members are nobles of the first
distinction, and others highly eminent for their great knowledge* I cannot
suppose them to have taken this upon trust from the Dictionary-writer, or to
have advanced it as a fact, without better authority than his for so doing. The
Gascon and Norm^n Rolls, published by the late Mr. Carte, are a proof, not to
mention several more which might be instanced, that there may still be in
France, and particularly in those parts of it which once were subject to us,
records relative to our history which we are yet unacquainted with; and it is
not impossible that the anecdote here alluded to may be one of them, even
though the name of the prince, and the date, may be mistaken. However, I speak
here only from surmise. Let me now use an argument which may possibly be more
striking. The Doctor himself, adopting the opinion of those who think that the
Northern parts of this island were peopled from Germany, the Southern from
Gaul, and the Western and Ireland from Spain, says, p. 150, it cannot be
doubted, that as the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland, so the sheep also came
originally hither from some other country, and most probably, for many reasons
that might be assigned, from Spain. This seems to be confirmed by the breed
being the same in both islands, and having a great resemblance unto those of
Spain. Now, with submission to the Doctor, to whose opinion I shall ever pay a
sincere deference, is it any way unreasonable to suppose, that the breed of
sheep imported into this island at the time of its being first inhabited, might
have degenerated, in the course of many centuries, so as to stand in need of a
kind of renewal* and, in that case, could there be any more proper way than
applying to the country from which the good breed first came? No matter which
of our princes did it; or even whether it was not done at all. Some such
expedient would be of service now to improve our present (...).
. At this time began the custom of folding them in the warm, kindly weather;
and the same practice was afterward continued during the winter. The abode of
the Spanish sheep in England altered by degrees the nature of their wool: it
became much longer, but did not con^inue so fine as before; owing, probably, to
the difference of the pasture. Our wool is however whiter and cleaner than that
of Spain, through the great care which the English take to keep their flocks
free from filth; an attention hitherto neglected by the Spaniards.

To the above mixture of the Spanish sheep with the natives of this island, and
the greater or less degeneracy of their posterity, is owing that we now see in
England three sorts of sheep; the common, which are very small; the bastard,
which are of a middle size; and the strong, fine and plentiful breeders.

The Gloucestershire, particularly those of Coteswold, the Herefordshire,
Shropshire, and the isle of Wight sheep, yield the finest wool of any in
England: they are short-legged, and have commonly a black forehead or a black
head. The Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Buckingham, and Lincolnshire sheep, are
the largest and best shaped, and their wool is the deepest of any we have, but
not so fine as that of the former. The Yorkshire sheep are likewise pretty
large, but their wool is coarse: and in general, that of all the Northern
counties is long, but hairy. The Welsh sheep are the smallest of all, and their
wool is by no means the finest; but in return their flesh is excellently well
flavoured. The wool of the Castilian sheep is undoubtedly much finer than that
of even the best English; but it is less in quantity, chiefly because the sheep
themselves are smaller: though there are in some parts of Spain sheep larger
and covered with more wool than any of the English. For their wool, the English
are certainly the next best to the Spanish.

The Irish wool in general, but especially in Limerick, Kilkenny, Kerry,
Waterford, Cork, and some other counties, is of the fine long combing kind,
scarcely surpassed by any of the sort in England. This is the wool that is most
acceptable in foreign parts, where they have short wool enough of their own, or
may easily procure it from Spain and Portugal.

In the last century, the Dutch brought from the East Indies a race of tall
sheep, long and thick in the body, with wool proportioned to the stature of the
animal. This valuable breed has succeeded beyond expectation in the island of
the Texel and in East-Friesland. One of these sheep yields a fleece of from ten
to sixteen pounds of a fine silky wool; which the Dutch sell for English wool.

The Flemings also procured some of the same ^ort of sheep, which they breed
about Lisle and Varneton, where they thrive well, and are known by the name of
Flemish sheep.

The largest of these sheep are six feet long from head to tail. In Holland,
they give four lambs in the year; whereas in Flanders they bring but two, of
which the strongest is reared in order to keep up the flock. Each of these
likewise yields as far as sixteen pounds of ^ool. They would be preferable to
those of the Texel, if the same care was taken of them, and if they were more
numerous than they are. Most of the sheep about Lisle are a bastard race,
proceeding from the Indian rams and the ewes of the country, and yield from six
to ten pounds of wool, little inferior to that of the true breed. Their flesh
is well-tasted and wholesome: a carcass of it weighs from ninety to a hundred
and twenty-five pounds, and yields about thirty pounds of suet. They are in
themselves the finest, largest, and strongest of any sheep. They require,
indeed, a larger quantity of food; but on the other hand they are indifferent
in regard to its quality: they are easily taken care of, naturally healthy, and
if sick easily cured. Their wool differs little from that of England, only it
does not so easily take fine colors. It is not so fine as it might be, for
several reasons, the principal of which are, that they are seldom folded; that
they are kept too warm (...) their houses during the winter: that the litter
(...) not changed often enough, whereby it not only dirts, but also gives a bad
smell to their wool; and that sufficient care is not taken to keep them from
hedges, bushes, and brambles, which not only tear off their wool, but scratch
their skin, which, if not healed in time, degenerates into the scab.

The Sw^des, after having tried in vain to mend the breed of their sheep in the
reign of Queen Christiana, set the same design again on foot in the year 1725*
They imported into their country a number of the best kinds of sheep from
England and Spain, and put them under the management of skilful shepherds, to
be treated according to their several natures. After the example of England,
heretofore, they established schools for training up shepherds, who were sent
from thence to the different parts of the kingdom; and those schools are
continued to this day. They put the foreign rams to their native ewes, and from
thence proceeds a valuable bastard race. By this care, Sweden now has,
notwithstanding the rigor of its climate, wool which nearly resembles the
English and Spanish. The French have, in several parts of their kingdom,
numbers of sheep of the true Spanish breed, and they multiply there
exceedingly; so that, as the authors of the Maison Rustique observes Tom. I.
part I. live. iv. c. 3.
, it might be easy for them, by following the method formerly practiced in
England, to establish every where that race, which would yield twice or thrice
as much profit as their own common sheep, as well in point of size, of the
goodness of their lambs and rams, of fruitfulness, and of milk, as of the
quantity and quality of their wool and skins.

The provinces of Berry and Beauvais are those in which the most and best sheep
in France are reared. Those of Beauvais, and some other parts of Normandy, are
the largest, and the fullest of suet. In Burgundy, they are very good; but the
best are those that are fed on the sandy coasts of the maritime provinces of
France. In Poitou, Provence, the neighborhood of Bayonne, and some other parts
of France, there are sheep which seem to be of a foreign breed: they are
stronger, larger, and have a great deal more wool than those of the common
breed. These sheep are also more prolific than the others; it being nothing
extraordinary for them to have two lambs at a time, and to yean twice a year.
The rams of this breed, engendering with the common ewes of the country,
produce an intermediate breed, partaking of the two from which it proceeds.

Some think that the present Italian sheep are the offspring of a mixture of
the Asiatic and the European kinds. But be that as it may, there are in the
Bressan Ibid. tom. I. p. 348.
, toward Mantua, sheep whose wool is indeed coarse, but of so quick growth
that they are sheared three times a year, namely, in March, in July, and in
November. It is true, they would not yield so great a quantity of wool in cold
countries; but in warm ones they will, every where; and yet they are of so
robust a constitution, that they fear neither rain, cold, nor even hoa^ frosts,
but will feed at all times in the open field, provided the ground be not
covered with snow. They yield plenty of milk during four or five months of the
year, and excellent cheese is made with it. Another kind of Brescian sheep,
called bastard sheep, but for what reason I know not, ^ears shearing twice a
year, and is much esteemed* though smaller than the former. But the (...) wool
of all Italy proceeds from that kind of sheep which the Brescians call gentili,
and of which numbers are fed in the Trentin, especially about the villages of
Ghede and Montechiaro: but as these sheep are extremely difficult to rear and
take care of, and as the fineness of their wool is owing to the climate and
pasture of the country, they probably might not thrive elsewhere.

The wool of the Ruffian, Polish, and Tartarian sheep, is better than that of
the common German sheep; and accordingly the Swedes make use of it in their
manufactures of cloth, stockings, etc.

All the abovementioned sorts of sheep certainly form but one
greatly-diversified species, which in M. de Buffon's opinion Histoire Naturell^
de la Brebis.
hardly extends beyond Europe: for as to those long and broad-tailed creatures
so common in Africa and Asia, and to which travelers have given the name of
Barbary sheep, they seem to him to be of a different species from our sheep; as
do likewise the American vigonia and lama*

Daily experience proves that the European sheep in some degree alter their
very nature; for instance, in Lincolnshire they are large, heavy, and ^low in
their gait. On the downs of Sussex, Wiltshire, and Dorsetshire, they are
smaller, more hardy, and fleeter; and in the mountains of Wales they are still
less of size, and so active as scarcely to be confined by any enclosures. If we
extend our view farther, we shall find, that the kind which yields the softest
and finest wool in Britain, when sent to the West Indies, becomes hairy like a
goat. It is also observed in North America, that the quality of their wool
depends much on the temperature and climate of the country: in some of the
middle provinces, such as New York, the Jerseys, etc. their wool is of so good
a quality, that a sample of it sent hither some years ago sold for as high a
price as our best; although this was only from a common tobacco plantation,
where no care had been taken of it since America was first settled The fact
here alluded to is mentioned in The Present State of America, p. 142; allowed
by Sir J. Dalrymple, in his Political Essays, sect. I. Colonies, p. 263; and
confirmed by a letter to the writer of this work from an eminent merchant in
New York, who says positively, Our wool in general is better than the English:
but how small is the quantity we raise! It is true, some late oppressive acts,
as the sugar-act, stamp act, and new duty-act on glass, paper, etc. raised a
spirit in the country for manufactories, and double the number of sheep; but I
affirm, that our wool was not a quarter part sufficient for our consumption. I
have taken pains to get an account of the number of sheep of New Jersey; and as
they were formerly taxed, I believe it just, and that the whole number does not
exceed one hundred thousand. These, at an average, yield about 2 lb. each,
which is sold for about fifteen pence sterling a pound. This quantity will be
under 3 lb. per head, for apparel and bed-clothes, and not near sufficient for
their demand. The country people, indeed, mix linen-yarn in their cloth, which
helps out, and make^ it very strong; yet, though every pound is worked up, the
towns, villages, and iron-works, cannot be supplied, and depend on English
cloth and stuffs. I think Pennsylvania keeps still fewer sheep. It is true
Long Island, and the islands in the Sound greatly exceed: but then the northern
parts of the colony of New York keep much fewer; so that, on the whole, they
are not equal to Jersey.

I have found from experience that no farming is more profitable than sheep,
and now keep an hundred and fifty on the same farm where my predecessor kept
but twenty-five. I estimate the profit from eight to ten shillings ahead per
annum, and this on land that rents at two shillings sterling per acre. I would
willingly increase my stock, but find my farm will not bear it; though, on four
hundred acres of arable and meadow land, I only keep besides, eighteen head of
cattle, thirty hogs, eight horses, and plough about eighty acres for summer and
winter grain. I winter, indeed, thirty head more of young cattle, which I
summer in the woods. The smallness of this stock will surprise a British
farmer: but our fields do not yield like those of England; owing to our cold
springs and hot summers, long droughts and heavy rains, bad husbandry and want
of manure.

To what I before said of our not having a sufficient quantity of wool, I will
now add the prices which I actually paid for manufacturing a piece of cloth,
three quarters of a yard wide.

New York Currency. L. s. d. "Spinning 23 lb. of wool, at 3s. 6d. per lb. 4 2 3
"Weaving 34 yards of cloth, at 1s. 1 14 0 "Fulling, pressing and dyeing 25
yards, at 1s. 6d. 1 17 6 "Wool, 23 lb. picked and cleaned, at 2s. 6d. 2 18 9 L.
10 12 6

Which is 6s. 3d. currency, or near 3s. 4 d. sterling per yard.

The cloth, after a few days wear, looked very indifferent. I had it made up
for myself, as most of the gentlemen here pique themselves in setting an
example of wearing country-made cloth; but we were under a necessity of buying
English cloth for our negroes. The restrictions being taken off our trade, we
are returned to wearing English cloth, and hope like causes will not oblige us
to recur to the same resolutions. We are now convinced that we cannot hi^e to
make cloth under almost double what the English does cost; but at the same time
farmers who have the labor done within themselves, and by this means employ
the women, who would otherwise be idle, will always make cloth for themselves
with advantage; especially as it is said to wear better: but we have not the
least prospect of making a yard for exportation. -- This letter was written in
December, 1773; the facts related in it may be depended on; and the writer of
this work most sincerely wishes, that the long and literal extract of it here
given may tend in any sense to rectify the mistaken opinions now, unhappily,
too prevalent. Such is his reason for inserting it here.


.

CHAP. II. Of the Management of Sheep.
AS the size and welfare of the sheep, and the goodness of their wool, depend
much on the nature and quality of their pasture, this becomes an article of the
utmost importance to the husbandman, and therefore deserves a particular
inquiry.

In order to their being rightly managed, the owner should be very careful what
kind of shepherd he entrusts his sheep to: for the shepherd not only
accompanies them to the field, but should also take care that they do not feed
in improper places, improper, on account of the quality of the food and drink,
as well as other dangerous circumstances. He should likewise be particularly
attentive that no improper rams mix with the flock; to give immediate relief to
those that fall sick, especially in lambing-time, and for this reason he should
be well acquainted with their diseases. In short, his presence and care should
be so constant, that the sheep shall obey him out of a kind of love. He should
be vigilant and circumspect, govern them with great clemency, and says
Columella Lib. VII. c. iii.
, who strictly enjoins the same rule to the keepers of all sorts of cattle, be
more like a captain and leader than a lord and master. When he threatens them
it should be with a loud shout and shaking his staff at them: but he never
should throw any offensive weapon at them, nor remove to any great distance
from them; neither should he lie down, or sit down, but, unless he be going
forward, he should stand, to be the better able at all times to look around
him, to see that neither the slow and big with young, whilst they loiter, nor
the nimble, whilst they run before, be separated from the rest; lest either a
thief or a wild beast deceive the heedless inattentive guardian.

We find by Columella, that it was an early custom to lead sheep to far distant
pastures at different seasons of the year; and the Spaniards have still
retained this practice, as will appear from the following abridgment of a
judicious account of their manner of managing the royal flocks, transmitted by
a gentleman in Spain to the late Mr. Peter Collinson, F. R. S.

There are two kinds of sheep in Spain, namely, the coarse-woolled sheep, which
remain all their lives in their native country, and which are housed every
night in the winter; and the fine-woolled sheep, which are all their lives in
the open air, and which travel every summer from the cool mountains of the
northern parts of Spain, to feed all the winter on the southern warm plains of
Andalusia, Manca, and Estremadura. It has appeared from very accurate
calculations, that there are not fewer than five millions of fine-woolled sheep
in Spain; and it is reckoned that the wool and flesh of a flock of ten thousand
sheep produce yearly about twenty-four reals ahead, which we may suppose to be
nearly the value of twelve six-pences sterling Of these, but one clear ahead
goes to the owner yearly; three six-pences ahead go yearly to the king, and
the other eight go to the expenses of pasture* tithes shepherds, dogs, salt,
shearing, etc. Thus the annual produce of five millions of sheep, amounts to
thirty-seven millions and a half of six-pences* a little more or less, of which
about three millions and an half are for the owners, above fifteen millions
enter into the treasury, and seven millions and a half go to the benefit of the
public. Hence it is that the Kings of Spain call their flocks, in their
ordinances, The precious Jewel of the Crown.

Formerly, this jewel was really set in the crown; for a succession of many
kings were lords of all the flocks: thence that great number of ordinances,
penal laws, privileges* and immunities which issued forth in different reigns
for the preservation and special government of the sheep. Hence a royal
commission was formed under the title of* The Council of the Grand Royal Flock,
which exists to this day, though the king has not a single sheep. Various
exigencies of state, in different reigns, alienated by degrees the whole grand
flock from the crown, together with all its privilege^, which were collected
and published in the year 1731, under the title of "Laws of the Royal Flock;"
in a large folio, of about five hundred pages.

The wars and wants of Philip the First's reign, forced that king to sell forty
thousand sheep to the Marquis of Iturbieta, which was the l^^t flock of the
crown

Ten thousand sheep compose a flock, which is divided into ten tribes. One man
has the conduct of all. He must be the owner of four or five hundred sheep;
strong, active, vigilant, intelligen^ in pasture, in the weather, and in the
diseases of sheep. He has absolute dominion over fifty shepherds and fifty
dogs, five of each to a tribe. He chooses them, and chastis^s or discharges
them at will. He is the prepositus, or chief shepherd of the whole flock.


.

Special ordinances, privileges and immunities are issued for the better
preservation and government of the sheep, which are under the care of
twenty-five thousand men, who, as the Spaniards express it, clothe kings in
scarlet, and bishops in purple.

These sheep pass the summer in the cool mountains of Leo, Old Castile, Cuenca,
and Arragon. The first thing the shepherd does when the flock returns from the
south to its summer-downs, is to give the sheep as much salt as they will eat.
Every owner allows his flock of a thousand sheep twenty-five quintals of salt,
which the flock eat in about five months: they eat none in their journey, nor
in their winter-walk. It is believed, that if they stinted their sheep of this
quantity, it would weaken their constitutions, and degrade their wool. The
shepherd places fifty or sixty flat stones at about five steps distance from
each other; he strews salt upon each stone; he leads the flock slowly through
the stones, and every sheep eats to his liking. What is very remarkable the
sheep never eat nor desire a grain of salt when they are feeding on land which
lies on limestone: and as the shepherd must not suffer them to be too long
without salt, he leads them to a spot of clayey soil, and after a quarter of an
hour's feeding there, they march back to the stones and devour the salt. So
sensible are they of the difference, that if they meet with a spot of mixed
soil, which often happens, they eat salt in proportion This shows how
favorable for sheep those pastures are which li^ on limestone, or chalk, as
most in England do; for in the south of this island there is chalk almost every
where, and limestone abounds (...) the north-west.
.

Toward the latter end of July, the rams are turned in among the tribe of
ewes, regulated at six or seven rams for every hundred ewes; and when the
shepherd judges that these have been served, he collects the rams into a
separate tribe to feed apart. There is also another tribe of rams which feed
apart, and never serve the ewes, but are kept solely for their wool and for the
butchery: for though the wool and flesh of wethers are finer and more delicate
than those of rams, yet the fleece of a ram weighs more than the fleece of a
wether, who is likewise shorter-lived than the ram: for these reasons there are
but few wethers in the royal flock of Spain. The fleeces of three rams
generally weigh twenty-five pounds; and there must be the wool of four wethers,
and that of five ewes, to make an equal weight. There is the same disproportion
in their lives, which depend on their teeth: for when these fail, they cannot
bite the grass, and are of course condemned to the knife. The ewe's teeth begin
to fail after five years of age, the wether's after six, and those of the
robust ram not till toward eight.

At the latter end of September they put on the redding or ocre, which is a
ponderous irony earth, common in Spain: the shepherd dissolves it in water, and
dawbs the backs of the sheep with it from the neck to the rump. It is an old
custom. Some say it mixes with the grea^e of the wool, and so becomes a varnish
impenetrable to the rain and cold; others, that its weight keeps the wool down,
and thereby hinders it from growing long and coarse; and others again, that it
acts as an absorbent earth, and receives part of the transpiration, which would
foul the wool, and render it harsh.

Likewise in the latter end of September the sheep begin their march toward
the low plains. Their itenerary is marked out by immemorial custom, and by
ordinances. Their journies are often so long, that the poor creatures go six or
seven leagues a day to get into open wilds, where the shepherd walks slow, to
let them feed at their ease and rest: but they never stop; they have no day of
repose; they march at least two leagues a day, constantly following the
shepherd, till they get to their journey's end. From the territory called the
Montana, at the extremity of Old Castile, from whence they set out, to
Estremadura, is an hundred and fifty leagues, which they march in less than
forty days. The chief shepherd's first care is to see that each tribe is
conducted to the same district it fed in the year before, and where the sheep
were yeaned, which they think prevents a variation in the wool; though this
requires but little care; for it is a known truth, that the sheep would go to
that very spot of their own accord. His next care is to fix the toil The toils
are made of Sparto, in meshes a foot wide, and the thickness of a finger.
Sparto is a sort of rush which bears twisting into ropes for coasting vessels.
It is so light as to swim; whereas h^mp sinks. The English sailors call it boss.
(in England hurdles) where the sheep pass the night, lest they should stray,
and fall into the jaws of wolves.

Next comes the time when the ewes begin to drop their lambs, which is the most
toilsome and most solicitous part of the pastoral life. The shepherds first
cull out the barren from pregnant ewes, which last are conducted to the best
shelter, and the others to the bleakest part of the district. As the lambs
fall, they are led apart with their dams to another comfortable spot. A third
division is made of the last-yeaned lambs, for whom was allotted from the
beginning the most fertile part, the best soil, and the sweetest grass of the
down, in order that they may become as vigorous as the first-yeaned; for they
must all march on the same day toward their summer-quarters. The shepherds
perform four operations upon all the lambs about the same time in the month of
March; viz. they cut off their tails five inches below the rump, for
cleanliness; they mark them on the nose with a hot iron; they saw off part of
their horns, that the rams may neither hurt one another nor the ewes; and they
emasculate the lambs intended for bell-weathers, to walk at the head of the
tribe.

As soon as April comes, the sheep express, by various uneasy motions, a strong
desire to return to their summer habitations. The shepherds must then exert all
their vigilance to prevent their escaping; for it has often happened that a
tribe has stolen a forced march of three or four leagues upon a drowsy
shepherd; and there are many examples of three or four strayed sheep walking a
hundred leagues to the very place they fed on the year before.

In the summer sheep-walks I learnt that the three following opinions should be
ranked among vulgar errors:

1. That salt-springs are not found in the high mountains, but in the low hills
and plains only. The whole territory of Molina is full of salt-springs, and
there is a copious one rising out of land higher than the source of the Tagus,
and not far from it; which is one of the highest lands in all the inward parts
of Spain.

2. The metallic vapors destroy vegetation; and that no rocks nor mountains
pregnant with rich veins of ore are covered with rich vegetable soils. There
are many iron, copper, lead, and pure pyritous ores, in these sheep-walks,
where grow the same plants, and the same sweet grass, as in the other parts.

3. That sheep eat and love aromatic plants; and that the flesh of those that
feed on the hills where sweet herbs abound, has a fine taste. I have observed,
that when the shepherd made a pause, and let the sheep feed at their will, they
sought only for fine grass, and never touched any aromatic plant, that when the
creeping serpillum was interwoven with the grass, they industriously nosled it
aside to bite a blaid of grass; and that this trouble soon made them seek out a
pure gramineous spot. I observed too, when the shepherd perceived a threatening
cloud, and gave a signal to the dogs to collect the tribe and then go behind
it, walking apace himself to lead the sheep to shelter, that, as they had no
time to stoop, they would take a snap of staechas, rosemary, or any other shrub
in their way: for sheep will eat any thing when they are hungry, or when they
walk fast. I saw them greedily devour henbane, hemlock, glaucium, and other
nauseous weeds, upon their issue out of the sheering-house Mr. Collinson's
correspondent observes very justly on this occasion, that if sheep loved
aromatic plants, it would be one of the greatest misfortunes that could befall
the farmers of Spain: for that the number there is incredibly great, and the
bees suck all their honey, and gather all their wax, from the aromatic flowers
which enamel and perfume two-thirds of the sheep-walks. He assures us, that he
himself knew a parish priest who had five thousand hives, and whose method was
cautiously to seize the queens in a small crape fly-catch, and then clip off
their wings. This obliged their majesty's to stay at home; and he declared,
that he never had lost a swarm from the day of his discovery, to the time of
his relating this, which was five years.
.

The shepherd's chief care now is, not to suffer the sheep to go out of their
toils till the morning sun has exhaled the dew of a white frost, and never let
them approach a rivulet or pond after a shower of hail; for if they should eat
the dewy grass, or drink hail-water, the whole tribe would become melancholy,
lose all appetite, pine away and die; of which there have been frequent
instances Hail-water is likewise so pernicious to men in the climate here
spoken of, that the people of Molina will not drink their river-water after a
violent shower of hail; experience has taught them the danger: but let it be
never so muddy, and rise never so high after rain, they drink it without fear.
Perhaps this may be the unheeded cause of many epidemics in other cities.
.

The sheep of Andalusia, which never travel, have coarse, long, hairy wool. I
saw some in Estremadura whose wool trailed on the ground. The itenerant sheep
have short, silky, white wool; the fineness of which is owing to the animal's
passing its life in the open air, of equal temperature; for it is not colder in
Andalusia or Estremadura in the winter, than it is in the Montana or Molina in
summer. Constant heat, or constant cold, with housing, are the causes of
coarse, speckled, black wool: and I do believe, from a few experiments and long
observation, that if the fine-woolled sheep stayed at home in the winter, their
wool would become coarse in a few generations; and on the other hand, that if
the coarse-woolled sheep traveled from climate to climate, and lived in the
free air, their wool would become fine, short, and silky likewise in a few
generations.

All the animals that I know of, who live in the open air, constantly keep up
to the color of their sires. There are the most beautiful brindled sheep in
the world among the coarse-woolled sheep of Spain. I never saw one among the
fine-woolled flocks: the free, but less abundant perspiration in the open air,
is swept away as fast as it flows; whereas it is greatly increased by the
excessive heat of a number of sheep housed all night in a narrow place. It
fouls the wool, makes it hairy, and changes its color. The swine of Spain, who
pass their lives in the woods, are all of one color, as the wild boars. They
have fine, silky, curled bristles. Never did a Spanish hog's bristle pierce a
shoe. What a quantity of dander is daily scoured from the glands of a stabled
horse; the curry-comb and hair-cloth ever in hand! How clean is the skin of a
horse that lives in the open air!

The shepherds begin to sheer their sheep on the first of May, provided the
weather be fair: for if the wool were not quite dry, the fleeces, which are
close piled one upon another, would rot. It is for this reason that their
sheering-houses are surprizingly spacious. I saw some large enough to contain
twenty thousand sheep in bad weather, and which cost above five thousand pounds
sterling. Besides, the ewes are creatures of such tender constitutions, that if
they were exposed immediately after sheering, they would all perish.

An hundred and twenty-five sheermen are employed to sheer a flock of ten
thousand sheep. One man sheers twelve ewes a day, and but eight rams. The
reason of this difference is, not only because the rams have larger bodies,
stronger, and more wool; but also because the sheermen dare not tie their feet
as they do those of the unresisting ewes. Experience having taught, that the
bold, rebellious ram will struggle, even to suffocation; but when held captive
under the sheers, they gently lay him down, stroke his belly, and beguile him
out of his fleece. A certain number of sheep are led into the great
shelter-house, which is a parallelogram, of four or five hundred feet long and
an hundred wide, where they remain all night, crowded as close together as the
shepherd can keep them, that they may sweat plentifully, which, say they,
softens the wool for the sheers, and oils their edges. They are led by degrees,
in the morning, into the spacious sheering-hall, which joins the sweating-room.
The shepherd carries them off as fast as they are shorn, to be marked with
tar: and as this operation is necessarily performed upon only one at a time, it
gives a fai^ opportunity to the shepherds to cull out for the butchery all the
sheep of the flock who have outlived their teeth. The sheered sheep go to the
fields to feed a little if it be fine weather, and they return in the evening
to pass the night in the yard before the house, within the shelter of the
walls; but if it be cold and cloudy, they go into the house, and are thus
brought by degrees to bear the open air.

The above, or a similar practice, might be followed to advantage by the
counties which border on Wales, or on the Grampian hills in Scotland: for in
both those countries there is summer-pasture for a much greater number of
cattle than they can maintain in the winter. In both, the pasture is not only
dry and healthy for sheep, but they would likewise thereby avoid the great
summer-heats to which they are at times exposed, even in this moderate climate.

In dry and high grounds, where the herbage is thick and fine, the sheep are
much more healthy, and their flesh is (...) much finer flavor than that of
those which are fed in moist valleys and low plains; unless those vales be
sandy, or very dry, or near the sea. These last are, indeed, the best of all,
because the herbage there is naturally sprinkled with salt. Also the ewes fed
on them yield more milk, and of a better taste.

Sheep should not, if possible, be suffered to feed on low, moist grounds, or
such as have been lately drained, unless these are become very dry; and even
then it should be only in the middle of the day. Grounds over which mineral or
hard waters run are also prejudicial to them; as is likewise grass in which the
webs or eggs of grass-hoppers, or other insects, are found; or in which the
dung of rats or field-mice lies. When sheep are forced to feed on such
pastures, it is advisable to rub their mouths frequently with salt, and to
have salt laid for them in vessels, where they will greedily lick it one after
another; for they are remarkably fond of salt, and nothing is more healthful
when given in moderation.

The world is greatly indebted to the celebrated Linnaeus for the inquiry which
he has excited in regard to such plants as are agreeable or hurtful to each
domestic animal. He has observed, in a dissertation entitled Pan Succus Page
^87.
, that sheep eat 3^7 sorts of Swedish herbs and plants; and that they leave 141
of them untouched, as being hurtful, or less nourishing, and therefore less
suitable to their nature. A similar account of our English plants might be of
great service to our husbandmen and owners of land, especially to such as are
concerned in grazing.

Among other interesting observations, Linnaeus remarks Pan Succus, page 95.
, that the milfoil, or yarrow, is a food which sheep are particularly fond of;
and I have been told by a gentleman who had been at much pains to clear his
ground of this plant, that having turned some sheep into a field where there
yet remained a good deal of it, he was greatly surprised at finding the next
day that the sheep had scarcely left a plant of it, but had eaten it quite down
to the ground. He then lamented his former industry, and laid down as an easy
rule, by which every one may judge what plants are most agreeable to the
different animals, to observe which are those that they prefer on being turned
into a fresh pasture, or what are the plants in common pastures which the
creatures feeding there never suffer to raise to seed. Thus the milfoil never
runs to seed but in places where sheep cannot get at it. It is the same with
the chamomile, though so bitter a plant, and with the narrow-leaved plantain or
ribwort. These plants have another advantage attending them with regard to
sheep, which is, that as they strike deep roots they retain their verdure the
longer, and therefore deserve to be carefully cultivated by those who have
flocks of sheep.

Burnet has, on all occasions, been found to be peculiarly pleasing and
healthful to sheep. An instance of its being both happened to a gentleman of my
acquaintance in the year 1766; the summer of which being extremely wet, sheep
in general were much afflicted with the rot. This gentleman, very attentive to
rural economy, bought some sheep in the autumn of that year, which he put into
a field of burnet, and killed them during the winter, as his family-consumption
required. Every one of them was found to be in a perfectly found state; whilst
every sheep belonging to a neighboring gentleman, and which had been part of
the same flock, which was Welsh, was disented. It was very remarkable too in
these last sheep, that, though they had plenty of grass and turnips, they could
not be confined; but the moment they were put into the field of burnet
belonging to the former gentleman, they became perfectly quiet, and never
endeavored to stir from thence, though the gate was left open.

The common opinion that sheep hurt lucerne in the autumn by biting it too
close, is without foundation; for the spring-shoots have no communication with
those that remained in the autumn, but are quite fresh shoots issuing from the
crown of the root Lucerne is an excellent food for all sheep in the autumn, and
particularly so for ewes and lambs in the spring.

Clover is a very succulent food for sheep, and these creatures are extremely
fond of (...) if the shepherd is not attentive, it may pro^e d^ng^rous to them.
He should always turn them into the clover with their backs to the wind, and
not leave them too long in it. It is said by some, that the wind mixing with
the clover, which they swallow greedily, swells them, and makes them die in a
few hours: others believe that it is the venom of the reptiles which this plant
attracts, that occasions these pretty frequent accidents: but, in truth, the
cause of this swelling is undoubtedly the same as was before assigned for the
hoving of cattle; and accordingly the remedy directed for it by the Royal
Society of Agriculture at Rouen is, as soon as this misfortune is perceived to
have happened to some of the flock, to throw cold water over their bodies, if
it be at hand, or to pen them up so closely as to make them press strongly one
against another. This wiil restore them to their natural state.

Sheep likewise readily eat turnips, and thrive upon them, when they have been
accustomed to them early; but they do not relish this food when it has not been
offered to them till after they are grown old; however, if they are kept
fasting two or three days, most of them take to it; and when they have once
tasted it, they become fond of it, and feed very kindly upon it. In some places
people feed their lambs with turnips till the middle of April, though they then
begin to run up to seed. Some parboil them a little at first, till their
cattle, and particularly their sheep, are accustomed to them: but a lamb only
three weeks old will, after it has once eaten of this food, scoop out a raw
turnip with great delight. Parsley corrects the inconveniences which may arise
from the too-great moisture and coldness of the turnips, and therefore should
be given them in plenty when they are fed upon this root. The sheep also are
fond of it.

Carrots are another excellent food for sheep, and these creatures are
remarkably fond of them. One acre of these roots, well planted, will fatte^ a
greater number of sheep, or bullocks, than three acres of turnips, and their
flesh will be firmer and better tasted. Parsnips are also another excellent and
profitable food for them.

It is a custom in most countries, especially where the verdure of the grass is
not so constant as in Britain and Ireland, to collect the leaves of trees
during the summer, or before they turn yellow, for feeding all kinds of cattle,
and particularly sheep; and when these are mixed with their hay, they have a
good effect. Straw, especially of oats, cut and mixed with their hay, is also
recommended during the winter. The bark of the branches of the fig tree, and
its buds, are likewise mixed with their hay in countries where that tree
abounds.

It is undoubtedly most healthy for sheep to range at large; but as that is not
in the power of every one, they should at least be kept as airy as possible.

We are so happy in the mildness of our climate in England, and in our safety
from wolves, that our sheep lie out of doors all the year. Yet I cannot help
thinking that they would be greatly benefited if there were at least sheds
under which they might retreat in stormy weather: for though sheep are well
clothed by nature, yet when the rain is so constant and heavy as to soak
through their fleeces, they become quite chilled, and that damp cold in them is
frequently the cause of many disorders. It is said, that when they are enclosed
in the narrow compass of a fold, they cherish one another by their mutual
warmth: but this cannot give relief to the damp which each of them feels.

In climates less fortunately circumstanced than ours, the sheep are housed in
winter, and fed chiefly with dry fodder. They are led out every day, unless the
weather be very bad, though this is rather to air and walk than to seed them.
In winter it should be near ten in the morning before they are led out, and
they should be brought back again early in the evening, after having had an
opportunity of drinking. In spring and autumn they are led to pasture as soon
as the sun has dispersed the hoar-frost or dew on the grass, and continued
there till sunset. It is sufficient that they drink once a day in these
seasons; and when brought back they should find fodder, though in less quantity
than in winter. It is only during the summer months that they can live entirely
on the pastures, and they should then have water in their power twice a day.
They may in this season be let out early in the morning; and in very warm
weather they should be led to cool or shadowy places during the midday heat,
which is found to be remarkably prejudicial, disordering their heads, and
throwing them into vertigoes. In very hot countries, Columella advises, that
they be led in the morning so that their backs be turned to the sun, and in the
evening so that the head may be shaded by the body.

Many people doubt whether it be more profitable to fold sheep, than it is to
let them range a field at large both night and day; on the principle that their
dung and urine are in either case pretty equally spread over the surface of the
ground. Custom has, however, given it in favor or folding; and I believe it
will be found, that if equal numbers of sheep are confined during the same time
in two fields, that in which they are folded will be the most effectually and
most regularly dunged; and therefore I must incline to prefer folding.

In the heat of summer, the fold should be large enough to admit of the sheep
lying at a moderate distance from each other: for, even in the open air, a
great heat is generated by the sheep when forced to be close together; and more
than an ordinary degree of warmth should be avoided at all times. As the
weather becomes colder, the extent of the fold may be diminished; but special
care should be taken never to pitch it in a damp place, particularly in rainy
weather, or winter; for nothing is so prejudicial to sheep as their being laid
wet. On this account it is that in Sweden, since the late regulations there,
they have in some provinces a kind of covered fold going upon wheels, so that
it can be moved from one place to another: and I am persuaded, that if this
practice was introduced, especially in rich, low pastures, a considerable
advantage would attend it, particularly in preventing the rot and purging which
sheep are liable to in wet weather.

Where the great degree of cold, or any other cause, renders it necessary to
house sheep in the winter, their cotes should be built on a dry spot; the sheep
should have sufficient room in them, and openings should be made in (...) upper
parts to carry off the heated air: they should not, on any account, be made too
warm, nor should the dung and litter ever be suffered to rise too high in them.
The racks for the sheep should never be fixed to the wall, but hang from the
roof, so that they may be raised or lowered at pleasure. They should never hang
too high; because when the sheep are obliged to raise their heads too much,
little bits of their food are apt to fall among their wool, which they
entangle, and also in their eyes, where they being on inflammations, and
sometimes blindness. The rack should therefore not be higher than the flanks of
the sheep. The roof of the cote should be covered with laths rather than with
straw, or other such material, because the dust, chaff, or insects, falling
from these last would damage the wool. Spiders especially are very hurtful to
sheep. The Swedes are so particularly careful in this respect, that they even
white-wash the walls of their sheep-cotes.

When the winters are very severe, or the sheep are in great danger from
ravenous animals, it becomes necessary to lodge them in houses, or cotes,
during the winter Memoires de la Societe Royal d' Agriculture de R^uen, tom. ii.
. Such cotes should be built in dry and airy places, free from springs, and
from the coming in of water any other way. Whilst the sheep are housed, great
care should be taken that the cotes be not kept so close as to render the air
in them too warm, and that the sheep have very sufficient room to lie down. In
order to secure them from too much heat, the best way of admitting a supply of
fresh air will perhaps be by windows in each end, near the roof; for it is
known that the heated and putrid air ascends, and therefore it will be
discharged by these windows; for there will be a constant current of air from
the one to the other, as the wind shall happen to set. The sheep will, by this
means, be kept cool, without having openings through which the wind would blow
upon their bodies partially, and thereby occasion coughs and colds, as every
one can testify from his own experience.

The proportion of space which Mr. Hastfer, an ingenious Swede, advises Maniere
d' elever les Betesa Lain^, part. ii. c. 2.. 2.
as a rule in building these sheep-cotes, is to allow six feet square for each
sheep Three Swedish else, says he, which make very near six of our feet; the
Swedish ell being exactly 23 380/1000 inches English measure.
; the height should be proportioned to the extent of the building, and to the
number of sheep; but there must be at least ten feet between the floor and the
roof, so that when the depth of dung and straw shall amount to four feet, there
may still remain an height of six feet for the heat to ascend in: for when the
hot exhalations of the sheep have not sufficient room to ascend, they return
back, and fall upon the lungs of the sheep, open their pores, and make them
sweat more than ever. Consequently great care should always be taken to make
these buildings high enough, and large enough to prevent such immoderate heat A
cote twenty feet square is large enough for thirty sheep; and a cote sixty feet
long and thirty feet wide is sufficient for an hundred and fifty sheep,
including rams and lambs. Any one may of course form his calculation from
hence. HATSFER. Maniere d' eleverles Betes a Lain. Part ii.
.

A cote twenty feet long should be ten feet high; that is the proportion for
small cotes: but to twenty feet more in length there must always be added two
feet more in height; that is to say, that for forty feet of length there must
be twelve feet of height, and so in proportion for larger sizes. The breadth is
generally half of the length: that is the best symmetrical proportion, and
gives the greatest strength to the roof: though Mr. Hatsfer would have them
rather exceed the above dimensions in point of height, because that contributes
greatly to keep the air purer than it would otherwise be, and nearer to the
temperature of a cool summer's day, or a fine clear day in autumn, which is the
degree of warmth most to be desired, and that for the following reasons in
particular:

"1. In the spring, when the cold is greater abroad than in the cote, it is
wrong to keep the cote too warm, because the sudden change from heat to cold is
too sensibly felt by the sheep, has an influence on their blood, and
necessarily affects their strength and health.

"2 In winter, the sheep, by passing suddenly from hot to cold, and from cold
to hot, cannot but get coughs.

"3. It is plain, that if too great perspiration is hurtful to sheep in summer,
when fresh grass gives them the most strength, it must be much more so in
winter, when they eat only dry hay, or even straw, which affords them less
strength, and less nourishment; especially as the heat, which ought to prevent,
or at least moderate, the bad effects of the superfluous humors, is at the
same time evaporated and wasted.

"4. The heat which penetrates through the pores into the gross winter's wool,
makes it grow too much: now this wool is not only of less value than the other
good wool which the sheep are to keep till shearing-time; but it falls off of
its own accord as soon as the sheep pass from the cote into the cold spring
air; and then this loss of their wool causes illnesses in them, and even death.

"The floor of the sheep-cote should be paved either with stones, or with
bricks or clinkers, and raised a little archwise in the middle, in order that
the urine of the sheep may run off easily on all sides through small holes made
for that purpose at the bottom of the building. Some cover this floor with
earth, and others with sand, to the depth of five or six inches, in order that
the urine of the sheep may soak into it, and thereby render it fit for manuring
of land. The floor itself may indeed be made of sand, as is the practice of
some; and in that case, instead of raising it in the middle, it should be
somewhat lower there, in order that the urine may penetrate thoroughly into the
sand; and when it is sufficiently impregnated, it is covered with new sand, or
thrown out of the cote with the dung of the sheep, and laid up in a heap (...)
manure.

"It is likewise to be observed, that of whatever height the cote may be, the
dung in it should never be suffered to increase to more than four feet deep:
for which reason the sides of the cote should be lined with wood to that height
in the inside. The cote should be more or less high in proportion to the number
of sheep kept in it; for by this means the heat will be more or less great, as
it will rise to a greater or less height.

"In whatever manner the floor of the cote is made, it should always be covered
with fresh straw before the sheep are put into it; as well for their pleasure
as for their health. By this means too their wool is preserved from filth; and
when the floor is made of wood, as is also the way of some, the straw preserves
the sheep from having their skin or their flesh hurt by splinters, or their
wool by turpentine in the boards. This straw must be removed from time to time,
and in some cases pretty often. Care must likewise be taken that there be
neither splinters nor turpentine in the side-linings toward the bottom; for
which reason the wood used there, and indeed as high as the sheep could reach
from the top of the greatest quantity of dung that ought to be in the cote,
should not be touched with either axe or plane, but left in its natural round
form, with only the rough bark thoroughly peeled off it, and the wood then left
for some time to dry in the sun, in order that all its resinous parts may be
exhaled. Such is the method of the Swedes when they build cotes of this kind.

"Besides the abovementioned windows at each end of the cote, intended chiefly
to purify the air in it, there should likewise be other common windows at
convenient distances in the sides of this building; because, as was before
observed, sheep are fond of much light, and never thrive well in dark places.

"Their fodder should stand in ricks near the cotes, and be kept as free as
possible from dust and all other impurities.

"The sheep in the cote should be foddered in cribs made for that purpose, as
well for the sake of saving, as to prevent the falling of any thing upon their
wool; and for this reason these cribs should be placed in the middle of the
cote; for if any hay chances to fall upon the sheep, they pull off each others
wool in trying to eat it.

"The cote thus built, however small it be, must be divided into two parts at
least, in order to separate the sick sheep, or such as are ready to lamb, from
those which are not in either of these cases: but they who would have a
perfectly complete building to house their sheep in, should divide it into
several compartments, in proportion to the number and kinds of their sheep, and
according to the other circumstances attending them. These compartments may be
made of whatever size is thought most proper, provided the sheep have but room
enough in them. Or, which would seem to be an improvement on Mr. Hastfer's
plan, the cote should rather be built separate, because then, besides the more
effectual parting of them in case of need, each kind of sheep will naturally go
to the home where they are fed.

"Besides the abovementioned compartments, it is necessary to have a moveable
crib, about four feet high, going upon four wheels of seven or eight inches
diameter each, to be drawn from one place to another. The use of it is to bring
the sheep close up together in a small compass, when one would either make them
sweat, or count them over. By this means their rubbing one against another, by
which they lose a great deal of wool, is avoided.

"It is likewise necessary to have a small building separate from the common
cote or cotes, to keep apart such sheep as are attacked with contagious
diseases, in order that their breath may not infect the others.

"As to the color of the sheep-cote, some would have it to be white, or of the
color of the wood it is built of, in order that the sheep big with young may
not see in it any thing to surprise them.

"The best covering, or roof, is that which is made of straw or holly. The
roofs made of boards are apt to warp, and let in the air through their crevices.

"Great care must be taken to preserve the cote free from spiders and their
webs.

"The outside should be smooth, and ^^ee from every kind of glutinous
substance, at least as high as the sheep can reach, lest they should rub
themselves against it, and thereby tear off their wool.

"There should be gutters all along the lower part of the roof to receive and
carry off rain.

"As soon as the cote is finished, it should be fumigated in the inside, by
burning in it hoofs or horns of cattle rasped, the hair of cattle, woollen
rags, brimstone, and boughs of juniper with their fruit on."

Mr. Hastfer's above directions appear to be chiefly calculated for a woody
country: but where stones are plentiful, the walls will be best built with
them, and tiles and s^ates will make proper covering for the cotes.

A certain fixed time of the year cannot be observed in all countries for
shearing of sheep, because the summer does not advance equally in each of them.
The best way therefore is to be directed by the weather, so that the sheep may
neither suffer by the cold when stripped of their wool, nor be injured through
too great heat by being made to wear it too long. After they are shorn, they
should be anointed with something that will destroy any remaining vermin.
Columella Lib. VII. c. iv.
recommends for this purpose a strong decoction of lupins, lees of wine, and
the dregs of oil, of each equal quantities, mixed together. Some use a
decoction of tobacco in salt water. After the skin has been soaked with one or
other of these liquors for three days, the sheep should be washed in the sea,
if near; otherwise in water in which salt has been boiled.

The we^hers have generally more wool than the ewes, and it is also better.
That of the neck and the top of the back is prime; that of the thighs, tail,
belly, throat, and head, is not so good; and the worst is that which is taken
from dead beasts, or such as are sick. White wool is also preferred to the
gray, brown, and black, because it will take any dye. Strait wool is better
than curled; and it is even said that the sheep whose wool is too much curled
are not in so good a state of health as those whose wool is straiter.

The general color of sheep is a dirty white, or pale yellow: there are also
many of a blackish brown, and not a few spotted with a yellowish white and
black.

The flock should be examined every year, in order to pick out such as begin to
grow old, and are intended for fattening; for as these require a different
management from the others, they should then be formed into a separate flock.
They should be led abroad in summer before the rising of the sun, that they may
feed on the grass whilst it is yet moistened with dew; for nothing forwards the
fattening of wethers more than a great quantity of moisture: and as, on the
other hand, nothing obstructs it more than too much heat, they should be
brought home, or at least driven to a shady place, at about eight or nine in
the morning, before the sun begins to be too powerful, and salt should then be
given them to excite thirst. About four in the afternoon, they should be led a
second time into cool and moist places, and be again made to drink as much
water as they can before they are either housed or folded at night. Two or
three months of this management will give them all the appearance of being full
of flesh: indeed they will be fattened as much as they can be: but as this fat
proceeds only from the great quanity of water which they drink, it may properly
be looked upon as no better than an oedema, or bloated humor, which would in a
short time turn to the rot; the only means of preventing which is to kill them
whilst in this state of fatness: though even then their flesh, far from being
firm and juicy, is extremely insipid and flabby. To render their flesh
perfectly fine and good, they should, besides feeding on the dew and drinking a
great quantity of water, have at the same time more solid food than grass. To
this end the shepherd should also, in the season, turn them, into the fields,
to glean, as soon as the corn has been taken off. They may be fattened in any
season, even the winter not excepted, by only keeping them apart in a
sheep-cote, and feeding them with good hay, meal, or barley, oats, wheat,
beans, etc. mixed with salt, to make them drink the more copiously. But in
whatever manner, and in whatever season they are fattened, they must be
disposed of immediately; for they cannot be fattened twice, and if they are not
killed by the butcher, they will die by diseases of the liver. Three months are
at all times sufficient to fatten them; but less will do near the sea.

Ewes fatten very fast near their pregnancy, because they then eat more than at
other times: but their flesh, and especially that of an old ewe, is flabby and
insipid. That of the ram, though he has been knit before fattening, is always
rank and ill-flavoured. The flesh of the wether is by far the most succulent,
and the best of all common meats.

The proper time for castration is when the lambs are five or six months old,
and the weather mild. The best way of performing this operation is by incision.
The testicles, which are easily separated from the bag, are then drawn out at
the wound, and cut off. The lamb will probably be sick and dull for a little
while after the castration, and therefore it will not be improper to give him
for two or three days a small quantity of salt, to prevent a loss of appetite,
which this operation often occasions.

The ancients tell us that all ruminating animals have suet; but this is
strictly true only of the goat and sheep, and that of the sheep is in greater
quantity, whiter, drier, firmer, and of a better quality than the other. Fat
differs from suet, in that it continues always soft; whereas suet hardens as it
grows cold. It is chiefly about the kidneys that the suet is found; and, as was
before observed of the horned cattle, the left has always more of it than the
right. There is also a great deal of it in the cawl, and about the intestines;
but this suet is far less firm and good than that of the kidneys, the tail, and
other parts of the body. Wethers have no other fat than suet; and so
predominant is this fat in their constitution, that all the extremities of
their flesh are covered with it. Their ver^ blood is not without it; and the
seminal lymph i^ so saturated with it, as to appear of a different con^istence
from that of other animals.

CHAP. III. Of the Propagation of Sheep.
THE ram is capable of generating at eighteen months, and a ewe may yean at the
end of a year: but it is better to stay till the ewe be two, and the ram three
years old; for the produce of these, if too early, or even the first at any
time, is always weak, and of a bad constitution. One good ram will suffice for
twenty-five or thirty ewes.

The qualities required in a good ram are, that he be strong and comel^: his
head must be large and thick; his forehead broad, round, and well rising; his
eyes large and black; his nose short; his neck thick, and arched like that of a
fine horse; his body long and raised; his shoulders, back, and rump broad; his
testicles large, and his tail long; his legs small, short, and nimble: he must
also have horns; for those which have not any, as is the case of some, are very
indifferent creatures for breeding, at least in climates like our's. The best
rams are white, with a large quantity of wool on the belly, tail, head, and
ears, quite down to the eyes; and particular care should be taken that neither
the mouth nor tongue be either black or speckled, because the wool of the lambs
would most probably partake of this defect.

The best ewes for propagation are those which have most wool, and that close,
long, silky, and white; especially if they have also a large body, a thick
neck, and an easy, light gai^.

The natural season of the ewe's heat is from the beginning of November to the
end of April; but they may be brought to conceive in any season, by giving them
provocative foods, such as bread made of hemp seed, or oatmeal, oil-cakes, etc.
and water in which salt has been diluted. Each ewe should be covered three or
four times, and then separated from the ram, which always prefers the older
sheep, and neglects the younger. In the season of copulation, they should not
be exposed to rain or bad weather; wet hindering their retention, and a clap of
thunder often producing abortion. In a day or two after they have been covered,
they should be returned to their common diet, and not have any more salt water;
because the continual use of this, as well as that of hemp seed bread, or other
hot aliments, would infallibly cause abortion: but they may always be given to
the ram for (...) time before he is put to the ewe. Ewes go five months, and
yean at the beginning of the sixth. They seldom bring more than one lamb at a
time. In hot climates they yean twice a year, but in colder countries only
once. Those which are rather lean than fat, bring forth most easily.

Some put the ram to their ewes about the end of July, or the beginning of
August, in order to have lambs at Christmas, or early in January: but then they
run a hazard of the lambs being destroyed by the cold, for they are extremely
tender creatures. However, the ram is given to the much greater number in the
months of September, October, and November; and lambs are accordingly to be had
in plenty in February, March and April. They are also to be had in May, June,
July, August, and September; there being no scarcity of them but in October,
November, and December.

When a ewe is near yeaning, she must be separated from the flock, and
carefully watched, in order to her being assisted, if needful; for the lamb
often presents itself cross-wise, or with its feet foremost, and in either of
these cases the ewe's life would be in danger if she were not helped. As soon
as the lamb is yeaned, it must be raised on its feet, and at the same time all
the milk in the ewe's udder should be drawn out, because it is vitiated, and
would be very noxious to the lamb, which must therefore be kept from sucking
the udder is replenished with fresh milk. The lamb must be kept warm, and
should be shut up with its dam for three or four days, that it may lea^^ ^o
know her. During this time, the ewe should be fed with good hay, barley-meal,
or bran mixed with a little salt: and her drink should be water, the chill of
which has been taken off* mixed with little flour, bean-meal, or ground millet.
At the end of four or five days she may be gradually brought back to the same
kind of food as the other sheep, and be returned to the flock; only taking care
that she be not driven too fast, nor too far, lest her milk should be heated:
and some time after, when the sucking lamb shall have gathered strength, and
begins to play, it may be left to follow its dam to the pastures; no farther
care being then necessary; for it will find its dam amidst a very numerous
flock, and seize her dug, without ever being mistaken.

Lambs yeaned between the beginning of October and end of February must be kept
in the house, on account of the cold, and be suffered to go out only in the
morning and evening to suck; but about the middle of April they may be turned
into the open fields. Some time before this is done, a little grass should be
given them daily, in order to accustom them by degrees to this new food. They
may be weaned at the end of one month; but it is better to let them continue to
suck for six weeks or two months.

The largest, most vigorous, and thickest-fleeced lambs, especially if their
wool be all white and without spots, are the best for keeping. Those of a
weakly appearance are generally disposed of to the butcher. Lambs of the first
yeaning, as before observed, are never so good as those of the following: and
it is a general rule with all good husbandmen, rather to bring up the young of
their cattle of every kind, than to sell them off when young; the profits in
the former case being by much the most considerable.

The ewe yields, during seven or eight months, plenty of milk, which is good
food for children and peasants. It also makes good cheese, especially if mixed
with that of cows. Ewes may be milked twice a day in summer, but only once in
winter, viz. immediately on their going to pasture, or at their return.

Ewes eat more during their pregnancy than at other times, and accordingly they
then fatten very fast: but they are also then very apt to hurt themselves, so
as, frequently, to miscarry, and sometimes to become barren from that time: nor
is it very extraordinary for them to bring forth monstrous productions. If no
accident befalls them, and they are properly tended, they are capable of
yeaning during their whole life; that is, to the age of ten or twelve years:
but generally they break and become sickly when they are turned of seven or
eight. A ram lives to twelve or fourteen years; but is no longer fit for
propagation after eight: he should therefore then be knit, and fattened with
the old sheep; though even then his flesh will be rank and ill-tasted: that of
an old ewe is at best flabby and insipid: the flesh of the wether is most
succulent, and the wholesomest of all common meats.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of Sheep.
A Shepherd well versed in feeding his flock properly during the different
seasons of the year, and skilled in the methods of curing the several disorders
to which sheep are subject, is a very valuable person, and therefore should be
sought for with the utmost diligence; for on his care and abilities the welfare
of the flock greatly depends. How injudiciously then do they act, who resign
the care of their sheep to boys, or to the least deserving of their servants!

Mr. F. W. Hastfer, the Swedish gentleman before quoted, and to whom the world
in general, and his own country in particular, is much indebted for a
well-methodized set of Instructions eoncerning the manner of rearing and
improving sheep, reduces the general causes of their diseases to the five
following heads, viz. 1. Too great heat; 2. Severe cold; 3. Water; 4. Fright;
and 5. Unhealthy pastures. If due care is taken to prevent the inconveniences
which arise from these causes, there will not be much room to fear a general
sickness or mortality amongst them.

It is generally thought that the brain of a sheep is more affected by heat
than that of any other creature: hence the inconveniences which arise to them
from the burning heat of the summer; and as their wool forms a warm covering
around them, the least additional heat greatly increases that which they have
naturally. Even in the winter, sheep, particularly in foreign countries, often
suffer from too-great heat of their cotes, which their shepherds shut up very
close, and can scarcely be persuaded that they are doing them an injury. In
this very wrong practice, which prevails in the northern parts of Europe, and
in France, the heat becomes prejudicial on a double account; first, from the
heat itself, which, in crowded cotes, sometimes rises to the dog-day heat; but
chiefly by the perspiration of the sheep, which not only makes the air less fit
for breathing, but by degrees renders it so putrid as to give rise to fevers of
the worst kind.

Though sheep can bear cold much better than heat, yet they should not on any
account be exposed to a too severe degree of it; and above all, particular care
should be taken that the pregnant ewes do not drop their lambs in the open air
when the weather is very frosty, because that might cripple the lamb for life.

Too rainy a season is very prejudicial to sheep, a^ was remarkably experienced
all over England in the summer of 1766, when whole flocks perished with the
rot. They who had luckily sown burnet before were then made thoroughly sensible
of its good effect, not only in preventing this fatal disease, but also in
curing sheep that were then in almost a dying condition. Parsley would have the
same effect, as it is probable that both of these plants carry off the too
great humidity by urine. Whe^^ neither of them can be had, the sheep should be
housed during heavy and constant falls of rain, (...) fed with dry hay, and, as
much as possible, sheltered from the wet.

Mr. Hastfer, Part II. p. 139, 141.
recommends the following po^ders, as efficacious preservatives in such season*
He calls the first of them ant-powders, and the (...) others drying-powders.
The ant-powder is (...) thus:

"In autumn, when the ants have done working, take the whole of an ant-hill,
ants and all, scooping it out quite to the bottom, in order to have the more of
the masti^ or resinous substance which they provide for winter. Dry it well in
an oven, till the ants and the earth can easily be crumbled into dust betwixt
one's fingers; then pound and sift it very fine, and keep it in a vessel that
has been used for salted meat or pickled herrings; first drying the vessel well
before the powder is put into it. Give to each sheep a quarter of a pint of
this powder mixed with twice as much oats, in their cribs, or otherwise, after
having sprinkled it with pounded salt, very salt water, or human urine. It will
make the sheep sweat, and experience will prove its good effect."

Mr. Hastfer adds, that this ant-powder is much used in Germany, as the
writings of Colerus, Bayer, and others testify, that he has seen it given in
some places in Sweden, though not many; and that he himself has used it on
several different occasions, and found that nature frequently affords in simple
remedies as much real utility as in the most costly. In the year 1746, which
was a very wet year in Sweden, he gave this powder, by way of trial, to four
sheep, once a week, and when they were killed the next autumn, their gall and
liver were perfectly found, whilst other sheep, which had not taken it, were
full of gall, and their livers covered with hydatides, or watery tumors, in
great numbers and of all sizes.

Of his drying-powders, as he terms them, one is composed of two ounces of
crude antimony, four ounces of bay berries, four ounces of sulphur, two ounces
of nitre, pounded together, and mixed with (...) pounds of salt. This is then
to be put into the cribs for the sheep to lick of it, and into their drink,
especially in autumn after they are housed, and after a rainy summer, when
there is room to fear they may have suffered by the wet.

The other of these powders is made thus: Take a pound of crude antimony, half
a pound of nitre, and a quarter of a pound of red tartar; pound them well
separately, and mix them together. A good spoonful is enough for six or eight
sheep. Mix it with a little meal and dry wormwood, make it into a paste, and
give the bigness of a walnut of it once or twice a week to each sheep, in
autumn and spring, when a general mortality prevails. This case excepted, it is
used only as a preservative once in three weeks or a month; and then not till
after the ewes have lambed, and the lambs are somewhat biggish. The sheep must
not be suffered to drink the same day that they have taken this remedy; but on
the contrary, they should be driven about a little, backwards and forwards.
This powder purges them by urine and sweat, drives out their too-abundant
humors, and is a very salutary medicine.

The same ingenious writer gives us also, from Van Aken's Pharmacopoei^ for
sheep, the following recipe for making the Pomeranian powder, famed for its
efficacy in curing many disorders in sheep.

"Take a pound of the gray powder of compound saltpeter; of gentian and
bay berries, each four ounces; juniper berries, common salt, roots of angelica,
elder, pimpernelle, aristotolochia, monkshood, cyclamen, black hellebore, root
of fern, betony, millepertuis, carduus benedictus, rhue, millefoil, fumetory,
and hysop, an ounce and a quarter of each, with two ounces of tops of wormword,
two drams and an half of assa-^oe^ida, six balls of castor prepared. Pound all
this into a gross coarse powder, and give to each sheep half an ounce of it two
or three times a week in the morning, mixing it with paste, or making it up
into pellets. They are very fond of it. When contagious distempers prevail
amongst sheep, and there runs from their mouths a thick and glutinous slaver,
it is a good sign; but people who have large flocks, as the shepherds of
Pomerania, who have sometimes five or six thousand sheep to take care of, may
give this powder to a dozen or more sheep at a time in their water, a little
thickened with flour; taking care that each sheep has, as nearly as possible,
its portion of half an ounce of it. When this powder is given them, they must
not have drank water for two days before.

After they have taken this remedy, they should be driven about a little, and
not suffered to drink till the next day, when juniper and wormwood should be
put into the water that is given them. If they are dropsical, they should not
be let drink oftener than every third day. There are extraordinary proofs of
the excellent effect of this powder in cases where other celebrated remedies
have not done any service; and experience will convince those who use it
properly; for it not only expels the noxious humors, and dries gently the scab
and smallpox, but likewise eases the breast, so that the sheep that it has
been given to twice a week have recovered their health, and in a fortnight
after, the dropsy being come on, and their heads swelled again as big as ever,
they have been perfectly restored by the use of this powder given two days
together. Care must therefore be taken to use this powder in time, in case of a
relapse.

A little salt should be sprinkled over almost all the medicines that are given
to sheep: it will make them relish what might otherwise be loathsome; and so
far as can conveniently be, they should be physicked when the weather is fine:
however, this must necessarily admit of many exceptions.

Pestilential diseases will be so fully treated of in the latter part of this
volume, that I shall only mention here Mr. Hastfer's having experienced the
efficacy of the above powder of antimony, in preserving sheep from pestilential
infections, even when those which had taken it chanced to be mixed with sheep
that were infected. He likewise recommends the use of rhue in their food, and
suspended round the neck, when there is a fear of such disorders: and also to
prevent their being bitten by snakes, these reptiles having an aversion to that
plant.

SECT. I. Of Cutaneous Diseases in Sheep.
THE Scab, or Itch, in sheep, is contageous, and therefore carefully to be
guarded against. It arises from various causes, such as unkindly seasons, the
skin's being wounded in shearing, or torn by thorns, brambles, etc. Lice also,
by breaking the skin in quest of food, or perhaps for nests to lay their young
ones in, bring on the itch, as does also this sheep's being reduced by hunger.

As soon therefore as the sheep are observed to scratch or rub themselves
against any thing, or to bite their skin, the shepherd should ex^mine their
skin with great attention, to see whether they have not the itch. If they have
it, the wool must be cut off wherever that disorder is perceived, in order that
the part may be the more conveniently rubbed with ointment, in which there is
brimstone; for that seems to be the certain antidote, though many forms are
boasted of, in almost all of which sulphur is an ingredient. Quicksilver is
so^^^imes added, on a supposition of its being more efficacious to destroy the
lice. The small lice, commonly called ticks, which are little hairy worms
shaped like buggs, and which pierce the skin, are easily destroyed by a strong
decoction of tobacco-stalks poured all along the back of the sheep, so as to
run down on both sides: some add brandy, to render it the more penetrating.
Others again put half a pound of tobacco and a handful of salt into five or six
quarts of water, boil it well, and after the sheep is shorn rub it in with a
brush, not over hard. At the same time they may likewise take the
antimony-powder as an alterative, or the aethiops-mineral, if the disorder is
come to a great height.

The writers of the Maison Rustique recommend strongly the following, as an
excellent general remedy for all sores of animals, sheep, goats, dogs, cows,
horses, etc. "Take an ounce of liver of antimony, wrap it up in linen, then put
it to steep in a quart of wine, (white wine is best) and mix therewith eight
drams of senna; you may, if you please, add sugar, nutmeg, and other warm
spices; for almost all the diseases of grazing animals proceed from cold and
damp. The remedy is not the less good for not having any spice. It has been
tried every way. Let the drugs steep twenty-four hours, or boil them with the
wine for six or eight minutes, and give a gill of it to each sheep, the same
dose to other small animals, and to large ones, such as cows and horses, a
quart. The creature must be kept in a warm place all the day, be well covered,
and not have any thing to eat till the evening. It will purge both upwards and
downwards. The scab and itch will, by this means, be driven out, and the cure
will be completed by bathing the sores with the wine in which the liver of
antimony has been steeped, after setting fire to it. No itch will resist this
remedy."

Whatever composition is made use of, it should be rubbed upon the parts
affected for at least three or four successive nights; and when the scabs begin
to heal and peel off, the sheep should be washed in a river, if in summer, or
in a tub of water made a little warm in winter, and be kept within doors till
the wool is quite dry. Special care must be taken that the sheep be perfectly
cured before they join the flock.

Another cutaneous disorder Hastfer, part II. p. 179, calls it an Erisipelas,
or St. Anthony's fire.
, to which sheep are liable, sometimes attacks the face in particular, in such
manner that the skin and flesh fall off, the ^yes drop out, the ears and horns
fall off, and the skull is left bare. Sometimes too it spreads itself over half
the body before the sheep dies. This is thought to be incurable, but not
contagious. The following application has been attended with the greatest
success. Take oil of tobacco and sulphur, with quenched mercury, mix, and rub
the sore with them, and wash it once a day with a very strong decoction of rhue
boiled in water. A peasant, who had a sheep so ill of this disorder, that its
head was eaten all round, freed it from the distemper in five weeks, by
treating it as above. Mr. Hastfer Part II. p. 180.
, who relates this case, adds, indeed, the creatures eyes fell out of its head,
and that its wool became so entangled and confused as to be all over full of
knots.

SECT. II. Of Diseases of the Head and Throat.
WHEN sheep are exposed to a great heat of the sun, they are frequently seen to
become giddy, and turn round. Too much heat of any kind, feeding too long on a
dry pasture without drink, or other such causes, may have the same effect. This
is remedied by bleeding, either in the jugular, or in the vein under the eye,
or by cuting off the tip of the ear, and by keeping them in a cool place, with
plenty of cooling drink, till the symptoms quite disappear. But if the
complaint arises from water contained in the head, as is sometimes the case, it
is incurable; and therefore, when it does not readily yield to easy remedies,
the best way is to kill the sheep before the disorder has reduced it.

Sheep are also frequently seized with an apoplexy, in which they fall dead at
once. If signs of life remain after they are fallen down, such things as will
hereafter be pointed out as antidotes against p^ison may be given, and blood be
drawn from every place that will afford any. Some are very fond of cutting off
the end of the tail, and leaving it to bleed as long as it will.

Sheep are liable to tumors in the throat, which should, if possible, be
brought to suppurate, lest the matter be translated to some other part. When
suppurated, the swelling should be opened, and a free discharge given to the
matter: but some caution should be used at first in the opening, to avoid a
worm that is sometimes found in such tumors, which being of a poisonous
nature, would, if cut, envenom the sore, and endanger the life of the animal.
After the worm has been extracted, the abscess is to be cured as directed for
horses.

SECT. III. Of Coughs and Shortness of Breath.
THE diseases of the breast, such as cough and difficulty of breathing, are to
be treated nearly in the same manner as in similar cases for horses. In case of
a fever, which is known by the frequency of breathing, heat, dry mouth and
tongue, disrelish of food, etc. blood should be taken from the neck, and
repeated occasionally. Frequent bleeding becomes therefore necessary in sheep,
because it is seldom that much blood can be got at a time. In other respects,
their treatment should be the same as is practiced for horses; and the
discharge from the nose should be encouraged, as is allowed for horses.

When a cough arises to such a degree as to occasion a discharge from the nose,
it is advisable to separate the sick from the sound, because there is reason
to fear that, in this state, the cough may be contagious. Mr. Hastfer says Part
I. p. 105.
, that knot-grass is so very prejudicial to sheep, as to occasion violent
coughs, in which they dart forth a thin, stinking matter.

SECT. IV. Of Diseases of the Body.
DISEASES of the belly may also be cured in the manner as is practiced for
horses, only altering the quantities of the doses in proportion to the strength
of the sheep. Their having the cholic, or any other disorder in their bowels,
may be discovered by their directing their head to the belly, and being
otherwise disordered.

SECT. V. Of Diseases of the Liver.
THE livers of sheep are subject to several disorders. In the rot, the liver is
constantly distempered: hydatides, or small watery tumors, are often found in
it, and frequently worms; concerning which last M. de Buffon Histoire Naturelle
de la Brebis.
gives us the following curious extract of a letter written by a doctor of
physic at Montiers, in the duchy of Tarantaise in Savoy, communicated to him by
M. Rouille, secretary of state in France for foreign affairs. It has for a long
time been observed, that the sheep of our Alps, which are the best in all
Europe, sometimes fall away surprisingly. Their eyes become white, sunk, and
bleared; their blood serous, with scarce any redness to be seen in it; their
tongue dry and shrivelled; their nose stuffed with a yellow viscid and putrid
mucus; an extreme debility, though they eat a great deal; and, in fine, the
whole animal system visibly decaying. After several close inquiries, these
animals were found to have in their liver white papillons (moths), with proper
wings, their heads of a semi-oval form, and of the brightness of those
belonging to the silkworm. I have been convinced of the reality of this fact,
by squeezing about seventy, out of the two lobes; and, at the same time, all
the unequal part of the liver became lacerated. They have been found in the
veins only, without a single instance of their being in the arteries. In the
cystic duct, small ones have been found, together with maggots. The vena porta,
and the capsul^ of Douglass, which are visible there as in man, yielded to the
softest touch. The lungs and other viscera were found. -- Here M. de Buffon
very justly remarks, that it were to be wished the doctor had given us a more
circumstantial desscription of these papillons, as he calls them, lest it
should be doubted that the animals which he saw were in truth no other than the
common worms found in the liver of a sheep, which are indeed very flat and
broad, and of so singular a figure, that they might rather be taken for leaves
than worms.

The chief reliance for a cure of this disease should, I think, be in antimony
and mercurials; perhaps of choice in the aethiops mineral. Mr. Hastfer
recommends here rhue mixed with antimony.

Christopher Baldwin, Esquire. of Clapham, in Surry, has found burnet to be
remarkably efficacious in the cure of the rot, as appears from a letter of his
published in a well-intended and very useful work, called The Repository for
select Papers on Agriculture, Arts, and Manufactures, begun in 176^ but
unfortunately dropped at the end of only a second volume; and a farmer in the
North, in the autumn of the year 1766, when all his sheep were so far gone in
the rot that he did expect one of them to live the winter over, sent them into
a field of burnet, which, in a month's time, restored them to perfect health.

The Memoirs of the Royal Society of Agriculture at Rouen informs us Page 28.
, that one of their members had recommended parsley as a good remedy for
several of the diseases to which sheep are subject, such as pimples, the
smallpox, running at the nose, the itch, etc. and that it had been found to
answer, when tried by a dealer in sheep, whom they name. The way of using it
is, to turn the diseased sheep fasting into a field of parsley, and leave them
there for a quarter of an hour a day during eight days. The parsley will grow
again, so as to yield seed, or may be cut and dried for sheep that are ill in
the winter.

When sheep have swallowed any live creature, such as spiders, caterpillars,
leeches, etc. the best way of treating them is the same as used for horses in a
similar case.

SECT. VI. Of the Dropsy.
SHEEP are subject to a watery swelling, which frequently affects the whole
body; and is at first discovered by the head's becoming larger, particularly
under the lower-jaw, where the water is collected into a kind of bag, and by
the body's being swelled.

The cure should begin with antimonial purges, keeping the sheep at the same
time on dry food. -- A full pint of strong decoction of the lesser species of
sedum (sedum minus) given to a sheep as soon as this disease is perceived, is
said to be an excellent remedy in cases of this kind. It purges strongly.

Likewise the following is recommended by Mr. Hastfer Part II. p. ^13.
, as very efficacious for sheep that have the dropsy. -- After purging them,
which should always be the first thing done in this disease, take of dried
wormwood, either powdered or cropped small, of parsley picked clean and shred
small, of bark of elder pounded or ground, a quart each; also a gallon of
strong sea salt well pounded, and a full quart of oat-meal, or as much as may
be wanted to make the whole into a paste. Put all these ingredients into a
kneeding-trough, mix them well together, and knead them into a paste with good
river-water. Make this paste into pellets about the bigness of a walnut, and
give to each sheep fasting two or three of them, according to its size and age.
The sheep must remain housed for three or four hours after they have taken this
remedy, and then they may be walked out, if the weather is fair and dry, but
with great care to keep them from water all that day. If the weather be bad,
the best way is to feed them that day and the following night in their cote,
with straw, or other dry food.

The way to make them take this remedy, at least till they become accustomed to
it, is, (...) th^ust the pellets down their throat with (...) fingers: but they
will soon eat them of their own accord, if they are only laid in the crib.

These balls are used every year in the sheep-cotes of Hojentorp and Berga, in
Sweden, and have been found to be a certain cure for the dropsy in sheep. The
abovementioned quantity of ingredients will make from 170 to 180 balls, which
are sufficient for sixty old sheep, or eighty or ninety young ones, or lambs.

In case the necessary ingredients cannot be had in the country, take for ten
or twelve sheep the value of five or six quarts of oatmeal, and dry it well in
an oven, or over the fire, in a pot or pan, then mix with it salt and
bay berries dried and pounded, of each a good pint, half a pint of powdered
wormwood, an ounce of laurel-berries pounded, and a pint of nettles with their
seed dried and pounded. All this being well mixed together, it may be given to
the sheep in a trough or crib made on purpose for that end, or it may be
divided into portions of a pint for each sheep, and given in the morning
fasting, with care not to let them eat any thing else till two or three hours
after, at the end of which they may have hay or dry straw; but they should not
be suffered to drink that day. This should be continued twice a week so long as
is nenecessary, and in proportion as the distemper is more or less obstinate.
One may likewise from time to time, offer them wormwood-water to drink.

If the sheep refuse to take the medicine thus prepared, let some oats be
ground, and a paste made of their meal, with the other ingredients, to which
may be added for each sheep three or four drops of oil of foot, and of bark of
the birch-tree. Let the same number of balls be made of it as was before said,
and given to the sheep in the same manner.

Another remedy is made thus: Take four pounds of rhue, shred it fine, put it
into a tub, pour upon it six or eight gallons of boiling water, cover the tub,
and let it remain to infuse six hours: then strain the water off through linen,
and put in as much sugar as will make an egg swim upon it.

When sheep are dropsical, two spoonfuls of this are given them evening and
morning, till they are cured: but as a preservative, only one spoonful is given
them, evening and morning, twice a week. Five spoonfuls of it are given,
evening and morning, to large cattle, in the same manner as it is given to the
small. Also, a mole may be taken, cleaned, and dried, then pounded, and when a
sheep or other animal is seized with the hydrophobia, let the bigness of a pea,
or of a small bean, be given to it in a spoonful of beer. This remedy has been
repeatedly tried, and found successful Hastfer, part II. p. 218.
.

BOOK V. Of GOATS.
THE Goat is naturally more sagacious and better able to shift for itself than
the sheep: it comes readily to man, soon grows familiar, is sensible to
caresses, and capable of attachment; it is also stronger, and less timorous
than the sheep. It is quick in its motions, capricious, more lively, nimble,
obstinate, and so fond of roving, that the strongest and most active man cannot
drive above fifty goats at a time; consequently it is difficult to keep them in
herds. They are fond of straying in solitary places, of climbing up craggy
mountains, of standing and even sleeping on the summits of rocks and the brinks
of precipices. The most scorching rays of the sun never incommode them; they
are not frightened by storms, and they bear rain quietly, but they seem to be
affected by great cold. There is scarely a spot so barren as not to afford them
sufficient sustenance, for they will browse even upon thorny shrubs; and very
few sorts of herbs disagree with them, even hemlock not excepted, which is
poison to other animals.

Goats are naturally so fond of man, that they never become wild near inhabited
places. As a proof of this; in the year School, an English ship having put in at
the island of Bona Vista, two negroes came on board, and after some intercourse
told the English that they should be welcome to as many he-goats as they
pleased. The captain expressing some surprise at this offer, the negroes
answered, that there were only twelve persons on the whole island, and that the
goats had increased so prodigiously as to be even troublesome; and that they
were so far from being difficult to catch, that they would follow a man like
tame animals.

The most usual colors of goats are white and black; some are entirely white,
and others wholly black; but generally white and black, and often with a
mixture of brown and sallow. The hair is of an unequal length on different
parts of the body; every where stronger than that of horses, but less harsh
than that of the horse's mane; and there have been instances of its being
intermixed with tufts of a whitish wool, as long as the hair, on the back and
upper parts of the sides. The beard of a he-goat, which M. de Buffon measured,
was nine inches long, and its mane, toward the withers, was six inches in
length. On the rest of the body, the hair was in general about three inches
long, but somewhat more on the pasterns and coronet.

The male-goat is capable of engendering at a year old, and the female at seven
months; but the kids of this forward commerce are weak and defective; for which
reason they are generally both restrained from copulation till eighteen months,
or two years. The he-goat, besides being no despicable animal, is so very
vigorous and fallacious, that one will be sufficient for above an hundred and
fifty she-goats, during two or three months; but this ardour consumes him, and
never lasts above three or four years; so that he becomes enervated, and even
old, before he has reached his sixth or seventh year.

Such is the disposition of the she-goat, that the fickleness of her temper is
plainly seen from the irregularity of her actions. She walks, stops, runs,
skips, leaps, draws near, flies off, appears in sight, hides herself, or flies
away, as by caprice, and without any other determining cause than the
unaccountable vivacity of her internal sentiments; and all the suppleness of
her limbs, and vigor of her body, can hardly answer the wantonness and
rapidity of these motions, which are purely natural.

For propagation, the he-goat should be young, and of a good figure; that is,
about two years old, and of a large size; his neck short and fleshy, his head
slender, his ears long and lapping, his thighs large, his legs firm, his hair
black, thick, and soft, and his beard long and bushy. The she-goat should have
a large body, full rump, large thighs, light head, capacious udder, long teats,
and soft and thick hair. Their usual season of heat is during the months of
September, October and November; but at any other time, if they happen to be
near the male, they are soon disposed to admit him; for they can copulate and
yean at any time of the year. They however, retain best in autumn; and the
months of October and November are preferred, in order that the young kids may
find a soft, succulent herbage, when they first begin to feed* for the she-goat
goes five months, yeans at the beginning of the sixth, and suckles her kids
about a month or five weeks. Generally, indeed, she brings only one kid; though
sometimes she has two, very seldom three, but never above four. These creatures
sometimes suffer greatly in yeaning, and therefore they should be watched, in
order to be assisted in case of need.

Goats are turned out to feed very early in the morning, before the dew is off
the g^ass; because this, though pernicious to sheep that are not fattening, is
extremely palatable, and even wholesome, to these animals. In snowy and wet
weather, they are kept under cover, and fed with herbage, small boughs of trees
gathered in autumn, cabbages, turnips, and the like. Plentiful feeding
increases their milk; and to keep up, or still augment its quantity, they
should be made frequently to drink water mixed with nitre and salt. They may be
milked in a fortnight after yeaning, and during four or five months they yield
plenty of milk morning and evening.

When goats are driven with sheep, as sometimes happens, they always take the
lead of the flock: but it is better to feed them separately on high grounds,
hills, mountains, and such like places, in which they take most delight.
Heaths, fallows, commons, and barren grounds will afford them as much food as
they want: but they must never be suffered to feed in cultivated lands,
cornfieldsd, vine-yards, or woods, because they would browse greedily on the
young shoots, or the bark of the trees, and thereby do great damage.

The he-goat readily copulates with the ewe, as the ass does with the mare; and
the ram joins himself with the she-goat, as the stallion does with the she-ass.
But, though these copulations are sufficiently frequent, and sometimes
prolific, no intermediate species has been formed between the goat and the
sheep: they are absolutely distinct, continue always separated, and always at
the same distance, without having been the least altered by such mixtures.

Goats cannot endure damp places, marshes, or rich pastures: few of them are
bred in flat and open countries, because they generally are sickly there, and
their flesh is of a bad quality: but in most hot climates they are bred in
great abundance, without any shelter over them; whereas in colder regions, the
winters would kill them if they were not housed. In summer they do well without
litter, but in winter they require it; and as all wet is very hurtful to them,
they should not be suffered to lie in their dung, but have fresh litter as
often as needful.

The she-goat is prolific to the age of seven years, and the he-goat might
certainly retain his generative faculty to that, or even a greater age, if he
was suffered to be with the females only at proper times: but he seldom serves
longer than five years, which bring him to about the same age: he is then
castrated, and sent to fatten with old she-goats, and young he-goats castrated
at six months, for that is the usual time, in order to render their flesh more
tender and juicy. They are fattened in the same manner as sheep: but neither
care nor aliment, of any kind whatever, can possibly render their flesh equal
to that of the sheep, unless, perhaps, it be in hot climates, where mutton is
always flabby and ill-tasted. However, the strong smell of the he-goat does not
proceed from his flesh, but from his skin; and the older he is, the ranker that
will be.

M. de Buffon says Histoire Naturelle de la Chevre.
that these animals might live to the age of ten or twelve years, if they were
not killed, when fattened, after being past engendering; and I cannot but be of
the opinion of that very judicious and experienced naturalist: consequently,
the Chaplain to the Centurian's telling us in his account of Lord Anson's
voyage, that they found upon the island of Juan Fernandez a he-goat, which,
from the slits in his ears, appeared to have been formerly under the power of
one Selkirk, who lived several years on that island, and had quitted it above
two and thirty years before their arrival, appears to me, supposing it to be
literally true, nothing more than one of those exceptions to a general rule,
which M. de Buffon himself apprizes us will sometimes happen.

The age of a goat may be known by its teeth, and by the knots in its horns,
when it has any; for though both he and she-goats generally have horns, there
are many exceptions to the contrary; and as to their teeth, they have not any
of the incisory ones in their upper jaw, but those of the under jaw are shed
and recruited at the same times, and in the same order, as those of sheep. In
the she-goats, indeed the number of teeth is not always the same, but usually
less than in he-goats, whose hair is also harsher, and their beards and horns
longer. Like the ox and sheep, they have four stomachs, and chew the cud. They
also differ greatly in the color of their coats. Those that are white and
without horns are said to yield the most milk, but the black are the strongest
and most robust.

These creatures cost little or nothing to bring up, as we have seen, and their
value is by no means inconsiderable, if properly attended to; for their flesh
will always fetch something, and their suet, hair, and skin, sell at a good
price, especially the skins of kids, of which the finest gloves are made. The
skin of the goat is preferred to that of the sheep, and the flesh of the kid is
nearly equal to that of the lamb. They are less affected with the diseases of
any climate than sheep are, and stand less in need of the assistance of man
Goat's milk is a part of the materia medica, frequently prescribed in cases of
decay, and wholesomer than that of the ewe: it curdles easily and makes
excellent cheese; but as it contains only a small p^oportion of buty^ous
particles, the cream should not be separated from it.

She-goats seem pleased with being sucked, as they often are by children, to
whom their milk is an excellent aliment. Like cows and ewes, they are apt to be
sucked by snakes, hedge-hogs, and a bird called the goat-sucker. They yield a
greater quantity of milk than the ewe.

The species of goats extends much farther than that of the sheep; several
parts of the world affording goats like the British, with this exception only,
that in very hot countries they are smaller, and in cold ones larger.

The Angola, or Syria goats, with their long, pendulous ears, and spiral horns,
are of the same species with British, engendering and producing even in
European climates. The she-goats in particular, of this breed, like most other
animals of Syria, have a very long, thick, wiry hair, so fine, that the stuffs
made of it are not inferior to silks, and full as glossy; witness in particular
the beautiful Brussels' camblets.

BOOK VI. Of SWINE.
CHAP. I. Of the Character, Properties, and Uses of Swine.
OF all the quadrupeds that we know, or at least, certainly of all those that
come under the husbandman's care, the Hog appears to be the foulest, the most
brutish, and the most apt to commit waste wherever it goes. The defects of its
figure seem to influence its dispositions: all its ways are gross, all its
inclinations are filthy, and all its sensations concentrate in a furious lust,
and so eager a gluttony, that ^t devours indiscriminately whatever comes in its
way, not excepting, frequently, its own young immediately after they are born,
and too often infants in the cradle; for, whenever these creatures meet with
any thing fat, moist, or unctuous, they begin with licking, and soon after
devour it. They are consequently fond of blood, and bloody flesh, which they
will sometimes even when putrid, to the great detriment of their health, though
they do not, like the wolf, attack other animals on purpose to kill and devour
them. So unbounded is their ravenous desire to fill the vast capacity of their
stomachs, and so undistinguishing is their taste, that M. de Buffon Histoire
Naturelle du Cochon.
declares he has several times seen a whole herd of these creatures, at their
return from the fields, stop and gather round a heap of clay newly dug up, all
of them licking this earth, though none of the most unctuous, and some of them
swallowing a pretty large quantity of it. This demonstrates their gluttony to
be of a piece with their brutal nature: nor is their sense of feeling less
sluggish than their taste; for, not only the harshness of their hair, the
hardness of their skin, and the thickness of their fat, render them little
sensible of blows, but even mice have been known to form lodgments in their
backs, and to eat their very skin and fat, without their showing any signs of
feeling them. Their other senses are indeed quick and acute enough: though
still they seem not to have any one clear sentiment; for the young hardly know
their own dam, or at least are very apt to mistake, and readily suck the first
sow that will let them. Fear and necessity probably impart a little more
instinct and sentiment to the wild race of hogs; for the young of these are
strongly attached to their mother, and she, on her side, shows herself more
careful to provide for their wants, than the tame sow does: and as to the very
great quickness of sight, hearing and smell in hogs, especially of the wild
breed, it is so well known to the huntsmen who go in quest of these creatures,
and particularly of wild boars, that they find it necessary to watch for them
in the night, to observe a profound silence, and to keep themselves to the
leeward, that the hogs may not scent the effluvia of their bodies, which affect
the organs of smelling in these animals so strongly at a considerable distance,
that they immediately betake themselves to flight, as if aware of some
impending danger The reader who is not acquainted with the method of hunting
the wild boar, may not be displeased at the following addition, from M. de
Buffon's Natural History of the Hog. The wild boar is, most commonly, either
hunted openly with dogs, or surprised and killed by moon light. As he is not
remarkably swift of foot, he leaves a very strong scent, and often wounds the
dogs dangerously in defending himself. For this reason, and because it spoils
their scent, and breaks them to a slow pace, the good hounds used for the stag
and roe-buck, (or for the fox) should not be employed in this hunting. Mastif^,
after a little training, will be fit for this purpose: but only the oldest of
these ^^imals are to be thus attacked, and they are easily known by their
tracks A wild boar of three years is not easily run down; (...) paces over a
great deal of ground before he stops: whereas an old boar does not run far, but
suffers the dogs to come near him, and often stops to keep them at a bay. In
the daytime he generally keeps in his so^^, which is almost always situated in
the thickest part of the wood, and when night approaches he goes out in quest
of food. In summer, when the grain is ripe, it is easy to surprise him among
the corn and oats, which he is sure to visit every night As soon as he is
killed, the huntsmen cut out his testicles; the smell of which is so strong
that if they were left only five or six hours in the dead body, all the flesh
would be infected by it.
.

The natural defect in the senses of taste and feeling in swine, is also
farther increased by a disease which renders them even absolutely insensib^e,
and which is not perhaps so much owing to the texture of their skin, as to
their filthiness, particularly in feeding, and especially to their often eating
putrid aliments: for neither the wild hog, which does not eat such ordure, nor
delight in mire as the tame one does, but generally subsists on acorns, mast,
and roots, and lives in dry places, nor a sucking pig, is subject to this
disease; whence it follows, that the way to preserve the common hog from it is,
to keep him in a clean stye, and to give him plenty of wholesome food.

With all its defects, however, this animal is one of the most profitable that
an inhabitant of the country can rear; for, besides its young, which generally
are very numerous, and always fetch a good price, its flesh sells for rather
more than that of the (...) or sheep, and its lard for near twice as much (...)
their suet The lard of the hog is the same as the suet of other animals.
. Likewise the flesh of this animal takes salt better than that of any other,
and keeps longer in this state. Its blood, all parts of its bowels, its feet,
and its tongue, are dressed and eaten. The fat of the intestines and cawl,
which is very different from the lard, makes what is called the hog's grease*
nor is the skin without its uses, both saddles and sieves being made of it; and
of the bristles are made various kinds of brushes, shoemakers' ends, etc. and
lapidaries use them in polishing of diamonds. The dung of this animal is
accounted a fine manure for fruit trees.

CHAP. II. Of Feeding and Fattening of Hogs.
THESE creatures are so very stubborn and untractable, that even an active man
cannot well take care of more than fifty of them at a time. In autumn and
winter, where it can be done, they are driven to such woods as afford plenty of
wild fruits: in summer, they feed best in moist and marshy places, where they
find worms and roots; and in spring they range the fallow fields. From the
month of March to October, they are turned out twice a day to feed; in the
morning from the time that the dew is exhaled till ten o'clock, and from two in
the afternoon till the dew begins to return in the evening. In winter they are
driven abroad but once a day, and then only when the weather is fine; because
the dew, snow, and rain rain are hurtful to them. Indeed, such is their
aversion to bad weather, that if a sudden storm comes on, or only a heavy
shower of rain, away they run, full speed, each endeavoring to be foremost,
and all continually crying out, till they reach their stye, or some other place
of shelter. The youngest cry most and loundest. This cry is very different from
their usual grunting: it is a cry of grief, resembling that which they send
forth when they are bound in order to be killed. The boar cries less than the
sow; and the wild boar is seldom heard to cry at all, unless when wounded in
fighting with another. The wild sow cries more frequently; and both, when
surprised and terrified, snort with such vehemence as to be heard at a
considerable distance.

These animals are very fond of worms, and particularly so of some roots,
especially those of the wild carrot; and to come at these they turn up the
earth with their snouts. The wild boar, whose head is longer and stronger than
that of the common hog, delves deeper, and generally continues the furrow in a
strait line; whereas the tame hog digs only here and there, and at the same
time more slightly: but as a great deal of damage is frequently done by this
means, all hogs should be carefully kept from cultivated lands, and suffered
only to run in woods and fallows.

The common way of fattening hogs is, to give them plenty of barley, mast,
cabbage, and other greens boiled, and a great deal of water mixed with bran. By
this means they acquire a thick stratum of seam, and are rendered sufficiently
fat, in two months: but this fat is neither very firm nor very white; and the
flesh, though good, is flabby. They may also be fattened at still less expense
in countries which abound in mast, by driving them into the forests in autumn,
when the acorns, wild chestnuts, and beech-masts are ripe. They there eat all
kinds of wild fruits, and grow fat in a short time; especially if, at their
return in the evening, plenty of lukewarm water be given them mixed with a
little bran and the meal of tares; for this makes them sleep, and increases
their flesh to such a degree that they are sometimes scarce able to move; but
the fat thus acquired is disagreeably oily. They likewise fatten soonest in
autumn, when the weather begins to grow cold, because they then perspire much
less than in summer, and have greater plenty of food. But the best way of all
to fatten them for their flesh to acquire a fine flavor, and their fat to be
firm and palatable, is, to shut them up for a fortnight or three weeks before
they are to be killed, in a clean paved stye, without litter, and to feed them
only with pure dry wheat, allowing them at the same time but very little drink.
The hog thus treated should be about a year old, full of flesh, and previously
half fattened; for the older the hog is, the longer time it requires to fatten,
and its flesh is also proportionably worse.

Castration, which must always precede the fattening of any animal, is usually
performed on hogs at the age of six months, and either in spring or autumn; but
never in very hot or very cold weather, because each of these is equally
dangerous to the wound, and renders its healing difficult; this operation,
which every tinker knows how to do, is most commonly performed by incision,
though sometimes by a ligature only, as in the ram. Those which have been
castrated in the spring are generally fattened the next autumn, and commonly
killed before they are two years old; though they grow very considerably in the
second year, and would continue so to do for several years longer; those which
are particularly remarkable for their height and corpulence, being only
creatures of a greater age, which have been turned out several years to feed on
mast. Their time of growth does not seem confined to four or even five years;
for the boars which are kept for propagation continue to grow in their sixth
year; and the older a wild boar is, the larger and heavier he becomes. It is
true, that the head of an old wild boar is the only part worth eating; whereas
all the flesh of the wild boar and sow not a year old, is delicate, and of a
fine grain; but the flesh of the tame boar is still worse than that of the old
wild boar, and can be rendered eatable only by castration and fattening, unless
it be when made into brawn.

The ancients used to castrate such wild pigs as they could at any time find
means to steal away from their mother, and afterward carried them back into
the woods: the castrated wild hogs not only exceeding the tame in bigness, but
their flesh being also better.

CHAP. III. Of the Propagation of Swine.
BOTH the male and female of this species of animals are able to copulate when
only nine months or a year old: but it is better to let them double that age
before they are put together; for the first litter of a sow, when she is not a
year old, consists of only a few, and those weak and even defective pigs. She
may be said to be in heat at all times; and even when she is pregnant she seeks
the boar, which, among animals, may be deemed an excess; the female in almost
every species refusing the male after she has conceived. The heat of the sow,
which is almost continual, declares itself more particularly at intervals, by
her emitting no small quantity of a thick, whitish liquid, and by uncommonly
violent motions which always end with her weltering in the mire. She goes four
months, and farrows at the beginning of the fifth; soon after which she again
grows eager for the male, becomes pregnant a second time, and thus farrows
twice a year. The wild sow, which resembles the tame one in all other respects,
farrows but once a year; probably because of the scarcity of food, and the
necessity she is under of suckling and feeding all her litter for a
considerable time: whereas the tame sow is never suffered to suckle all her
pigs above a fortnight or three weeks; after which eight or nine only are left
with her, and the rest are carried to market. They are fit for eating in a
fortnight; and as few sows are wanted, the castrated pigs being more profitable
to rear, and their flesh the best to eat, most of the sow pigs are disposed of,
only two of these, and seven or eight boar pigs, being generally left with the
sow. She should never be permitted to suckle any of her pigs above two months;
and even at the end of three weeks it is best to drive them to the field with
her, that they may by degrees accustom themselves to feed as she does. In about
five weeks after this, they are weaned, and whey mixed with bran, or at least
warm water boiled with greens, is then given them morning and evening.

The boar for propagating should be short and thick of body, rather square than
long, with a large head, a flat short snout, large flagging ears, small fiery
eyes, a large thick neck, a swagging belly, broad buttocks, short thick legs,
and thick and black bristles, white hogs being never so strong as black. In the
sow, the body should be long, the belly broad and capacious, and the teats
long. She should also be of a quiet disposition, and taken from a fruitful
breed. When pregnant, she must be kept apart from the boar, or he would
probably do her some mischief; and when she has farrowed, she must be fed
plentifully, and also watched, lest she should devour some of her pigs: the
boar especially must be removed, for he would show them still less mercy. The
sow is commonly put to the boar in the beginning of spring, in order that, by
farrowing in summer, her pigs may have time to grow and gather strength and
flesh before winter: but when it is intended that she should farrow twice a
year, she is had to the boar in November, that she may farrow in March, and be
again put to him in May. Some sows farrow regularly every five months. The wild
sow, which, as was before observed, farrows but once a year, admits the boar in
the months of January or February, and farrows in May or June. She suckles her
young three or four months, leads them abroad, follows them, and keeps them
from straying, till they are three or four years old; so that it is not
uncommon to see wild sows with their young of the present and preceding year
about them.

Wild boars are called sounders during their first year, and beasts of company
till they are three years old, because they keep together till that age, and
never go alone till they are strong enough to encounter the wolf: by this means
these animals compose among themselves a kind of squadron, and in this their
safety consists; for when they are attacked, the largest form themselves into a
close circle round the lesser, to keep off the enemy. The same method of
defense is also practiced by tame hogs; so that there is no occasion to make
use of dogs to secure them from beasts of prey.

It is not uncommon for boars to live twenty-five or thirty years. Aristotle
says, that hogs in general live twenty-years; and adds, that the boars
engender, and the sows bring forth, till the age of fifteen.

I cannot conclude this last chapter of my work, without continuing to observe
with M. de Buffon, that this species of animals, though known, and even found
in great plenty all over Europe, Asia, and Africa had never been seen in
America till it was carried thither by the Spaniards, who turned great numbers
of black pigs loose on the continent, and also on its larger islands, where
they have increased prodigiously, and in several places become wild. They
resemble the European wild boars; but their body is shorter, their head larger,
and their skin thicker than in other hogs, which in hot climates are totally
black, like the wild boar.

A ridiculous prejudice, which owes its continuance to superstition, deprives
the Mahometans of this animal: they are taught to look upon it as unclean, and
so far from eating, that they dare not even touch it. The Chinese, on the
contrary, are very fond of hog's flesh: it is their most common food, and is
said to have animated them to refuse the doctrine of Mahomet. The Chinese hogs,
which are the same with those of Siam and India, differ from those of Europe,
in that they are smaller, their legs considerably shorter, and their flesh much
whiter and more tender. Some persons breed them here, and they copulate and
engender with our common swine. The negroes also breed vast numbers of hogs;
and though they are very scarce among the Moors, and in all Mohammedan
countries, wild boars abound as much in Asia and Africa as in Europe.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of Swine.
THE only disease that I know of which seems to be peculiar to swine, is a kind
of leprosy, commonly called measles. When it seizes them, they become dull and
sleepy. If the tongue is pulled out, the palate and throat, will be found full
of blackish spots, which appear also on the head, neck, and the whole body; the
creature is scarce able to stand on its legs, and the roots of its bristles are
bloody.

As this disorder proceeds chiefly from their gluttony and filth, the only way
of preventing it is, as was said before, to keep them clean; and the most
probable way to remedy it is, to put the diseased hogs into a separate clean
stye, and there give them wholesome food; to wash them carefully, and let them
have plenty of water to wallow in: antimony, and its preparations, will also be
of service to them.

BOOK VII. Of the CONTAGIOUS DISEASES of CATTLE Abridged from Memoire sur les
Maladies epidemique des Bestiaux, par M. Barberet, M. D. to which the Royal
Society of Agriculture at Paris adjudged their premium for the year 1765, and
of which they were pleased to transmit a copy to the writer of this work.
.
THE contagious diseases which have attacked cattle at different times are not
all of the same nature. The authors who have noticed them, have given different
descriptions of them. I shall first describe those of which they have spoken,
and then proceed to those which have appeared in our days. It must be from a
knowledge of what was observed in former epidemics, that we can learn to guard
against the dire effects of future ones; for it is but too certain, that those
which have already appeared will appear again, as there will hereafter be
occasion to remark; and the proper treatment of diseases which may hereafter
attack cattle, can be learnt only by considering what was done for them before:
for, as in the cure of diseases incident to men, so in those of animals,
experience is all in all. Experience makes us acquainted with each species of
malady, its genus, the different causes which have contributed to its
production, the remedies which have been applied, and their effects. Be always
mindful, says Hippocrates Lib. de decent. Ornat. 8.
, of whatever has cured diseases, of the appearances under which those diseases
have shown themselves, of the changes they have undergone, and of the different
manners in which they have affected different creatures; for this is, in
physic, the beginning, the middle, and the end.

The ancients afford us but little instruction concerning the contagious
diseases of cattle, a scourge which so often sweeps away whole herds; for they
scarcely enter into any description of them. Virgii, at the end of his third
Georgie, describes, indeed, a mortality amongst cattle; but what he says is
rather the flight of a poet's imagination, painting the ravages of any epidemic
disorder, than the description of a particular one: and though we find in
Celsus prescriptions for many maladies of horses, oxen, and sheep; yet he has
not given us a description of any epidemic disorder: nor is Columella at all
accurate in his description of the contagious diseases of cattle.

We must therefore come so far down as Ramazzini, who, in his account of the
epidemical constitution of the year 1690, at Modena, says, that the season was
cold and moist, and that the reigning distempers of that year attacked all the
people who lived in the country, and spread itself indiscriminately amongst all
kinds of animals, of which great numbers died after a few days illness. Nature
made strong efforts to disengage herself from the disease by a critical
discharge on the thighs, neck, and head, resembiing the pustules of the
smallpox. Most of the animals which had this appearance lost their eyesight.
Those creatures which were not carried off by this disease, but resisted its
violence, lost their flesh by degrees, and fell into a marasmus. Ramazzini did
not scruple to declare these pustules to be the smallpox; for they differed
not from it in form, in color, or in the matter which they contained, nor in
size, nor in the manner in which they went off: when they had dried off after
the suppuration, they left a black scar, like to that which remains after the
smallpox.

This epidemic contagion continued in 1691, and attacked chiefly the sheep, so
violently that the breed was almost destroyed: (Ita ut ovilus grex pene deletus
fuerit. Ramaz. p. 42.) It has been constantly observed, that, of all the
animals, sheep are the most subject to the smallpox. The French call it, in
them, clavin, or claveaux, and I shall speak more fully of it hereafter. It was
therefore to be expected that they should be particularly affected by it, since
they are more disposed to it than other cattle.

In 1693, Hesse saw her herds carried off by a pulmonary phthisis. (Constable.
epid. Hassiac. ann. 1691.) The winter of that year began with rain, and ended
with very severe cold: an extraordinary warmth which commenced in the spring,
and continued during the whole summer, took place all at once of the former
cold. Such sudden changes always occasion unusual motion in the fluids, and
frequently obstructions in the capillary vessels; and hence it seldom happens
but that a sudden change from cold to heat brings on epidemical diseases: yet
the disorder which then reigned in Hesse was also attributed to a blight, or
corrosive dew, which fell on the pastures in 1693, in the same manner as the
pastures in Italy had been infected in 1690. Besides these causes, the
above-quoted observer imputes the disorders to the coldness of the water,
which, the animals drinking greedily of it whilst they were very hot,
contributed much to the pulmonary phthisis: for if a man in a great sweat
drinks a draught of ice-water, it is to be feared that he will be seized with a
pleurisy or peripneumony. The case is the same with animals.

The spring of the year we are speaking of being very warm, the bullocks and
cows, heated both by the warmth of the season, and by the devouring fire which
raged in their bowels, through the infected quality of the plants they had fed
on, ran to the coldest water they could find. One of the first effects of cold
is to condense fluids, and to lessen the diameters of vessels. The fibers of
the capillary vessels, being contracted by the action of the cold, stopped and
returned the blood which before flowed freely in those vessels, and from thence
proceeded an inflammation. When this happens to a considerable number of
vessels, they burst, and their coats, with their contents, turn to pus, or that
matter which we see in boils. This is what happened in Hesse: the inflammation,
at first neglected, suppurated, and the cattle sunk under a pulmonary phthisis.

In the year 1712, they were attacked in Lower Hungary with a most dangerous
distemper, (Constable. epid. inter Hunger. ann. 1712.) The winter had been
extremely cold, and the spring rainy, with great changes in the temperature of
the atmosphere; for on the same day the morning was cold, the middle of the day
very warm, the cold began again about three o'clock, and the evening became
warm. These changes occasioned amongst men many fevers, which were as irregular
as the season. In the months of June and July, during which the weather
continued constantly warm, there appeared a prodigious number of insects,
reptiles, and particularly serpents which killed many persons in the country.
Their bite brought on a swelling which spread very fast all over the body, and
particularly to the tongue, so that the sick could not utter a word. The cattle
were not less subject to the bite of these serpents, than the men; and
accordingly the mortality among them was very great.

In August, which was very rainy, the mortality increased, but by a new kind of
disorder, which showed itself by white pustules filled with matter insufferably
stinking. A liquor of a cadaverous smell flowed from the mouths of the sick
cattle; it was with the utmost difficulty that they breathed: the bullocks and
cows seized with this disorder bellowed constantly, and without intermission,
as death approached. A noise was then heard in their bowels, as if the coats of
their intestines, distended too much, burst. Though the observer does not
mention it, yet every circumstance, especially the pustules, declare this
distemper to have been the smallpox complicated with some other disorder. The
liquor which flowed from the mouth greatly resembled the spitting which comes
on in men in the smallpox. The difficulty of breathing, the stench of the
breath, and the infectious smell of the pustules, are symptoms which constantly
attend the clavin or smallpox in sheep, when the disease is violent or
accompanied with putrefaction.

In the stomach of the animals which were opened were found balls of the size
of a wallnut, filled with hair, and covered with a membranous tunic, so hard
that it could scarcely be cut with a knife. This membranous tunic is uncommon;
for the egagropiles are not organized bodies.

This mortality spread even to the wild beasts, several of which were found
dead in the forests. The dogs which ate of their flesh, or that of any of the
animals that died of the contagion, became mad; and the men who were bitten by
them were seized with the hydrophobia.

The changeableness of the season had a great share in the epidemic here spoken
of, and the multitude of reptiles contributed to render it still more dangerous
to cattle: for the great number of insects which adhered to the grass they fed
upon, might cause as many disorders as the blight before mentioned; because all
animal substances are of a more septic quality than grass, which is the natural
food of cattle.

The epidemic disease of 1711 Constable. Epidem. August. ann. 1711, 171^.
, which made such havoc in Italy and Germany, came originally from Hungary, by
means of bullocks brought from that country: for there appeared nothing in the
constitution of the air, nor in the food, that could give rise to it; nor did
it affect cattle which had no communication with those that came from Hungary.
The infection seemed to be communicated by their saliva dropped on the grass;
so that sound cattle, which afterward fed on the same pasture, contracted this
disorder with which the others were infected.

The virus, which was communicated by the saliva, was so extremely acrid, that
it acted as a caustic on the gullet, stomach, and intestines, affected the
nervous system, occasioned spasms, contracted the fibers, and caused
obstructions in the capillary vessels: the fluids consequently became putrid,
and the bowels were seized with gangrenous inflammations. The disease was
attended with a burning heat, a total loss of appetite, a difficulty of
breathing: in some bullocks the tongue was inflamed and covered with many red
blisters; the stomach, the epiploon, and especially the intestines, were also
inflamed; the parts near the liver were of the color of the bile; the
excrements were purulent, tinged with blood, and of an insufferable stench, so
that, says the observer who has left us this account, the disorder assumed the
appearance of a malignant dysentery: and yet the dysentery here certainly was
only symptomatic.

The mortality amongst the cattle ceased but very little during the winter, and
began again the next year: the cause, however, did not seem to be the same; for
the epidemic disorder in* 1712 appeared with different symptoms. It first
attacked the horses, especially those which were in the neighborhood of
Augsburgh; yet almost all that were in the town escaped. It afterward spread
to the bullocks and cows, and to many other animals of different kinds. On the
breast, groin, and many other parts, there arose hard tumors, which extended
greatly, and soon carried off the cattle affected with them. This disorder
seems to have been the consequence of that of the former year; the hard tumors
and the symptoms attending them being imputed to the sting of hornets, of which
there was an incredible number in 1712, of an uncommonly large size. It was
said that they fed on the bodies of the cattle which died the year before, and
had not been buried sufficiently deep. That the sting of these hornets bred in
and fed on infection, could not but be dangerous, will appear from the
following event, which shows to how great a degree the juices were altered.

A man intending to chop off the foot of a horse which had died of the sting of
a hornet, and had not been buried deep enough, the foot appea^^ng above ground,
some drops of the juices splashed about by the hatchet he made use of flew into
one of his eyes, and caused there an inflammation and swelling, which soon
extended to the other eye, afterward over the whole head, and finally killed
him.

Lancisi informs us, that the wise precautions of Pope Clement XI. preserved
for two years the states subject to him, from the contagious disease which a
bullock had brought from Hungary into the district of Padua, from whence it
spread all over the Venetian territories and the Milanese, and at length
penetrated into the kingdom of Naples. In the middle of the summer of 1713,
information was received, that some drovers were conducting a great number of
cattle to the fair of Frusino, a town in the ecclesiastical state, but
bordering on the kingdom of Naples. To prevent all danger, orders were
immediately given, that the fair should not be held. The drovers seeing the
impossibility of selling their cattle as they had intended, led them through
bye-ways to Rome. They were sold at a low price; and being sold again to the
inhabitants of the towns and villages throughout that province, the infection
was soon spread over the whole Campania of Rome. An exact register was kept of
all the cattle that died from the month of October, 1713, to the month of
April, 1714, when the infection ceased in the ecclesiastical state, and
presents us a shocking detail of the effects of that pestilence, by which were
destroyed 8466 oxen used for ploughing, 10125 white cows, 2816 red cows, 108
breeding bulls, 427 young bulls, 451 heifers, 2362 calves, 862 buffaloes, male
and female, 635 young buffaloes, in all 26252 cattle in the space of nine
months. Lancisi thinks, that if the computation had been begun from the 2d of
August, the number of cattle which perished would have amounted to 30,000.

That author does great justice to the truly paternal care and solicitude shown
by the Holy Father on this melancholy and fatal conjuncture. We may see by his
account, that the speedy extinction of a scourge which continued long to ravage
other states of Italy, was owing more to the Pope's prudent measures, than to
medicines, which were found to be ineffectual. This evinces, that good laws and
active magistrates are frequently the most effectual safeguards against
pestilential diseases.

This distemper showed itself in some animals by lowings, by a kind of terror
with which they were seized, by a thousand different motions which seemed to
arise from that terror, and by a sudden and precipitate flight. Others, chiefly
the weak, dropped down dead at once, as if they had been thunderstruck. In
almost all the rest was observed a great dejection; they could hardly hold up
their heads; their eyes were dull and full of tears; a surprising quantity of
mucus flowed from the nose, and of saliva from the mouth; the fever in them was
very high; they were so dejected that they could not stand up; their hair stood
on end; their tongue, mouth, and gullet, were inflamed, ulcerated, and more or
less covered with blisters: at first they showed a great thirst, but soon
refused every kind of drink and food: many had a considerable purging; what
they discharged was of different colors, always very foetid, and sometimes
bloody. Most of them sunk under the distemper in a week, being seized with the
most violent oppression. Their breath was insufferably stinking, a strong cough
was frequently joined to all these symptoms, etc.

It was seldom that the appearances in the viscera were alike in the creatures
which died of this plague. The contagion fell sometimes on one part, and
sometimes on another, seemingly according to the weakness of that particular
part. This Lancisi says he was convinced of by opening three bodies. Except the
small ulcers observed in the mouth, throat, aesophagus and paunch of each of
them, and likewise the gangrenous spots observed in their lungs, all the other
effects were totally different. In the paunch of the first, which died on the
third day of the disease, he found a mass of the creature's last food,
extremely hard, and what Pliny calls juvencarum tophum, that is, an
aegagropile. The liver, intestines, and lungs of the second, which died on the
sixth day, were entirely sphacelated; the heart and brain of the third were
become putrid masses, with scarcely any vascular appearance. He observed
nothing particularly remarkable in the fluids.

The young and fat cattle, which had worked little and been well fed, were more
easily affected by the distemper, and died sooner, than the cattle which had
been made lean by hard labor, and were come to a certain age.

Lancisi thinks that the greater or less abundance of the fluids, and their
flowing more or less freely through the vessels, was the true cause of this
difference; for the pestilential ferment, says he, insinuates itself more
easily into the blood and spirits, and falls more severely on the bowels, when
it meets with a greater plenty of fluids liable to be corrupted, and with
obstacles which prevent its finding a passage out of the body.

Though the lean cattle did not escape the contagion, and though they generally
died of it, yet some of them recovered; probably owing to the less interruption
which the pestilential ferment met with in them, than in those that were fat.

What was very remarkable is, that most of the female buffaloes, which were
seized with the plague when they suckled their young, did not die. Their teats
were ulcerated all over, and none of their young escaped. Lancisi is of opinion
that the acrid venom taken in by the nose of the mother, and with her food,
flowed with the chyle into the blood, and by that means into the minutest
vessels of the udder. (...) happily deposited; and as part of the venom was
taken off by their young, and the rest of it remained stopped at the extremity
of the lactiferous vessels ulcerated and corroded by that same ferment, the
mothers, by means of these salutary sores, frequently escaped death; perhaps as
happens to men seized with the plague, who are often cured by a lucky
suppuration of buboes.

In the year 1730, a great number of cattle died in Bohemia, Lithuania, Saxony,
the March of Brandenburgh, and the Duchy of Magdeburgh ( Hist. Feb. Cantarrh.
ann. 1730.) but we have no account of the distemper which carried them off.
Perhaps it might be like that which destroyed so many in some of the provinces
of France in 1731, the first symptom of which was a white blister that appeared
on the tongue. This blister afterward became red, and ended with turning black
and degenerating into a cancerous ulcer, which ate away, and, in a short time,
consumed the whole tongue. It was very like an anthrax. This distemper was the
more dangerous, because there was no symptom which declared its approach; for
the creature which was seized with it ate and drank as usual, till the ulcer
had made a considerable progress, and often nothing was perceived till it was
too late to assist.

From the year 1740 to 1750* the horned cattle, not only in France, but all
over Europe, died in vast numbers of a putrid, malignant, inflammatory fevers,
like that which made such havoc in Germany and Italy in 1711, and which was
called a malignant dysentery. Of all the diseases that have at any time
attacked cattle, this seems to be the most dangerous, the most complicated, and
the most difficult to cure. Its approach was indicated by a languor and general
dejection: the beating of the heart was as quick again as in a natural state,
which denotes a very brisk fever. The sick animal, hanging down its head, could
hardly stand upon its feet; it tottered; its loins panted; its eyes were red
and full of tears; its horns and ears were cold; a thick, glutinous slaver ran
from its nose and mouth; and a convulsive motion was apparent from the head all
along the back. The other symptoms were similar to those before mentioned in
speaking of the epidemical disease of Augsburgh.

In 1756, the French lost a great number of cattle in Minorca. These animals,
transported thither from Auvergne, were little accustomed to the heat of a
climate where they were exposed all day long to the burning rays of the sun:
for, excepting the middle of the island, scarce any shade is to be found in it.
This became the more grievous to them as they naturally delight in a cold
climate, and in such it is that they thrive best. In fact, the cattle of
Denmark, Podolia, and Ukraine, are the largest, and next to them those of
Ireland and England, whilst those of Spain and Barbary are the smallest. They
found not in Minorca any thing that could allay in their bowels a heat which
they had not felt elsewhere. They had no cooling grass, for all is burnt up in
that island by the month of May. The water, being every where warm, and in many
places brackish, afforded but little refreshment to creatures which love it
cool and pure. They languished, and lost their flesh visibly from day to day:
their breath was hot, and they ended with pissing blood.

We were terrified in 1762 with accounts of an epidemic disease which made
great havoc in Denmark, and had advanced to the frontiers of Germany. The
following is an account of it, sent to one of the members of the Royal Society
of Agriculture at Paris.

The contagion spread with great rapidity; the youngest, the most robust, and
the most healthy cattle, were the first seized with it, and died the soonest.
In most of them a cough was the symptom of the disease. Their eyes became dull,
watery, and bleared; and even tears trickled from them. In a day or two after
the cows were thus seized, their milk dried up, and this was a sure sign that
the contagion had reached them. In the beginning, the creatures were cold even
to shivering, nearly as men are on the first attack of a fever. A heat
succeeded, and continued for several days: it was most perceptible at the nape
of the neck, either by the heat itself, or by the beating of the pulse. The
sick animal lost its appetite for eating, but continued to drink freely till
the inflammation deprived it of the power of swallowing. A great quantity of
insufferably-stinking, snotty matter, flowed from the nose, and the teeth
became loose in most of them. Some became costive; but in much the greater
number a diarrhaea came on in the beginning, with a discharge of scarce any
thing except water, with very little excrement. Toward the end of the disease,
the two last joints of the tail became soft and rotten: if the skin which
covered them was opened, there came out a foetid, purulent matter. The gangrene
proceeded by degrees even to the horns, which became cold and empty. When the
ears and nose became cold, the disease was in the last stage; and then it was
that the animal generally died on the sixth or seventh day from its being taken
ill.

On opening the dead bodies, the gallbladder was found greatly enlarged, and
full of a liquor more like urine than bile. In some of them there was even
three pounds weight of this liquor in the bladder; in many, the stomach and
intestines were full of worms, yet alive at the opening of the body. There were
likewise in the blood vessels certain insects called plaice, because of the
resemblance of their shape to that of the fish so named. Sometimes the brain
appeared dissolved into a purulent water. In many, the veins were full of black
blood. Numbers had the neck inflamed. In others, the inflammation fell on the
bowels, and sometimes another part of them was found gangrened. The stomachs
were full of food not digested; and that food was so dry, and so much compacted
together, that it could not be separated without great difficulty. Livid and
black spots on the stomach and intestines showed evidently a gangrene. In some
animals, the liver and spleen were covered with small tumors, so hard that
they could not be broken, and they felt like grains of small sand under the
fingers; while the rest of the substance of these viscera was, on the contrary,
so soft, that it could scarcely be touched without piercing into it. Some dead
bodies afforded no sign of any distemper. The blood that was taken from the
animals was of a clear red, and discovered signs of great inflammation by its
frothing and smoking, and not having any liquid in it after it had cooled: the
whole was one coagulated mass, which might be cut like a jelly.

In the years 1746, 1754, 1761, and 1762, there appeared among the sheep in the
neighborhood of Beauvais (in Picardy) a contagious disease which the French
commonly call clavin, or claveau, and which is in fact no other than the
smallpox, as was before observed. It is, of all the contagious distempers
which affect sheep, the most easily communicated, and that to which they are
the most liable. Like the smallpox, too, it is distinguished into the distinct
or mild, and the confluent or malignant.

The Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris having received the following very
particular account of this disease, as it appeared in 1762, from M. Borel,
Lieutenant General of Beauvais, and Member of the Society of Agriculture of
that city, gladly pay him the tribute of praise justly due to the zeal and
diligence which he manifested on this occasion. He himself examined the
condition of the sheep in many villages and hamlets, in order to become
perfectly acquainted with the symptoms of the disorder, which he has described
with a precision that shows he judged and saw with his own eyes.

The disorder manifested itself by a want of appetite and a dejection in the
animal. Some perceived it twenty-four hours before the eruption; the most
attentive perceived it two or three days sooner; but the greater part did not
notice it till after the eruption had begun. The disgust was proportioned to
the degree of the malady; for the sheep that were affected continued to eat,
those that were most severely attacked took no food of their own accord, people
supported them as well as they could; they were very thirsty, and water was
given to them all. As soon as they were seized with the disorder, they ceased
to chew the cud; their eyes were heavy, swelled, and watery; they became very
dim, and frequently the eyelids were so glued together, that the creatures
could not see. Many of those which had been cured had lost one eye, and others
were quite blind: a deposite or translation of the pocky matter being made,
brought on a suppuration which destroyed the whole substance of one or both
eyes; but these deposites contributed much to a recovery. There flowed from the
nose a thick, tough matter, of the color of pus, generally white, seldom
yellow. Their strength failing them to follow the flock, they laid down, and
remained in the place where it may be said they fell. Their ears were very
cold; though this was not always the case. They were quite motionless, and
collected into the smallest compass possible, with the head inclining as much
as could be to the ground, the tail drawn in between the legs, and the hinder
parts brought near to the fore ones, without seeming to be griped. The
oppression they labored under was in proportion to the violence of the
disorder. When the attack was mortal, they groaned during the last twenty-four
hours of life, and their loins palpitated strongly. If they recovered, their
wool fell off from the places where there had been an eruption. Their
excrements were nearly the same as in a state of health, but rather dryer, and
blacker than in the natural state. The pimples resembled exactly those of the
smallpox. They were of different forms and different colors. Some were
perfectly round and distinct; others confluent, and of an eliptical shape. All
of them were at first red and hard. The distinct sort became afterward white
and soft, suppurated, dried up, and fell off in scales. In the confluent kind
the pimples were so near together that they touched each other; they became of
a purple color, and instead of rising and turning white, they appeared flat
and became black. The fever, heat, thirst, and dejection continued, attended
with a difficulty of breathing, and working in the loins. Some died so early as
third day after the eruption. The more the head was affected, the greater was
the danger, and the speedier the death. Those that outlived the disorder, were
long in recovering. Some did not recover in less than two months, others at the
end of six weeks, or a month: in the distinct kind, they generally recovered in
a fortnight: but in both sorts, several died at the end of these periods.
People were at first of opinion, that the sheep fed in moist pastures were more
liable to be seized with this disorder than those fed in dry pastures: but it
was afterward observed that there was not any difference between them. The
sheep were seized in the winter as well as in the summer. In several places the
infection spread without any immediate communication with the sick sheep: in
others, it seemed to be the effect of their coming near to one another. The
eruption appeared chiefly on the head, on the inside of the fore and hind legs,
on the belly, and around the anus. Some sheep had but very few pimples. These
the country people called the flying smallpox. Some had pimples only on their
legs, others on their ears only, and some again had only one cluster of the
breadth of a crown-piece. A sheep had such a cluster on one ear, which it
treated so roughly, that the ear remained curled up, and displaced from its
natural position. Another had one on its foot; the hoof fell off, and the
creature remained lame ever after. The eruption was generally complete by the
fourth or fifth day. The inside of the mouth was full of pimples, which would
have prevented the sheep's eating even if it had not had a disgust to food. The
breath was excessively stinking. M. Borel observes, that when a flock of sheep
was seized with this distemper, at least one half or two-thirds of them was
very sick. In most places, no attempt had been made to cure it, the country
people being persuaded that there was no cure for it, because they had never
seen their fathers administer any; only some of them assured him, that the open
air was better for the sick sheep, than housing them.

This gentleman, not contented with examining the symptoms of the disease in
the living, endeavored to discover its effects in the dead bodies. A sheep
which was first observed to be sick on a Thursday, continued in the field all
Friday, and on Saturday morning was found dead in the sheepfold: it was brought
to M. Borel in the afternoon of the same day; signs of putrefaction appeared
already in it by an offensive smell, by a livid, greenish color upon its neck,
and under its fore and hind legs, and by the largeness of its lower belly,
which enclosed a great deal of infected air. This sheep had not any pimples on
the head, nor was that part of it at all swelled; only two pimples were found
on the upper, and two on the lower part of the tongue; and in those places the
skin peeled off as it does from a tongue put into boiling water. On raising the
eyelids, it was seen that the eyes had lost their brightness and transparency,
and that more in one than the other. The pimples were numerous on the belly,
under the fore and hind legs, and on the neck and throat. They appeared like
tumors, or white pustules, round, flat, and of a sixth, a fourth, or a third
part of an inch in diameter. They did not pierce deeper than the skin, and
moved with it. The matter of which they were formed, had not yet made pits, as
in the white pustules of the smallpox. On opening them, they appeared like a
pinguous tumor; some were excoriated in the middle. It was presumed that they
had not become white till after the death of the creature, and that they were
red before, as in the other sheep during the first days of the eruption. The
remains of a sa^io^s humor, of the color of coffee, were found in the
nostrils; but no judgment could be formed of its mucosity at the end of twelve
or eighteen hours after death, when a putrefaction had begun. The lower belly
being opened, the cawl appeared of a dead, blackish red, and the fat of it had
not that cohesian and consistence which it has in sheep killed when in health.
The liver was of a dark green color; which color penetrated about a twelfth
part into the substance of it, in some places more, in some less, and the part
so colored was brittle, as if boiled. The gallbladder was flabby, and seemed
to have contained more bile, and that thinner, than in its natural state. The
inner coat of the first stomach was loose and wrinkled, of a green color, and
prodigiously full of white lenticular pustules, of the same nature as those on
the skin, but smaller in diameter. The stomach contained a greenish liquor in
small quantity. The second stomach contained also but little. The third was
very full of food pretty well chewed, and as green as the grass of which it was
the produce. It was also much extended with a very rarefied and foetid air. The
small guts were almost empty. In the colon and ^accum were excrements of a
middling consistence. The kidneys were like the liver, green and dry on the
outside. The bladder had little urine in it. The lungs were flabby, and of a
dark, livid red. Some small tumors were observed in them, like those on the
skin, but round and thick. The heart appeared larger than in its natural state.
The right ventricle contained a very black blood: a clod of blood taken out of
the inferior vena cava was black in its upper part next the heart; but in its
lower part next the liver it was yellow, and resembled that coat which covers
the blood in ple^risies. The head of this sheep was not opened, as well on
account of the putrefaction, as because the disease did not seem to have fallen
on that part. M. Borel adds, that if a child had died at the same period of a
disease, and with the same symptoms, it would be thought to have died of the
smallpox stricken in. The resemblance between the claveau in sheep, and the
smallpox in men is very striking, whether we examine it in its beginning and
progress, or in its effects and consequences in the sheep that were cured. In
many of these the skin of the head, especially about the lips, was seamed as
the skin of a human face is by the confluent smallpox.

It were to have been wished that M. Borel's occupations had permitted him to
notice with the same care and exactness the effects of some medicines, which
were pointed out to him at the time by one of the members of the Royal Society
at Paris, and to pursue the experiments then proposed to him. The questions
which that society put to him may, however, help to direct others on a similar
occasion; and I shall therefore transcribe them here.

1st. Are old sheep more subject to the claveau than young ones? Is the claveau
apter to be of the confluent or malignat kind, and consequently more dangerous
in the former than in the latter? M. Borel answered, that no difference had yet
been observed between the old sheep and the young, with regard to the height to
which the malignity or other symptoms arose. The society, however, wish that
this important point may be ascertained by more accurate observations.

2d. Are the lambs subject to this disorder? Is the distinct or mild kind the
most common am^^^st them? Are they subject to a looseness in (...) kind of this
distemper? Have they the discharg^ by the nose in the confluent kind? Does this
discharge precede, or does it accompany the eruption?

3d. At what time precisely does the eruption appear, and how long also does it
last, in the one and in the other kind of this disease? Does it vary according
to the kinds of the disease, and according to the age of the animal?

4th. After the eruption, are the symptoms lessened in the distinct kind? Do
they become more alarming and seem to increase in the confluent kind?

5th. Is a sheep which has recovered of either the one or the other kind of
this distemper, ever attacked with it a second time, or oftener? -- The country
people assured M. Borel, that they never knew a sheep attacked a second time by
it.

6th. Could not inoculation be tried on a sound sheep, or on an uninfected
lamb, which has been prepared beforehand? What would be the issue of such an
experiment, made with all possible precaution to guard against the spreading of
the contagion?

7th. If a sheep cured of the claveau in the natural way is inoculated, will it
be infected?

8th. What would be the consequence of inserting some of the variolous matter
into an ass, a mule, a horse, a bullock, a dog, or, in short, into any animal
of a different kind? What would be the effects of inoculating a sheep, or other
animal, with the variolous matter taken from the human body?

9th. Prepare some sheep as for inoculation, and expose them afterward to be
infected in the natural way? will they be infected, and of what kind will the
infection be?

10th. Inoculation not having had any effect, expose the sheep to the claveau
in the natural way, will they be infected?

Pleneiz, a celebrated physician at Vienna, in a treatise on contagious
diseases, printed by Trattner, in 1762, has taken into consideration, in p.
142, etc. the havoc made by the distemper among cattle for thirty years past,
in almost every country in Europe. He ascribes the cause of it to small worms,
and founds his opinion on what he observed by the help of a microscope in the
several ulcers which extended from the mouth and throat to the stomach and
lungs of the distempered animals. He cites the testimony of Rodius, Cent. 3,
Observat. 61, and 62. that of Bidloo, and that of Bono in his letters to
Valisnieri.

The progress of this cruel disease having been such toward the end of the
year 1761, that the symptoms of it became daily more and more severe, this
zealous author determined to search first into the cause of its spreading so
rapidly, and next into the means of getting the better of it. These two points
are the subject of a small work serving as a supplement to that we have been
speaking of, viz. Additamentum ad Tractatum de contagione, p. 142, 143, 144,
etc. seu de lue bovina ad finem vergente anno 1761, epidemia grassante, etc.

Michael Sagar, physician in the circle of Iglaw, in Moravia, has given us the
history of a distemper which reigned among the cattle in 1764. It was printed
in 1765, by Kraus, at Vienna, under the title of, Libellus de apthis pecorinis
anni 1764, cum appendice de morbis pecorum in hac provincia tam frequentibus,
eorundemque causis et medelis preservatoriis.

These two works contain excellent observations, and cast a great light on the
subject; as does also the work of M. Ens, entitled, Disquisitio Anatomico
pathologica de Morbo Boum Ostervicensium.

We find in the second volume of Sydenham's works printed at Geneva in 1736, by
the brothers Detourne, not only all that Bernard Ramazzini has said of the
constitutional epidemics of 1690, 1691, 1692, 1693, and 1694, but likewise a
collection of what Schroeck, Harder, Valentinus, Garhliep, Behrens, Rayger,
Steggmann, Schelhamer, Hoyer, Gerbezius, etc. have written on the epidemical
constitutions of different countries at different times. They have all been
sufficiently attentive, whenever the contagion extended to any kind of cattle,
not to neglect this circumstance, though it was not, so much as might have been
wished, the principal object of their writing. We are, however, obliged to
physicians, who, whilst they search into the causes of deseases fatal to men,
at the same time cast an eye on those of cattle. Sunt enim animalia post
hominem, ita ars veterinaria post medicinam secunda est. Veget.

Of the Causes of the contagious Diseases of Cattle.
THE constitution of the air, and the quality of their food, are the original
causes of all the epidemic diseases of cattle. They breathe the same air as we
do, and consequently must be affected by its various temperature, its changes,
its gravity, its lightness, its greater or less elasticity. The vapors, the
exhalations, and whatever it carries with it must make on them at least as much
impression as on us, and even more, since, not being clothed, as we are, they
are more exposed to the immediate contact of the air; so that that is contained
in the atmosphere finds an easy admission by the mouth and nose, and being
lodged in their hair, may insinuate itself into the body, and so occasion many
disorders.

It appears that whatever in the air is hurtful to animals, affects them
chiefly by the mouth and nose: for these effects generally show themselves
first in the head or stomach, and frequently in both at once. Hoffman is
clearly of (...) that morbific ferments are mixed with the blood by means of
the saliva, more than by any other means. That liquor, whether it be swallowed
constantly, or only when it accompanies the food, carries the ferment with it
into the stomach and intestines, where, mixing with liquors easily susceptible
of putrefaction, or of being affected by any particular ferment, the liquors
are in this depraved state carried with the chyle into the body, and produce
effects similar to their different qualities, either on the body in general, as
in a fever, or on some particular part: whereas if the venom entered by the
pores, it would meet with liquors in continual motion, and therefore not so
susceptible of putrefaction, or of being affected by any peculiar ferment.

That the air is the great source of contagious distempers, was an opinion of
the most ancient writers. Hippocrates (Sect. 4. de Flatibus) looks upon the air
as the source of all disorders. Virgil (Geor. Lib. 3.) promises to teach us the
causes of all the diseases of cattle; Morborum quoque te causas et signa docebo.

"The causes and the signs shall next be told,
"Of every sickness that infects the fold."
Yet he mentions only the air, as if that was the sole cause.

Hic quondam morbo coeli miseranda coorta est,
Tempestas, totoque autumni incanduit aestu,
Et genus omne neci pecudum dedit, omne ferarum,
Corrupitque lacus, infecit pabula tabo.
"Here from the vicious air, and sickly skies,
"A plague did on the dumb creation rise:
"During the autumnal heats the infection grew,
"Tame cattle and the beasts of nature slew;
"Pois'ning the standing lakes, and pools impure:
"Nor was the foodful grass in fields secure."
Livy too (Lib. V. Decad. 1.) seems to impute to the air a pestilential disease
which carried off both men and animals in his time. Trystem hyemen sive ex
intemperie coeli raptim mutatione in contrarium facta, sive alia de causa
gravis pestilensque omnibus animalibus aestus excipit.


Though the air is unquestionably a most powerful agent in communicating
contagious diseases, yet it is not the only one; for if it were, how comes it
that the pestilential diseases which at different times have destroyed mankind,
have spared the beasts of the field? Thucydides, in his description of the
plague of Athens (de Bell. Pelopon. Lib. 2.) does not say that it extended to
beasts: he only relates, that the carnivorous animals would not touch the
bodies of those which died of the plague, and that those which were so
voracious as to eat of them died; which is a tacit proof that the other animals
did not die of it. The plague ravaged the Roman Empire during fifteen years
under the Emperors Gallus and Volusian (Zonar. tom. 2.) in the year 263, it
killed five thousand people in one day in Rome only (Baronius, Annal. tom. 2.)
Under the Emperor Justinian, there died of the plague at Constantinople, from
five thousand to ten thousand people likewise in one day (Procop. de Bello
Pers. Lib. 2.) Guy de Chauliac speaks of a plague which appeared in his time,
viz. in 1348, so extremely severe, that it swept away three-fourths of mankind
from off the face of the earth. According to Rondelet, it made dreadful havoc
in France, Germany, Italy, and Spain, in 1450. Valeriola says that, in 1553,
men dropped down dead of the plague in Narbonese Gaul, whilst they were talking
together or walking, as if they had been struck with thunder. Jerome Mercurialis
relates the same thing of that which appeared at the same time at Padua and at
Venice. Zacutus speaks of a most dreadful plague which happened at Lisbon in
1601. In fine, it appeared in Moscovy in 1655, in England in 1665 and 1666, in
Poland in 1708 and 1709, at Marseilles in 1720; and yet the authors who have
spoken of these terrible scourges make no mention of their having affected any
other creatures than mankind. Can it be supposed that all of them neglected or
forgot a circumstance of so great consequence? Their silence is a convincing
proof that all epidemical diseases do not arise solely from the constitution of
the air.

It may be objected, that as the air acts differently on different bodies, so
the diseases which the air communicates to men may not affect other animals,
nor those which are peculiar to any one species of animals affect any other
species: for what proves mortal to one species does not to another; and that
there is a plague for men, another for horses, another for cattle, and another
for sheep. A sound bullock put into the same stable with a glandered horse,
does not catch the glanders. A bullock put into a house with sheep ill of the
smallpox, does not catch that disease, nor do horses; and sound sheep do not
catch the glanders or farcy from horses, when confined with them in the same
stable: and yet one should be cautious not to mix sound animals of any species
with diseased ones of any other: for men who had not so much as a scratch on
their hands have been seized with a true anthrax by opening the bodies of
cattle dead of a contagious distemper; and almost all the cow-herds who were
appointed to watch an infected herd, have been seen to fall into malignant
fevers accompanied with a gangrene.

Independent of the air, it is certain that many epidemic diseases take their
rise from the bad qualities of food. If the bread-corn is any way distempered,
it never fails to bring on disorders among the country people; of which a
remarkable instance is recorded in the History of the Royal Academy of Sciences
for the year 1710; viz. that the peasants of Sologne, who lived on rye which
had the spur, were seized with a dry black gangrene, which began in the toes,
ascended insensibly, and made their limbs drop off, in such manner that some of
them were alive in the Hotel-Dieu at Orleans, with nothing left but the trunk
of the body. Grass equally distempered becomes equally pernicious to the cattle
which are fed with it. The distemper in grass called rust (aerugo and rubigo,)
has always been looked upon as very dangerous. The Holy Scriptures speak of it
as an effect of the wrath of God. Pliny reckons it more hurtful than hail; and
therefore it was, says he, that Numa Pompilius instituted festivals, called
Rubigalia Festa, to avert the effects of it. They were celebrated in the month
of April, because this distemper usually begun in that month. The nature of it
is not yet well understood. It generally begins when, in hot weather, there has
fallen a plentiful dew, which was supposed to break the vessels of the leaves
and stems of plants, from whence issued a thick, extravasated juice, which
being dried by the sun, was turned into a red powder which adhered to the
plants, and did them great injury; for they soon after appeared gangrened, if
we may apply this word to plants. Count Francesco Ginnani, in his work entitled
Delle Mallatie del Grano in Herba, C. 5. Part. II. attributes this distemper in
vegetables, not to the extravasation of the juices, but to the hatching the
eggs of insects. He has seen them, he says, between the outward and the inward
covering of the leaves. Plenciz, in the work beforementioned, quotes the
microscopical discoveries of Needham, the Observations of Mercurialis, and the
Acta Eruditorem of Leipsick for the year 1718, in order to demonstrate that
what is properly called the Rust, depends on the eggs of certain vermin, which
being laid on vegetables, penetrate the outer skin, hatch, and afterward
multiply there. Calm and temperate weather, rather warm, and in which there are
dripping rains without a cloudy sky, favors their production. This, says he,
is what was experienced in Austria in the year 1751, and what was observed on
the 31st of March and 30th of June, 1759, on both which days it did not cease
to rain, though the sky was clear. In the former of these cases, almost all the
vegetables in the country were covered with rust; and in 1759 the wheat was
greatly damaged by it. This opinion of the cause of this distemper is adapted
by M. Tillet, by Loewenhoeck in his 109th letter to Van Leeween, and by M.
Duhamel. Whatever be the case as to this opinion, all agree that damaged or
corrupted food must be as hurtful to other animals as to men. Clover, sainfoin,
and lucerne are certainly wholesome plants; but let them be attacked with this
distemper, they become as hurtful as the crow-foot, (ranunculus) tithymal,
(spurge) or hellebore; and these too, dangerous in themselves, become more so
when thus affected. This rust, says Ramazzini in his Observations on the
Epidemic Distemper at Modena, seems as corrosive as spirit of nitre. The
pastures corrupted by it were so fatal to cattle, that whole herds were carried
off. In 1693, the grass was infected by it in Hesse, and accordingly, says
Bernard Valentine, the cattle died there by whole droves. The same happened in
Carniola in 1712, and in the Ferrarese in 1715; and the same consequences
ensued. Rye which has the spur, is not only fatal to men, but occasions
internal and external ulcers in hogs and geese.

In the months of July and August, 1756, there was a mortality among the cattle
in Minorca, which having been transported thither, could not bear the heat of
the climate, as was mentioned before. The herdsmen who attended them fell sick;
but the disease was much more severe in those who had been so imprudent as to
eat of the flesh of the sick cattle; for all of them were seized with a
malignant fever, accompanied with a gangrene which showed itself on the second
day, especially at the elbow and heel.

The rust is to grass, what a corrupted state is to flesh: if flesh in this
state occasions fevers amongst men, why should not vitiated plants have a
similar effect on cattle? Independent of this, there are plants which are in
themselves prejudicial to cattle. We see them frequently die in marshy ground,
whilst those fed on the neighboring heights are healthy. In our pastures,
hurtful plants grow among the good, and the care of selecting the latter is
left to the cattle. It is true that the Creator has endued them with an
instinct to distinguish the hurtful from the good; but the former often grow so
close to the latter, that it is almost impossible for them to crop the one
without eating of the other. We see the crow-foot growing every where: all the
species of it contain an acrid juice, especially the parsley-leafed marsh
crow-foot, ranunculus palustris apii folio, otherwise called herba scelerata, a
name which sufficiently indicates its noxious quality. This grows by the sides
of rivers, and is indeed not so often met with as the acrid upright meadow
crow-foot, ranunculus pratensis erectus acris foliis, and the creeping, hairy
meadow crow-foot, ranunculus pratensis repens hirsutus, which are very common
in our meadows, and though less dangerous to cattle, yet are injurious to such
as eat them. The ptarmica vulgaris, dracunculis pratensis, which some likewise
call the sneezing-plant, is not less common nor less acrid than the ranunculus.
We also find in them the spurge, (tithymalus) a very acrid plant, and the small
kind of hemlock, which ought to be banished from them. A careful observer will
remark other plants perhaps equally prejudical; and the husbandman who suffers
such plants to grow in his pastures is inexcusable: for when one or two of the
creatures fed on them become sick, the disease soon communicates itself to
many, already pre-disposed, by the effects of their food, to receive the
infection; and thus it is insensibly spread.

Water, which should be accounted an aliment, may, by bad qualities
communicated to it, contribute greatly to the production of epidemic diseases;
and still more so, when assisted by distempered or acrid food.

We read in the philosophical transactions, that, during the plague in London,
there was collected from off the surface of water, exposed in a vessel to the
air, a blue pellicle, which having been mixed with bread, and given to a dog,
killed him in twenty-four hours. But without being infected by these
pestilential particles which drop upon it from the atmosphere in a pestilential
constitution of the air, the water may be charged with other substances
pernicious to animals, taken up whilst passing through mines of lead, copper,
etc. It sometimes carries with it gypsous matters and selenites, which may form
concretes or obstructions, and cause many diseases. The waters in Minorca are
of this kind: having too short a run to drop the earthy particles with which
they are loaded, they constantly form strong concretions adhering to the sides
of the vessels in which they are contained. Standing, heavy, slimy water,
loaded with many insects and their eggs, as well as with many particles from
the animals and vegetables which die and rot in them, is the cause of many
diseases to cattle which are often obliged to drink of it. Water is both the
most universal dissolvent, and the aptest vehicle for carrying noxious
particles into the blood.

Standing putrid water is not more pernicious by reason of its viscidity, than
it perhaps is on account of vast numbers of small worms which are swallowed
along with it, and live and grow in the stomachs of cattle; as do also their
young brood. These by their motion irritate, and by pricking inflame the
stomach and intestines, from whence proceed spasms and convulsions, somewhat
similar to what arises from the use of acrid or distempered food: for these too
irritate the stomach and intestines; and the ill effect that will follow is an
acceleration of the peristaltic motion of the intestines; whence more frequent
discharges, and even bloody flux. The acrimony, being sometimes so strong as to
erode the coats of the stomach and intestines, occasions inflammations and
intolerable pain, convulsions, etc. and the inspection of the dead bodies shows
us, that in contagious diseases, the stomach has been inflamed, and that the
internal coats, by the livid spots in them, which are sometimes continued down
the whole length of the intestines, had a tendency to a mortification or
gangrene.

Of the Cure of the contagious Diseases of Cattle.
IT has been already said, that the constitution of the air is one of the
general causes of contagious diseases among cattle. M. Le Clerc, treating of
the epidemic diseases which desolated Russia, lays down the following rules for
judging of the nature of contagious diseases, and of the method by which they
may most probably be cured. An unexpected distemper, says he, supposing the
case, breaks out at once with alarming symptoms and terrible effects, and
communicates itself from creature to creature. The effects of this distemper,
howsoever complicated they may be, teach me the time, the order, and the means
of correcting an evil arising from a cause unknown. Nature also shows me, by
the crisis she brings on, the manner in which the disorder should be expelled.
Moreover, I attentively consider the qualities of the air we breathe, the
situation of the place, the qualities of the soil, the kind of life which the
inhabitants lead, the disorders which at the same time affect cattle or plants,
the neighborhood of mines, marshes, standing water; and if I do not trace the
cause in any of these, I look back, and search for it in things already past. I
reflect on the seasons anterior to the disorders: I examine the time, the
course, the duration, the anticipation, the changes, the temperature, and
finally the mixed or extraordinary qualities of the seasons, and the winds which
have been most frequent during that time. I then reflect on the nature of the
diseases which these variations have given rise to; nor do^^ lose sight of the
changes these diseases have undergone. If in my researches I at length find one
or more causes capable of producing the disorder which I was unacquainted with,
I compare the effects of the distemper with the power of the cause, and then
draw my conclusion from their resemblance, or analogy. Have southerly winds
reigned long? I answer, that these winds are naturally pestilential: they may
therefore produce pestilential fevers. Do the mixed or extraordinary qualities
of the seasons, their heat and moisture united, occasion the distemper? The
effects, being truly discovered, make known the state of the fluids and solids
during, and even after, such a constitution of the air. The disorder being
known, (as far as our limited knowledge can reach) I form my indication of
cure. I guard the infected body against the effect of the present venom, by
giving of choice, such medicines as have been employed with the greatest
success in such diseases as have been particularly marked by similar effects.
These are the means of coming at the knowledge of venom; a knowledge which is
not otherwise sufficiently manifested to our senses. Does the intemperature of
a season give me room to think that it is the efficient cause of any disorder?
I have immediate recourse to the hydroscope and engyscope. The first informs of
the real state of the air; the second gives me an insight into the nature of
the particular salts then diffused in the atmosphere The curious may likewise
consult on this subject, Les Experiences Phys. de Poliniere, Tom. II. p. 306,
and seq.
. I then expose to the air every substance which the salts of the air can
alter, as silks died of such particular colors as are tarnished by the nitrous
or sulpherous acid, and are turned black by the vitriolic acid. I moreover
observe the alterations which the vapors of dew have produced on white linen
before it has been washed with ley or soap.

In all the cattle which have died of contagious diseases, and have been
opened, there have been evident marks of inflammation and putrefaction. These
distempers may therefore be reduced to the putrid and the inflammatory kinds.
Putrid diseases differ among themselves, as do likewise the inflammatory: but
that difference consists only in the greater or less degree. The epidemic
distemper of 1690 showed itself with pustules. Whenever eruptions appear on the
skin, it is a certain proof that the cutaneous vessels are obstructed with a
matter that cannot circulate in so minute vessels, and therefore an
inflammation arises. In almost every creature that was opened in 1693, there
was found in the lungs a suppuration, which must have been preceded by an
inflammation. The distemper which proved so fatal to the cattle in Lower
Hungary in the year 1712, appeared with pustules which contained an extremely
foetid matter. The stench of that matter, and of the humor which flowed from
the mouth and nose, proved that a putrefaction was joined to the inflammation
in that disease. The author who has described the epidemical constitution at
Augsburgh, declares the distemper of the cattle was putrid and inflammatory. In
the contagious distemper which prevailed in 1740 and the following years, the
fever appeared to be inflammatory, malignant and putrid. The contents of the
first stomach were very putrid, and the air which proceeded from it was
extremely foetid: those of the second looked as if they had been dried: its
membranes were black, gangrened, and easily torn to pieces; as were also the
membranes of the third stomach and of the intestines, which likewise contained
sometimes purulent matter. Black spots and hydatides were observed on the
liver, the lungs, and on the meninges of the brain. In the cattle which were
opened in Minorca in 1756, traces of inflammation, terminating in
mortification, were observed in almost all the bowels. The appearance of the
sheep which died of the smallpox in the neighborhood of Beauvais, likewise
confirms that the disorder was highly inflammatory and putrid.

As it has constantly appeared upon opening the bodies of cattle which died of
contagious distempers, that the diseases were either inflammatory or putrid,
the method in which these disorders should be treated is hereby pointed out.
When they are inflammatory, the first intention should be to cool the too-great
he^t of the blood, to lessen its rarefaction, the velocity and force of its
motion, in order to take off or lessen the obstructions in the capillary
vessels. These purposes are answered by plentiful bleedings, by so much the
more necessary in cattle, as the action of their vessels is stronger than in
men. The heat and strong action of the vessels soon dissipate the thinnest
watery part of the blood, whence farther obstructions ensue; and hence it is
that inflammatory diseases are most dangerous in the most healthy
constitutions, and in the most robust animals. Evacuations become therefore the
more necessary, lest suppurations or mortifications should be the consequence.
Plenty of cooling and diluting liquors should be given at the same time.

If, on the contrary, signs of putrefaction appear, the first passages should
be immediately cleared of whatever putrid substance they contain, or of any
substances that may become so; for if they were to remain there, they would
communicate their putrid taint to the blood. This end is obtained by glysters
and purging medicines. The first passages being thus cleared, digestion is
better performed, and room is made for antiseptic medicines, which may destroy
the remaining infectious venom.

Comparative anatomy teaches us, that the structure of other animals differs
but little from ours. The animal and vital functions are the same; the
secretions are made in the same manner. Why then should not the same medicines
be used in their disorders as are used in ours?

In case a contagious epidemic distemper amongst cattle is attended with a
cutaneous eruption, it will be first of all necessary to examine what kind of
eruption it is: for cutaneous eruptions proceed sometimes from the violence of
the fever, from acrid and stimulating substances taken down into the stomach,
or from medicines of too warm and cordial a nature. In this case, no good is to
be expected from the eruption. But sometimes it is an effort of nature to
relieve herself by throwing the peccant matter out upon the skin, and in this
case the eruption is favorable, and should be encouraged.

In the first case, the fever is high, the heat considerable, and all the signs
of inflammation appear. Recourse must therefore be immediately had to bleeding,
and to cooling and diluting liquors, such as water in which saltpeter or
sal-prunel has been dissolved; an ounce in about fifteen pounds (or pints) of
water. In lieu of saltpeter, vinegar or spirit of vitriol may be mixed with
water in quantity sufficient to give it a grateful acidity. The food should be
light; such as fresh grass or other plants, and bran boiled in water. By these
means the progress of the inflammation may be stopped, or a resolution may be
obtained of the vessels already obstructed.

In the latter case, the above method must be avoided: evacuations might strike
in the eruption, and thereby prove mortal. The eruption must, on the contrary,
be encouraged, by giving an ounce of theriac to a bullock or a horse. The
eruption will likewise be kept up by giving them daily a spoonful of the flower
of sulphur with bran. Their drink should be water in which sea salt has been
dissolved. That salt is a diuretic which helps to depurate the blood by urine.
The depuration should be aided by a seton made in the dew-lap of a bullock, by
piercing it through with a bistory, and drawing through the incision a rag of
linen or a skein of thread, daubed with basilicon. Care must be taken to draw
the rag or skein through the wound daily, so as to leave a fresh piece of it in
the incision, in order to keep it clean. If, notwithstanding these means, the
eruption does not keep out, the dose of theriac must be repeated, and a
decoction of sarsaparilla and sassafras, or of contrayerva, must be given for
drink.

The contagious distemper which appeared in Hesse in 1693, terminated in a
pulmonary phthisis, which might have been prevented, or rendered milder, by
bleeding in the beginning, and by cooling and nitrous or acidulated drinks. If
it could not be entirely prevented, it might have been very proper to have
given to the sick animals half an ounce of sulphur, and the same quantity of
cinnabar of antimony mixed with bran; at the same time rubbing them heartily
and often, in order to determine to the pores of the skin the matter which
would have produced an abscess in the lungs. When the smallpox does not
suppurate kindly, the disease often falls on the lungs; and by the rule of
contraries, a cutaneous eruption, a determination of the humors toward the
skin, often draws the humor from the lungs, and is frequently seen. An ulcer,
an issue, make drains which often relieve the lungs. The phthisis might
therefore have been thus prevented, seeing it proceeded from (...) same cause
which three years before brought on the smallpox. This is making nature our
guide.

The contagious distemper which reigned in France and over all Europe from 1740
to 1750, and which had appeared before in Hungary, Germany, and Italy in 1711
and 1712, showed itself with evident symptoms of an inflammatory, malignant,
putrid fever. As the throat, stomach, and intestines were greatly irritated by
an extremely acrid humor, the first care, in such a case, should be to allay
the acrimony by mild drinks which resist putrefaction, and to prevent the
inflammation it may cause, by bleeding. With this view, a glass of oil of
olives, or of linseed oil, with half as much vinegar, should be given morning
and evening, in a pint of warm water. During the two first days, a decoction of
sorrel rendered gratefully acid with vinegar, or spirit of vitriol, should be
given, and for food only bran boiled in water, in order to give time to the
stomachs to free themselves of the food lodged in them, as was before observed;
after which it will be right to give them an ounce of crocus metallorum in
powder, or, which is yet better, the ounce of crocus may be infused for
twenty-four hours in a quart of white wine, and the whole be given at once
through a horn. A quart is the dose for horses, bullocks, and cows, and half a
pint for sheep. The creatures which take this remedy should be kept all the day
warm in a stable, and not be suffered to eat till the evening; the effect of
this medicine being as much by the skin as by purging. The efficacy of this
medicine has been often experienced; yet the violence of the distemper requires
that we do not stop here. The seton before recommended is here of the greatest
utility. If people in the country cannot procure the crocus metallorum, they
may substitute in its place two ounces of dry briony roots, or one ounce and a
half of those of asarabacca. The crocus metallorum is however by much the best.
In order to cause a freer discharge from the mouth and nose, powder of
hellebore, or of horse-chesnut, may be blown up the nose, and the mouth may be
washed with a mixture of vinegar and theriac: or if the nose is dry, it may be
proper to throw up into it, with a syringe, some barley-water and honey; and if
a stimulant is wanted, some flower of mustard may be added.

If, notwithstanding this treatment, the symptoms do not abate, recourse must
be had to the Peruvian bark, half an ounce of which, mixed with two drams of
sal-prunel and twenty grains of camphire, should be given night and morning.
These medicines are powerful preservatives from putrefaction, especially the
bark, the virtue of which in gangrenes is well known. Country people, who
cannot afford the expense of these medicines, may substitute in their place
half an ounce of gentian-root with half an ounce of kitchen-soot, this
abounding most in sal-ammoniac. The sal-prunel and camphire, may be added to
them, because these medicines powerfully promote the secretions by the skin and
kidneys. Instead of the theriacated vinegar, one may use strong vinegar, in
which a handful of salt has been dissolved, and a few heads of garlic bruised.
It is proper to observe that, if the animal has not been bled in the beginning
of the disorder, bleeding should not be attempted now; for it will do much hurt.

When hard tumors or buboes appear on the breast, or groin, as happened in the
contagious distemper in Germany which succeeded to that in Hungary,
cupping-glasses are thought to be of great use, to draw the humors the more to
these parts. They should be scarrified, and brought to suppuration as soon as
possible by applying warm ointments and poultices; and to determine the
remaining peccant matter to the pores of the skin, half an ounce of soot should
also be given daily in a glass of theriacated vinegar. A bubo in the glands
about the throat and neck has often proved a happy crisis, and carried off
pestilential fevers. The theriacated vinegar consists of two ounces of theriac
dissolved in a quart of common strong vinegar. The strongest is the best.

If a red blister, turning black at the bottom, is perceived on the tongue of
an animal, such as was observed in the years 1731 and 1765, that blister is
much to be feared. It is a pestilential pustule which may carry the creature
off in twenty-four hours; and therefore the cure must be very speedy. The whole
of this blister should be immediately cut out and carefully separated from the
live flesh. The skin and every part which appears black should be taken away,
and the wound be afterward washed three times a day, at least, with strong
vinegar in which some salt has been dissolved; and this should be continued
till the wound is cicatrised.

The Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris have published the following method,
which was found successful in the generality of Moulins, where it was tried on
three hundred and thirty horned cattle, all of which were cured.

"The first care was to administer preservatives to the sound cattle. To this
end they were bled in the jugular, their mouths were washed frequently,
acidulated nitrous drinks were given them, and their habitations were fumigated.

"The lotion was made of vinegar, pepper, salt, and assa-foetida bruised. The
whole was mixed together, and steeped, shaking it at different times. The
tongue, and all the parts of the mouth and jaws, were then strongly rubbed with
this liquor. Every part of the tongue was in an especial manner rubbed with a
cloth wet in the liquor. Sometimes half an ounce of sal-ammoniac was added to
this lotion.

"The drink was barley-water, with an ounce of saltpeter, and vinegar enough
to render it gratefully acid.

"The fumigation consisted either of vinegar thrown upon live coals in the
stable or cow-house; or of four handsful of juniper berries, two of wormwood,
two of elecampane root, and two of leaves of sabine, with an ounce of myrrh;
the whole powdered and burnt on a chafing dish.

"Likewise juniper berries were steeped in vinegar, and a handful of them mixed
with bran was given twice a day.

"In places where the contagion had been extremely violent, the drink
prescribed consisted of two handfuls of rhue infused in a pint of red wine; to
which were added a few cloves of garlic, some juniper berries, and two drams of
camphire. A hornful of this was given every morning to each creature fasting;
and by the use of all these means, two hundred and twenty-five bullocks and
cows were preserved from all taint, though several of them had communication
with the sick animals.

"With regard to the treatment of these last, all bleeding was forbid; the
fumigations were recommended; and as to the tumor which appeared on the
tongue, it was thought better and surer to cut it entirely out with a bistory
or scissars, than only to scrape and rub it. Scarifications were ordered to be
made in the bottom and sides of the ulcer, and the whole tongue was afterward
fomented five or six times a day with tincture of myrrh and aloes, or with
spirit of wine in which sal-ammoniac and camphire had been dissolved in the
proportion of half an ounce of each to eight ounces of the spirit. A wash of
theriacated vinegar, with some camphire added to it, is likewise very proper in
this case; and it will not be at all amiss to make the creature swallow a
spoonful or two of it every time it is used: for it cannot be thought that a
distemper, of which the effects are so rapid and severe, that the tongue of the
animals may be cut asunder by it and drop off in less than twenty-four hours,
can be sufficiently treated by external remedies only. The following alexiteric
medicines are therefore advised to be given inwardly.

"Take roots of contrayerva and alecampane, of each three drams, a dry viper in
powder, and one dram of camphire; mix them with a sufficient quantity of the
extract of juniper, make them into a ball, and give it to the animal.

"Or, take of the root of swallow-wort, of master-wort, of alecampane, and of
angelica, of each half an ounce; boil them in two pounds (or pints) of vinegar
of roses till one third of it is evaporated. Strain off the liquor, and then
add to it one ounce of orvietan: then divide it into two doses, and give one
them in the morning fasting, and the other in the evening, taking care to cover
the sick creatures well whilst they are taking the medicine. This done, there
will be no need to fear returns of the disorder, sometimes by so much the more
fatal, as it afterward appears on other parts, and in a different form: as
experience has shown. It is moreover necessary that the diseased be perfectly
cured, that both sound and sick be well curried, and that their mouths be
examined several times a day to be assured of the situation the beast is in;
for this gangrene does not show itself by any other external sign."

The smallpox is, next to the plague, the most dangerous of all the contagious
diseases to which sheep are liable. I shall here distinguish it only into the
distinct and the confluent kinds. The distinct, or mild, stands very little in
need of medicines: it may, and indeed should, be left to nature. The confluent,
on the other hand, requires the greatest attention. Whatever the cause of this
disease may be, look upon the expulsion of the matter, and the suppuration and
drying of the pustules, as the natural progress of it. There must then be an
eruption: but sometimes the eruption is imperfect, comes on with difficulty, or
is even suppressed; and at other times is so great as to endanger the life of
the animal. It therefore is plain that this disease should not always be
treated in the same manner; for sometimes cordials may be requisite in order to
support a too feeble eruption, and cooling medicines may be necessary to check
a too-high inflammatory fever. If therefore, the fever appears high, blood must
be taken from the jugular, and this must be repeated, because not above two or
three ounces can be got from the jugular of a sheep at one time. This operation
was found to give great relief to the sheep before spoken of at Beauvais. It
sometimes lessens the number of pimples; but those which remain become larger,
and suppurate more kindly. Two drams of saltpeter mixed with honey are given
every day to each sick animal, and for drink warm water rendered gratefully
acid with vinegar or spirit of vitriol; nor should the seton be forgotten here.
If the pimples are of a violet or purple color, they indicate a gangrene, or
at least a disposition toward it. In this case, a dram of Peruvian bark, half
a dram of sal-prunel, and eight grains of camphire, mixed up with honey, should
be given two or three times a day. Some sheep thus affected, and which had been
given up as lost, were recovered by the use of these medicines. They must be
kept within doors, especially in the winter.

If the sheep are weak, and the eruption feeble, not only bleeding should be
avoided, but sueh medicines should be given as will incline the matter to the
(...) of the skin; such, for example, as a dram o^ vipers in powder in a
decoction of contrayerva-root. A blister may be put on the neck after clearing
it entirely of wool. This blister should be made of cantharides and a little
vinegar mixed with leaven. It is commonly left on for a long while, because the
flies do not easily affect the skin of sheep. One might even use from time to
time a decoction of the sudorific woods; for the common drink of the sheep in
this condition should be water in which sea salt has been dissolved.

When the pimples appear again, the eruption is kept up by giving every day
half an ounce of flower of brimstone, with as much laurel-berries in powder,
mixed with bran. This should be continued till the pimples begin to suppurate;
after which the sulphur and laurel-berries should be suppressed, but their
drink should still continue to be water rendered diuretic by the mixture of
sea salt. The discharge from the nose should be encouraged, by washing it with
a decoction of tobacco, and blowing up the nostrils hellebore and betony in
powder: for though a great discharge from the nose is a bad symptom, as it
always indicates much putrefaction; yet a free discharge from thence is
beneficial, just as a plentiful spitting is to mankind.

As soon as the pimples become dry, it is highly proper to purge the sheep with
half an ounce of assafoetida in powder, mixed with bran, to prevent a
translation of matter on the eyes or breast, which otherwise happens frequently.

In a village called Les Echerres, about three leagues from Lions, one half of
a flock of sheep was seized with the smallpox: the sound half was immediately
separated from the infected; but though all communication between them was cut
off, the disease broke out in some of those which had been deemed sound, and
those infected ones were returned back to the sick. Endeavors were used to
ward off the infection by properly fumigating the sheep-cotes, and clearing
them of every ordure or other thing that could communicate or continue the
infection.

Blisters were immediately applied to the inside of the thighs of most of the
infected sheep; whether the smallpox was of the distinct or of the confluent
kind; and in the others, instead of the blister, a seton was cut. The
suppuration was soon established by the one and the other of these means, and
the effects which they produced were sensibly advantageous. The former of these
creatures were not lest wholly to nature; but she was assisted when necessary
by decoctions of juniper berries, or by decoctions of saffron in the proportion
of a quarter of an ounce to a pound of water: and these remedies were given
through a horn. In the confluent kind, recourse was had to the Peruvian bark,
which is known to prevent and even to cure gangrenes. It is a medicine which
promotes a favorable suppuration. Half an ounce of roots of swallow-wort was
boiled in a pound of water; and in the strained liquor was put a dram of
Peruvian bark in powder: it was then boiled up again, and the sediment was
given with a horn every morning and evening: by way of precaution, ten grains
of salt of wormwood were added to each draught, in order to give the more
activity to the bark.

Camphire was tried on other sheep which had the confluent smallpox. Thirty
grains of it were rubbed into the yolk of an egg, then mixed with a dose of the
foregoing decoction, and given with a horn morning and evening.

When the disease fell on the eyes, the following collyrium was used.

Take two handfuls of quince leaves, two drams of rind of pomegranate, one dram
of seeds of sumach, infuse them for some hours in a pound of warm water, then
give it a slight boiling, filtre it, and, after having added to eight ounces of
this decoction two grains of camphire and eight grains of saffron, foment the
eyes of the creature with it.

Emollient glysters were given occasionally, and purges toward the close of
the disease. This practice was attended with so much success, that out of
twenty-two sheep which were seized with the disorder, only one died.

M. Hastfer treats this disease in a manner very different from the above
related. He attributes it to a too great quantity of humors, and prescribes
only dry, sweating medicines, salt, lovage, rupatorium, some grains of civet,
and all in a dry form: and, what is still more, he forbids giving any drink to
the sheep whilst they are sick. This method may succeed in Sweden, a cold
country, in which the perspiration is but little, the plants more watery, and
the blood more serous: but surely such treatment would not answer in Languedoc,
Provence, or any other warm climate, where the food is drier, and carries less
moisture into the blood. Regard should always be had to the country and
climate, in the treatment of every disorder, whether epidemic or other. The
situation of Naples, bordering on the sea, in the naighbourhood of a vulcano,
in a country which abounds with sulphur; that of Rome, in a champain country,
washed by a river whose waters having but little descent, move slowly, are very
different from that of Paris or Lions, cities more inland, and in a colder
climate. This difference in situation and climate must occasion a difference in
the nature of diseases, and consequently should do the same in the method of
treating them.

It is not less necessary to know how to guard against the contagious
distempers of cattle, than it is to be acquainted with their natures, and a
successful method of cure. To prevent a contagious distemper, the creatures
exposed to it must be preserved from the influence of the cause, or the cause
itself should be corrected. When the contagion is the effect of the
constitution of the atmosphere, it is very difficult to preserve animals from
its influence; for being continually exposed to its immediate contact, they
breathe it, it enters with the food into the stomach and intestines, it
penetrates into the substance of the lungs, and in each of these places it
communicates its noxious quality. It has, however, been found by experiment,
that the constitution of the air may may be changed for the better. We are told
of what advantage the fires which Hippocrates ordered to be made were in the
plague. Levinus Lemnius (Lib. II. de occult. Not. Mirac. cap. 10.) says that
the garrison of Tournai kept the plague off from that city by firing so many
cannons and burning so much gunpowder that the air was totally changed
thereby, and the city preserved from that dreadful scourge. In fact, nothing is
fitter to correct the bad qualities of a putrid air than that excellent
antiseptic, the sulphurous and nitrous acid set at liberty by the deflagration
of gunpowder. It would therefore be advisable to burn sulphur and nitre in
the buildings where the animals are lodged, or to cause vinegar to be boiled in
them till it is totally evaporated. Juniper Berries, myrrh, olibanum,
assa-foetida, may also be burnt in them; but these last fumigations should be
used only in the winter, nor are they at any time so efficacious as the acids.
The habitations of the cattle should be kept as clean as possible, their walls
should be white-washed, or washed with vinegar, the litter in them should be
frequently renewed, their doors or windows on the north side should be opened,
and those on the side from whence the infectious air proceeds, should be kept
shut, as advised by Varro.

The bad effects of air may also be prevented as follows. If the constitution
of the air tends to produce inflammatory diseases, it is proper to bleed the
creatures exposed to it, to give them from time to time acidulated drinks, to
prevent their being exposed to great heats, not to put them to hard labor, to
take care that they do not pass suddenly from a hot to a cold place, and that
they do not drink too-cold water when they are heated. If, on the contrary, the
constitution tends to produce putrid diseases, it would be proper to purge them
with crocus metallorum, or assafoetida, or roots of briony, or with
assarabacca, to give them acidulated antiseptic drinks, and to rub them often,
as well to free them from infectious particles which may adhere to the hair,
and penetrate the skin, as to increase the perspiration; for it is not to be
conceived how many disorders arise from a suppression of perspiration, and how
salutary it is to keep the perspiration clear.

When the contagious diseases of animals arise from the bad quality of their
food, it is certainly in our power, in a great measure, to prevent them. All
plants prejudicial to the health of cattle should be rooted out of every
pasture; which is easily done with a spade, when the plants are in bloom; for
if they are then cut through beneath the surface of the ground, and the clod is
again replaced, the remaining root will perish, and thus the whole pasture may
in time be cleared of them. Artificial grasses may be sown instead of the
natural. The world is now acquainted with the benefits which arise from such
grasses, both in regard to their quantity and their quality. Lucerne, sainfoin,
and (...) known to be very wholesome and very nourishing. As they grow to a
pretty good height, the effects of a mildew or blight may be prevented in them,
which cannot be done in plants that creep along the surface of the ground. Thus
it is a common practice, when corn is mildewed, for two men, holding each of
them the end of a rope, and being as far asunder as the length of the rope will
permit, to run along the fields of corn: the rope either shakes off the vermin
which occasion the blight, or makes the mildew fall off by the shaking of the
corn, which afterward recovers itself. If this method does not prove effectual
when used on artificial grasses, the owner should not hesitate to cut down the
pasture, burn what is infected, and endeavor to procure a fresh healthy
growth. At all events, cattle should not be suffered to feed on infected grass
of any kind, nor even in the field where that grass was, till a new growth has
arisen.

Cattle should not be suffered to drink putrid standing water, especially in an
infected season: for, as was before observed, the water which was exposed to
the air during the plague of London, became covered with a blue pellicle, which
mixed with bread and given to a dog, made the creature die mad. Such a pellicle
may adhere to all standing waters, and will be more or less dangerous,
according as the air is more or less infected, and the water is more or less
loaded with putrid substances.

As water is an indispensably necessary article of food, every had quality in
it is the more dangerous, and the means of correcting them are the more
requisite and valuable. In order to attain this desirable end, a very simple,
easy method was tried before the laudable Society for the Encouragement of the
Arts, etc. at London, with the wished-for success. It was found that clay,
mixed in putrid (...), to such a degree as to take off the transp^^^ncy of the
water, so that a hand h^ld under its surface, could not be seen through it,
soon settles to the bottom if suffered to stand still, and carries down with it
all such vegetable or animal putrid substances as are mixed with the water.
These substances, kept asunder, and buried as it were in the clay, cease to
putrify, and the water remains perfectly clear for a long time. It is almost
needless to observe, that if there are any living insects in the water, they
should be separated from it, by running the water through something which shall
keep back those insects, or their brood, which may be too bulky to be carried
down and buried in the clay. If the putrefaction be great before these means
are used, a disagreeable stench may still attend the water, though it appear
clear. The Rev. Dr. Hales, that friend of mankind, has taught us to get rid of
this by ventilating the water, that is, by forcing through it air, which
carries off the remaining putrid taint. If any object to the trouble of
preparing in this manner a sufficiency of water for a whole herd of cattle; all
the answer that such deserve is, that if they think the health of men and of
beasts not worth this trouble, it is in their power, they and their cattle, to
crawl slowly, but certainly, to the grave. Even amongst mankind, many of the
usual autumnal epidemic diseases might be prevented by this easy method: for
the bad water which is drank at that season gives rise to many disorders in the
bowels, as well as to fevers of various kinds.

If clay cannot be had, it is advisable to shake the water well, or have it
tossed about by oars, before it is given as drink. Thus it is that people on
board of ship render their corrupted water less unhealthy by beating it; by
which means the impurities in it fall to the bottom of the casks. Mr. Boil
having taken some water which had gone a long voyage, beat it frequently; by
which means all its impurities subsided, and it became perfectly pure and
wholesome. Where sweet water is wanting, a well should be dug.

If a contagious disease has unhappily seized a herd or flock, every means
possible should be used to prevent its spreading. The first care to be taken
is, to cut off all communication between the sound and sick. Cattle collect the
grass with their tongue before they bite it; by that means some of their saliva
necessarily adheres to the grass which remains, and if they are distempered,
the grass is of course infected; and other cattle which feed on it catch the
contagion. Again, cattle are fond of licking one another; and as their tongues
are rough, there sticks to them a great deal of hair, which afterward forms in
their stomachs balls called egagropiles, which incommode them much when they
become of a considerable size: but this is not yet the greatest evil. The
perspiration is vitiated in infected animals, and their hair falls off easily:
the infection adhering to the hair thus licked off by a sound animal, becomes
an infection to this last, and thus it may be spread to many. The herds should
therefore be frequently visited, in order that every creature of which there is
the least suspicion may be separated from the sound, which last must no longer
feed on the same pasture, nor drink of the same water with the former: even the
cribs, trays, tubs, or any other thing made use of for the sick, must not be
brought near the sound, at least till they have been washed well with
limewater or vinegar, and afterward fumigated. The persons who attend the
sick cattle should not approach the sound ones before they have washed
themselves, and changed their garments, which, in this case, should be of flax
or hemp, and not of woollen; because wool imbibes the contagion, retains it,
and readily communicates it.

On the above principle it was that Lancisi proposed to a congregation of
Cardinals, during the aforementioned plague which made such havoc in Italy,
to kill not only all the cattle that were manifestly infected, but even all
those that there was but the least room to suspect of being infected. This
advice was rejected after a long debate, and it was too soon experienced how
much wiser and more prudent it would have been to follow it. A proof of this
soon resulted from the town of Capravola. Five bullocks there were suddenly
seized with the distemper; and after immediate strict inquiry it was found,
that a strange bullock had been introduced into the enclosure where all the
cattle belonging to the town were kept. The infected bullocks were immediately
killed, and the distemper ended there.

All those who took sufficient care to prevent the entrance of any infected
creature into their lands, not only about Rome and the ecclesiastical state,
but also in the territories of other princes, preserved their cattle. Such was
the effect of the vigilance of the princes Pamphili and Borghese, that, though
at the very gates of Rome, and in the province the most infected, all their
cattle escaped unhurt. The same care preserved the fields of Corneto, of the
patrimony of St. Peter, of Umbria, of Picenum, of the Flaminian province, of
Tuscany, and of Modena: and it is likewise by the same means that the convents
of nuns are generally preserved from the plague, when it unhappily attacks
mankind See Lancisi Opera, Tom. II. Genesis 1713. Dissert. Hist. de Bovilla peste.
. By a similar care the Temple was preserved from the plague, when it made such
havoc in London in 1666.

Too much care cannot be taken that the bodies of creatures which have died of
contagious diseases be buried deep, especially in warm and moist countries; not
only to prevent carnivorous animals from being infected, which may soon spread
the contagion, but also to avoid increasing the putrid exhalations with which
the air is already too much loaded. They were very near being fatal to the
French in Minorca. That island being a rock covered with very little earth, it
was not possible to bury the bullocks which died; they were thrown into the
harbor, with heavy weights tied to them: but notwithstanding this precaution,
the bodies soon rose up and floated on the surface of the water, which is
constantly the case as soon as an incipient putrefaction sets the fixed air in
the animals at liberty, and the bodies become specifically lighter than the
water. These bullocks infected the air of the port with a horrible stench,
which rendered sick many of the seamen who remained on board of the ships; and
though the carcases were towed out into the open sea, yet as the current
brought them frequently back, it was found that the only safe way was to burn
them.

Reflecting men observed, with much concern, that, during the contagious
distemper which prevailed from 1740 to 1750, the country people, in France in
particular, took very little care to prevent the spreading of the contagion.
They skinned their dead cattle, and kept the skins; an economy fatal to the
surviving cattle, and ruinous to their owners. None should be permitted to keep
such skins, unless they are immediately put into limewater, and steeped in it
for some time. The dung of diseased cattle does not require less attention,
because the infection is quickly communicated by it when it is left exposed to
the air. Every particle belonging to infected creatures should therefore be
immediately burnt, or buried very deep.

When one is obliged to make use of a building in which creatures infected had
formerly been, too much care cannot be taken to clean the floor, walls, roof,
and every other thing belonging to it, and also to sweeten the air: for it has
been observed, that healthy creatures have been seized with contagious diseases
by being put into buildings in which infected animals had been, even though
those buildings had not been used for a considerable time. Trincavel relates
(Lib. III. Consil. 17.) that ropes, which had been made use of to carry out
dead bodies in time of a plague, being taken out of a trunk in which they had
been lain twenty years, by a servant, he and ten thousand more died of the
plague. Sennert (Tom. II. p. 150) mentions a plague at Breslau, which was
communicated in 1553, by linen that had been locked up ever since 1542. Since
then the contagious virus will remain so long dormant, and yet retain all its
strength, too much care surely cannot be taken to purify the buildings into
which cattle are to be put. It is not enough to clean them and keep the doors
and windows open: every part of them should be well washed with lime water or
vinegar, fumigations should be burnt in them, and vinegar, or spirit of nitre,
should be boiled in them till totally evaporated.

By strictly attending to the above precautions, we may hope to prevent many
contagious distempers, to hinder their spreading, and even to cure, by means of
the few medicines here mentioned, considerable numbers of infected cattle.

Additional Observations on the Diseases of Cattle, and on their Cures; by the
Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris.
TOWARD the end of the year 1^62, a formidable disease attacked the cattle in
the parish of Mezieux, in the province of Dauphiny. The bullocks and cows were
chiefly affected by it: but few horses or mules felt it.

During the first twenty-fours hours the following symptoms appeared. A refusal
of all kinds of food whether solid or even liquid, a heaviness of the head,
hanging of the ears, watery eyes, rough and dull-looking hair, a costiveness
not to be got the better of, a painful swelling about the lower jaw and along
the neck, a pulse rather dull than frequent, a discharge of a frothy humor
from the mouth and nose of some. These symptoms continued for two, three, or
four days, at the end of which a great beating in the loins, and the feebleness
of the sick creature, foretold a speedy and inevitable death.

The farriers and country people bled them in the ears, gave them cordiais, and
administered drinks with a view to purging, but which contained nothing capable
of producing that effect. At length the progress and ravages made by the
disease determined the unhappy husbandman, on the point of being ruined, to
apply elsewhere for the help of which he felt how much he stood in need. More
intelligent persons sought in the dead bodies of the animals, that which the
ignorant and uninformed could not discover in them. A beginning of putrefaction
showed itself, by livid spots, in the hind part of the mouth, in all the
muscles of the pharynx and larynx (the gullet and windpipe) in the cellular
membrane which surrounds them, in the whole passage of the aesophagus, and in
the trachea arteria. In some bodies the cawl was affected, in some others the
intestines. In these last the spleen was greatly swelled; in the former,
neither the liver nor the lungs were in a natural state, and in all, the
digestion was depraved, as it usually is in all dangerous diseases; for the
paunch was filled with the food they had taken down before the disorder had
openly appeared in them. The red, and sometimes brown or even black color, the
swelling, the soft consistence of the parts about the throat in the greater
number of the dead, were the consequences of a violent inflammation, not of the
erisipelas or phlegmon-boil kind, for these would have excited a greater degree
of fever, and would have showed themselves with a more remarkable pain and
hardness; but of a latent inflammation, and a swelling caused by the want of
action in the parts; such, in short, as is found in malignant diseases. A
similar disorder happened at the same time in the town of Macon, where a
gangrenous quinsey carried off rapidly a prodigious number of people. This
swelling frequently extended itself to all the glands of the lower jaw and
about the neck and chest; thereby forming considerable tumors on the outside,
which in many creatures came to suppuration either naturally or by the help of
a^^* In some, the throat was not so dangerously affected; but tumors appeared
in all parts of the body indiscriminately. These were not the less looked upon
as critical deposits, and accidents which attended a disease owing to the same
cause, and of the same character. In effect, the same treatment, except so far
as the different deposits required a particular method of cure, preserving the
lives of fifty-three out of sixty-two; whilst out of forty-nine which were
treated in the common way, not one escaped.

The summer had been very hot, and the drought very great. The only pastures to
which the cattle could be led were bordering on a pond full of muddy, standing,
putrid water. The place nearest to this was a dry gravel, heated by the
scorching sun, and consequently a truly burning abode for the cattle, which
were there most part of the day. Thus the excessive heat of the season, the
indifference of the pasture, and chiefly the bad qualities of the water, were
the first causes of this disease: for all the juices being heated and rarefied,
there was necessarily a great loss of the most fluid and subtle parts of the
blood, and the corrupted state of their food gave the disorder a putrid turn.
The hind part of the mouth, the larynx and pharynx affording a continual
passage to very hot air, and the mucus which should naturally moisten them
being less, owing (...) blood's being deprived of it, or to the (...) being
dried up, the whole became (...) ^usceptible of inflammation. Add to this the
(...) qualities of their food, and we shall not wonder that the inflammation
degenerated into a quinsey truly gangrenous.

What in all similar fatal cases should be first attended to, became here the
first object of our care. All communication was cut off between the sound and
the sick: for the surest way to avoid the plague is to fly from it. The cattle
which had hitherto escaped were therefore taken out of the infected houses,
after having been strongly rubbed with wisps of straw previously fumigated with
thyme, rosemary, sage, and other aromatic plants, on which a small quantity of
vinegar was cast while they were burning. The buildings into which they were
put were cleaned of whatever dung was in them, and fumigated with juniper and
bay berries bruised and steeped in wine-vinegar and burnt on live coals: others
were fumigated with only the fumes of vinegar. The diseased cattle were
afterward carefully confined within the limits in which the disorder unhappily
reigned; thereby to prevent its spreading. The same precautions that were taken
with regard to the sound cattle, were extended to all in general, to the extent
of the boundaries of the village: all were bled again in the jugular vein, and
by means of that evacuation, by rendering all their drink lightly acidulated,
by diminishing the quantity of their food, by not sending them too soon to
grass, by not suffering them to remain too long in the heat, and not to be out
at all in the night; and lastly, by giving them sweet water to drink, above
three hundred bullocks and cows were entirely preserved from this infection,
which never went beyond the limits first set to it.

The sound cattle being thus taken care of, the infected were treated as
follow: the buildings were cleaned and fumigated with the same care as for the
others; the necessity of renewing the air became indispensible. The buildings
were in general very injudiciously constructed, low and not airy. The constant
respiration and perspiration of the animals that were in them soon deprived the
air of its vivifying principle, and those animal particles soon putrefied. From
both these causes, the original tendency to putrefaction was much accelerated.
Lofty buildings were therefore prepared for the sick, and they were kept well
aired by windows which admitted a constant supply of fresh air at the same time
that they carried off the bad.

The inexpressible advantages arising to mankind from that attention which the
Rev. Dr. Hales excited to the preserving of the air sweet, especially where
there are sick, or numbers assembled together, calls upon us in this place to
pay him that tribute of praise which his unbounded beneficence deserves. A
window in each end of such buildings, and as near to the root as can be, is, in
this case, very useful; because the one admits fresh air, while the other
discharges the noxious air; and this without cooling or altering the
temperature of the air near the sick.

Ma^^ of these sick cattle were bled in the jugular; but that was only once,
and in the very beginning of the disorder. Care was taken not to perform this
operation after the signs of putrefaction had appeared. Water whitened with
bran was their only nourishment. An ounce of crystal mineral was added to a
pailful of this water, for some; and for others the water was acidulated with
vinegar, which was preferred to every other acid. Cooling glysters were not
forgotten. Two of them were given daily to each of the sick animals. They were
composed of leaves of mallows, of pellitory of the wall, and of mercury, of
each two handfuls, boiled in five pounds of common water to a consumption of
one fourth. Two ounces of common honey, as much oil of olives, and one ounce of
crystal mineral were added to this when strained off.

Injections were also thrown up the mouth and nose two or three times a day.
These were composed of the leaves of plantain, briar and agrimony, of each a
handful, boiled half an hour in four pounds of common water, to which were
added, when strained off, two drams of sal-ammoniac; and sometimes in place of
this salt, two ounces of oxymel squills were mixed with this liquor. The liquor
thrown by a large syringe into the nose, descended into the back part of the
mouth, and moistened and washed all its parts. It was the more necessary that
these parts should be well cleaned, because they generally were the parts most
affected. The creatures were likewise from time to time made to snuff up the
volatile spirit of sal-ammoniac, and doubtless the volatile fumes penetrating
into the live parts, stimulated them, and excited in them a motion, by the help
of which the diseased parts exfoliated or cast off in white filaments.

The tumors which appeared externally were suppurated as speedily as possible.
The ripening poultice or cataplasm used for this purpose was made of leaven
with one third of basilicon. When this was thought insufficient, another was
substituted in its place, made with six bulbs of lilies roasted under the ashes
of a wood fire, four ounces of white lily roots, and four handfuls of sorrel
boiled in four pounds of common water, and afterward bruised in a mortar. Two
ounces of hog's lard, and a like quantity of common honey, old grease and
basilicon were mixed with them; and lastly, according to the circumstances,
half an ounce of galbanum dissolved in wine, and an equal quantity of gum
ammoniac in powder were added. As soon as a fluctuation was felt in these
tumors, they were opened with a knife or caustic, but most frequently with the
actual cautery, to excite a more plentiful suppuration by giving the greater
stimulus to the vessels. If it was not possible to open all the tumors
externally, one or two glysters were immediately injected, in order to prepare
the way for a purging drench, lest the matter being absorbed into the blood,
might add to the already too-putrid disposition of the blood. The purging
potion was composed of an ounce of the leaves of senna infused for three hours
in a pound of boiling water; and in this liquor, when strained off, an ounce of
bruised succotrine aloes was infused all night over hot ashes, and given to the
animal warm in the morning out of a horn. This was repeated as occasion
required, till the symptoms disappeared: and then the creatures were gradually
brought back to their usual wholesome food.

One of the diseases which made the greatest havoc, was that which, in the
year 1763, left scarcely any cattle alive in the district of Brouage in the
election of Marennes, in the generality of Rochelle. The accurate account given
of it by M. Nicolau, M. D. on the eleventh of September, 1763, is so full of
instruction, that it ought not to be omitted here.

"The parishes in which the distemper among the cattle exert its greatest fury,
are situated on the borders of a low country, in extent about three leagues. It
was formerly laid out in salt pits; but the communication with the sea has been
since cut off, and the sea now comes no farther than the town of Brouage. The
whole remains in the uneven state it was in when employed for making salt; and
the hollows and risings still retain all the appellations then given them* Some
of the hollows have been in time imperfectly filled up, and others remain in
nearly their former state. They are filled with water in rainy seasons,
especially during the winter; and the water, not having any outlet, stagnates
till the sun and heat of the summer have evaporated it. The deepest, which
seldom dry entirely, form so many pools full of aquatic plants, and,
notwithstanding that, are made to serve as watering places for the cattle. The
whole forms a vast slimy, marshy meadow, in which are fed numbers of cattle
intended for the butcher, and for the farmer's work. It is the loss of these
which has in part occasioned the misery of the inhabitants of that place.

"These receptacles of mire spread far around foetid exhalations which infect
the atmosphere, and render the inhabitants subject to intermitting putrid
malignant fevers toward the end of the summer. The disagreeable smell is
particularly felt at sunrise in good weather.

"During the spring and summer of this year, 1763, the rains have been almost
incessant, and the weather constantly cool. In the greatest heat, Reaumur's
thermometer, in a room facing the north, did not exceed 18 or 19 degrees (from
64 to 68 of Fahrenheit's). On the 3d of July we had a storm, accompanied with
hail of an uncommon size, which in many places destroyed every kind of crop,
and did considerable damage to the buildings. Most of the large cattle which
the disease has carried off were exposed to this storm, and felt all its
violence; but the sheep and swine, to whom the distemper proves equally fatal,
were under shelter. Besides, the mortality had begun before.

"There was great plenty of grass, owing to the constant rains; but these have
prevented its being made into hay. Great part of it perished without being cut,
or rotted after it was cut. The cattle were exposed night and day to the
inclemency of the season. All the fruits both of the summer and the autumn have
failed, and the trees are now (Sept. the 11th) in bloom, as in the spring.

"The grasses which grew in this place did not appear to me to be unwholesome
for cattle; and even if there were any such, the principal cause of the
contagion ought not to be imputed to them, since the sheep which fed elsewhere,
and some horses which lived on dry hay, were equally affected, as well as the
swine which did not feed on it.

"The mortality spreads to the other domestic animals, without excepting even
the poultry The Royal Society of Paris observe here, that the distemper of
which the poultry died in the abovementioned village, may perhaps not have
been the same as that which killed the cattle, nor p^^duced by the same causes;
for that the mortality amongst fowls was pretty general every where, and seemed
to have been the (...) of a great inflammation on the breast, like that which
affected the dogs.
, which perished in a hamlet of St. Symphorian. Yet, however epidemic the
disorder is, there is room to think it not contagious. Numbers of dogs died in
several parishes, which had eaten of the flesh of the diseased cattle; but
others which had not eaten of it died likewise, and some continued to eat daily
of it without being incommoded.

"In the month of May last (viz. in 1763) some complaints appeared on the
tongues of the horned cattle in a few contiguous parishes; but that was only a
false alarm, for the complaints went off without doing any mischief. In June,
and in the beginning of July, the reigning distemper showed itself among the
sheep, and has committed such havoc as not to leave one of them in some
places; and in others, the few that do remain are abandoned by their shepherds
and left to die, literally speaking, like rotten sheep, without any care being
taken of them.

"The mortality among the horned cattle, horses and other animals, has been
fatal principally to two parishes since the end of July. It now spreads on all
sides, though with less havoc in some places than in others.

"The first symptoms observed in them was their abstaining from food. I do not
mean to say, that no other symptoms precede this; but the keepers of the herds,
little experienced in, and as little attentive to, such objects, do not
distinguish them. This prelude awakens attention. The creatures are observed to
be melancholy, to hang their heads, to have cold and drooping ears, rough hair
without its usual luster, loins fallen and beating, the belly hard and full,
the whole body wreathed and seeming to be disposed to make efforts to urine.
The urine which they void is often as clear as water; it is seldom that any
thing passes by stool, and chewing of the cud ceases in the horned cattle. In a
few hours after, if no tumors appear on the surface of the body, they are
seized with a shivering, their eyes become dull and watery, a tough s^ivel
issues from the mouth and nose, they lie down and die quietly, or are more or
less convulsed. In this extremity they stretch their heads out frequently, pant
for breath, fetch long sighs, and sometimes too they cough. These symptoms
often come on so rapidly, that the creature dies before they have been seen:
many bullocks have dropped down dead under the yoke. The quicker the succession
of these symptoms is, the greater i^ the danger. A violent shivering is always
fatal. When the symptoms come on more gradually, there commonly is no
shivering, but if there be, the danger is in proportion to its violence and
duration. It sometimes happens that tumors appear indifferently in all parts
of the surface of the body. They sometimes remain fixed in the part where they
first appeared; at other times they disappear, to show themselves elsewhere; if
they vanish entirely, the creature dies; if, on the contrary, they increase in
number, and on the parts least essential to life, whilst the creature still
retains its (...) there is room to hope for a recovery. Daily ^^perience begins
to prove, that the cure depends essentially on the character of these tumour^
(...) approaching the nearest to a phlegmon, and on their good issue.

"The tumors are not of the inflammatory kind. They seem first of all to
affect the muscles. The part affected feels hard, without being much swelled.
Soon after a humor insinuates itself into the cellular membrane around, which
relaxes the fibers steeped in it, enervates them, and raises a lump in the
skin. If it is not immediately discharged by an opening, its stay produces a
gangrene which soon spreads farther; or if the humor falls on any of the
bowels necessary to life, the creature dies before the gangrene has made much
progress. These tumors are flabby, and yield only a thin, reddish sanies. If a
suppuration comes on, all does well, the creature recovers strength, and
appetite to eat. If, on the contrary, there is only a thin discharge without
suppuration, the cure goes on but slowly, the creature languishes and sinks,
till by the falling off of all the gangrened sloughs, the wound appears well
colored, and the cattle themselves lick it with their tongues in order to heal
it.

"The gangrene which succeeds this tumor is of a very particular kind. The
cellular membrane and the flesh seem to be rather mace^^^^d than rotten. They
look of a pale color, inclined to livid; and though their fibers seem
dis^^niting, they retain a pretty firm consistence: (...) the slough which
casts off before the cure, is black, foetid, and quite mortified. If the
tumors continue long in a lax flaccid state, there is great dan^er of the
matter's being reassumed into the blood, and consequently of its falling the
more violently on some other part. This happened to several creatures of
different kinds. They died, either because the discharge was interrupted, or
because it came out but imperfectly. The more sensible the diseased flesh is,
the greater is the room to hope for a cure; and the more insensible it is, the
greater is the danger.

"When the tumors, from being flat, as they are at first, rise higher into a
round circumscribed form, becoming at the same time more firm and elastic, it
is a sure sign that nature is getting the better of the disease, by changing
that thin discharge into a tumor of the inflammatory kind; which being in a
convenient place, always ends well. The weakness and faintness soon change for
the better when these favorable signs appear. The flies of every kind, which,
attracted by the smell of the sickness, settle on diseased creatures in greater
numbers in proportion to their weakness and inability to shake them off, leave
them likewise in proportion as their strength returns. A liveliness and desire
of eating succeed their former dull state.

"The humor contained in these tumors, shows itself sometimes from the very
beginning to be of great acrimony, almost caustic. M Drouhet, surgeon at Point
l'Abbe, has observed, that having opened one of these tumors on the inner and
upper part of the thigh of a bulloek, the humor discharged from it stripped
off the hair in twenty-four hours, as if the part had been steeped in boiling
water. The bare skin appeared very red and inflamed. The tumors which show
themselves on the breast of a horse are the most dangerous; and on the contrary
those which are formed in the part corresponding to that which is called the
dew-lap in a bullock, are the least dangerous. Those which come in the muzzle,
mouth, or fundament of any creature, prognosticate the worst of events. It is
in this last case in particular, that the creature, either whilst dying or when
dead, bleeds at the mouth, or nose, or fundament, and sometimes at all of these
together.

"One of the symptoms most commonly met with on the opening the dead bodies, is
a want of digestion. The whole intestinal canal is generally empty, while the
stomachs are full, and as it where crammed with grass, which is more or less
hard in the third stomach of animals which chew the cud. This happens though
they have ceased to eat for several days before their death; and even when a
sudden death takes them off before they have discontinued to eat.

"The blood taken from the sick creatures coagulates readily, and is soon
covered with a thick hard crust, of a whitish color, a little inclining to
yellow. Bleeding, when properly timed, has had sensibly good effects; but when
done at an improper time, the consequences have always been fatal. Most of the
drenches hitherto given have seemed to hasten death, according to the report of
those who have made the greatest use of them.

"Though the causes of epidemic diseases are seldom known, yet I think we may
impute the disorder here spok^n of to the too long continued moisture of the
air, owing to constant rains, fogs, and storms, which have not ceased during
the whole of this year (1763)* To this may be added, that the moisture, which
had penetrated deep into the earth, may, rising again, have spread in the air
uncommon exhalations, which may likewise have greatly affected the animal
economy. But as disquisitions of this kind lead little to the cure, I shall
not dwell any longer on them.

"This epidemic disease has so great a resemblance with what we call in man, a
putrid malignant, purple and pestilential fever, that I do not scruple to give
it these names in other animals. So much is it of the same stamp, that I met
with three men in the country, on whom the anthrax or true pestilential bubo
had appeared; probably owing to their being so much among the infected cattle.
Though, for want of judicious observers among those who watch over the brute
creation, we have not a regular account of the first symptoms by which the
approach of the disease might be determined; yet, from the symptoms
abovementioned, there were evident signs of an inflammation in the beginning,
as will appear to every intelligent reader, from the recapitulation of them
here made. The violence of the fever, and the concomitant putrid disposition of
the air, and also of the infection communicated, soon brought on a putrid state
of all the fluids, as appears no less dently from the symptoms already
mentioned.

"During the course of my inquiries, I found but one peasant who could give any
account of the pulse. This man, examining whether any tumor yet remained in a
cow, put his hand between the upper part of the fore-leg and the breast, and
felt a frequent and strong pulsation of the artery, which answers to the
axillary in men. The animal was then feeding; but it soon lost all desire to
eat, was thereupon judged to be distempered, and died speedily after.

"The pulsation of the arteries is easily felt in most cattle, and particularly
that of the temporal, the axillary, and the crural. The carotid artery in a
horse is frequently perceivable by the eye, in that part where the neck joins
to the breast; and the artery may likewise be felt in that part of the leg of a
horse which answers to the ankle in man; and the crural artery is easily felt
in sheep.

"The excellent Dr. Hales, who let no inquiry escape him which he thought might
be of use, has given, in his Haemostatics, the number of pulsations which the
arteries of different animals make in a minute. He counted forty-two in a
minute in a horse full grown and at rest; sixty-five in a very young colt;
fifty-five in a colt three years old; forty-eight in a horse five years old,
but a native of Limoges, and consequently of a country where these animals are
very backward; thirty-two in an old horse; and fifty-five, sixty, and even up
to an hundred in a horse whose crural artery was cut on purpose for
instruction. The pulse was more frequent as the horse approached its end. In
full grown mares he counted from thirty-four to thirty-six; which proves that
the pulse is less frequent in the females than in the males, in brutes This
observation may be true with regard to brutes, but we think it is otherwise in
wom^n.
. The arteries of bullocks and cows beat nearly the same as those of horses and
mares. In sheep, they beat about sixty times in a minute; in dogs, about
ninety-seven times. It is, however, to be observed, that the pulse is far from
being uniformly the same in each species, nor even in the same animal, at all
times; the frequency of pulsation frequently depending on many circumstances,
such as rest, food, as well as the degree of health. The frequency of the pulse
in the different species of animals may be said to be in proportion to their
size, slowest in the largest animals, and quicker as they become less.

"In the beginning of the diseases, the advice judiciously given by the Royal
Veterinarian School at Lions should be allowed. Bleeding, a spare diet,
acidulated and nitrous drinks, and emollient loosening glysters, will be of
great service. These means may mitigate the symptoms, check the progress of the
disorder, and thereby procure time to place proper remedies fit to prevent that
feebleness and great degree of putrefaction which are so much to be feared. The
use of the former medicines is therefore to be followed, by giving liquors
which stimulate, and yet are not too acrid; and by administering cordials and
such medicines as prevent the gangrenous disposition. Emetics and purgatives
are, in this case, given to men; but the structure of the stomachs of cattle
render the use of vomits impossible with them; and they are so hard to move by
purgatives, that these become dangerous from their stimulating too much. Other
animals whose stomachs will admit of vomiting, such as dogs and swine, have
been cured with the help of vomits.

"The putrid and acrid quality of the humors which are contained in the
tumors, requires their being opened as soon and as fast as they appear, be
they ever so many. The longer the opening is delayed, the more the humors are
corrupted. It is likewise right to draw the humor to places the least
dangerous, by applying ^^uteries, or making setons in them, though there is not
any humor in them. The parts should at the same time be strengthened by
fomentations, such as a decoction of scordium, made in wine and sharpened by
the addition of sea salt, or sal-ammoniac. The wound should be dressed with a
suppurating medicine, covered over with some plant more or less acrid,
according as it seems necessary to promote a greater flow of humors, or only
favor the discharge of them. Lousewort, black hellebore, root of iris, etc.
answer this purpose. When the wound becomes clear, it requires no other
dressing than lint and a proper digestive or turpentine.

"By means of this easy and plain method, people, little accustomed to the care
of cattle, have preserved the lives of many; and it is to be lamented, that we
have not in our country places more expert farriers, capable of carrying on a
regular method: for by that still more might be saved.

"The cattle never appeared fatter nor in better condition than they are this
year (1763); and the disease has seemed chiefly to attack the finest and
plumpest: no wonder that their owners are grieved to see them die."

M. Nicolau next gives an account of what was observed in the dead bodies.

"On the 23d of August, 1763, a bullock died at about four o'clock in the
afternoon, after having been slightly convulsed. His body was not swelled, nor
did the disease appear by any external mark. Being opened immediately after
death, the flesh appeared sound, without any offensive smell. After having cut
the sternum and pleura, a small quantity of wind escaped, not at all foetid;
and the mediastinum, pleura, diaphragm, heart and lungs, were in their natural
state. When these viscera were removed, some blood was spilt, which was not
coagulated, but in a dissolved state. The lungs had some hydatides on the
surface, filled with a thin serum. Otherwise nothing extraordinary appeared
either externally or internally. The tongue, mouth, and aesophagus appeared
sound. In the abdomen, the cawl was sound. The spleen had some gangrenous spots
upon the part which touches the stomach. The bile was thin, and of a somewhat
paler color than is natural. The stomach and intestines having been torn,
through the unskilfulness of the farrier, it was not possible to examine them
with sufficient exactness. However, the abomafus appeared entirely sphacelated,
and the villous membrane fell off so easily, that parts of it were mixed with
the food, and others lay upon it.

"A cow was observed to be sick on the 22d of August, and in the evening of the
23d we were informed that she was dying. As we were going toward her, in order
to examine her, she mounted very quickly upon a high heap of dung, where she
fell, and died in violent convulsions at about seven in the evening, emitting a
thick slimy matter from her mouth and nose. We opened her at eight in the
morning of the 24th. Her belly was swelled, owing partly to her being big with
young, and partly to wind contained in the peritoneum. No foetid smell came
from her, nor did any thing uncommon appear on the surface of her body.

"The skin being cut off, the cellula^ membrane appeared sound. The milk which
issued from her udder was white, of a due consistence, and clear. The head and
breast were in their natural state; but the blood, which flowed plentifully
from the large vessels, was in a dissolved state, no where coagulated. A small
quantity of wind, not s^^^king, issued from the breast and belly. The stomachs
were distended; and all of them were full of grass, except the abomasus, which
contained a small quantity of a muddy dark-colored liquor. In general, the
grass contained in the other stomachs was not so dry nor so much chewed as in
the bullock; yet it seemed sufficiently so to render the digestion extremely
difficult. All the stomachs were deprived of the wrinkled membrane which covers
their inside. This membrane lay upon the food, and was partly mixed with it.
Also several parts of the coat of the third stomach were destroyed, looked
black and fell in rags on the least touch. The intestines were quite empty and
inflamed, as was also the mesentery. The intestines were likewise deprived of
their inner villous coat, and in many places so sphacelated, that they fell to
pieces on the least touch. Part of the cawl was in the same state, whilst the
rest of it appeared sound. The bladder, the womb, the foetus, and its covering,
and all the rest of the flesh looked well, and had no bad smell; and what is
remarkable, the corrupted parts had not a very bad smell.

"On the 28th and 29th of August, a horse was observed to be sick. The first
thing that appeared was a tumor on the left side of the breast, from whence it
soon extended over all the lower part of the neck. A farrier, in my presence,
destroyed the skin to the flesh with a red-hot iron. The horse showed no sign
of feeling this operation; though he was at the same time sensible of the bites
of flies in other parts of his body. There was no discharge from the wound, and
he died at about five in the afternoon of the 31st. We opened him early the
next morning. He stunk, and his belly was swelled. On the opening, a quantity
of very stinking air issued out: all the bowels were in their natural state,
excepting some traces of inflammation. The stomach only was full of hay, though
the creature had not eaten for three days before his death. The intestines were
empty. The pericardium contained a great quantity of lymph a little bloody, in
which the heart seemed drowned; its basis was drenched, loose, and as if
macerated in it. All the forepart of the neck from the breast to the jaw, that
is to say, all the tumor, appeared under the skin to be only a mass of fibers,
some white, others livid, all macerated and drenched in a mucilaginous lymph,
resembling a discharge from the nose, a little tinged with blood. The flesh all
around was likewise very moist and livid; but elsewhere it was sound.

"A sheep, yet warm, was found on the 2d of September. The skin between the
legs, where it is not covered with wool, was speckled with red and purple
spots. There was under its throat, between the two branches of the lower jaw, a
tumor bigger than one's fist; and, upon opening it, there issued out a great
deal of tawney serum, with which all the cellular membrane around, under the
skin and between the muscles, was filled. It reached as far as the base of the
brain, which was likewise steeped in it. There appeared no sign of gangrene
elsewhere. The rest of the body was sound, both within and without, excepting
that the intestines were empty. The three last stomachs were not too full; but
the omasus, or first stomach, contained a great deal of grass. The liver had in
it some old schirruses, which seemed not to have any relation with the disease
of which the creature died. The gallbladder was of its natural color, as well
as the bile. The spleen was swelled, and stuffed with black blood.

"On the 7th of September, we examined six dead sheep. The five first had no
other symptom on the external parts of their bodies, than purple spots on the
places free from wool. The sixth had many more; besides which, it discharged
blood from the nose and fundament; which last was swelled all round. We opened
this sheep. The head and all the rest of the body were sound and free from
inflammation. The first stomach, called omasus, was distended, and stuffed with
grass; the second stomach contained less of it in proportion; the third stomach
had but little in it, and that somewhat hardened; the fourth contained a muddy
liquor of a dark green color; its coats were red, and its wrinkles a little
gangrened. The intestines contained excrements, the cellular membrane around
the anus was full of serum, and the veins were filled with clotted blood."

Dr. Nicolau's above-recited account of the distemper having been presented to
the Veterinarian School, this highly useful Society give accordingly their
opinions thereon to the following effect, and the Royal Society of Paris have
published it, in order to afford every help in their power in so great a
calamity, in case the like should happen again.

In this consultation, they agree with Dr. Nicolau as to the causes of the
disease, and are of opinion, that it consists in a perversion of all the
humors, and in a relaxation, inaction, and stupor of the solids.

"As to the tumors which appeared externally, they should, say they, with
manifest reason, certainly be looked upon as a salutary crisis; especially when
there yet remained strength enough in the solids, to throw the vitiated humors
on the part where the obstruction had begun, and by that means so far free the
rest of the mass of blood.

"Even the sound cattle in so unwholesome a country as the district of Brouage,
above described, carry in them the seeds of the disorder, and therefore the
first attention should be directed to their preservation. As to correcting the
bad qualities of the air and water, enough has been already said on that head,
as well as of purifying the places into which the sound cattle are to be put.
Particular care should be taken that their food be wholesome; and if it be
dear, it may be given in less quantity: for it is better that the cattle become
lean, than that they die. Running water should be got for them, if possible:
but if they think standing water, vinegar should be mixed with it, or red-hot
irons may be quenched in it. It should, if possible, be boiled; and the
following preservative may be given them.

"Take two handfuls of juniper berries, bruise them, and let them infuse
twenty-four hours in a quart of wine vinegar; give half a pint of this liquor
morning and evening. Repeat this remedy once or twice a week, even to the
animals which appear perfectly sound. As to those in which the least sign of
sickness appears, give them the following medicine:

"Take Peruvian bark in powder, and filings of steel, of each two drams; one
dram of sal-ammoniac; mix them in half a pint of wine, or in the same quantity
of a strong decoction of juniper berries in water, and give this with a horn
every morning and evening for a week.

"In the cure of the diseased, bleeding seems rather a thing to be avoided; for
it inevitably increases the loss of strength, the inaction of the solids, and
thereby hastens the putrefaction of the fluids. As it is evident, by the
opening of dead bodies, that the digestion is much vitiated, no solid food
should be given to the sick animals: but dissolve rock-alum in bran and water,
in such a quantity that the creature may take half an ounce of it in a day; and
give, as soon as possible, the following medicine.

"Take gum-ammoniac and assafoetida, of each half an ounce, rub them in a pint
of vinegar till they are dissolved; strain the solution, if any dirt be mixed
with the gums, and give it as warm as the creature can bear it for several days
only once a day.

"In case the symptoms are so urgent, that there is not time to make the
foregoing solution, give half a table spoonful of volatile spirit of
sal-ammoniac, in half a pint of wine, or of infusion of juniper berries, and do
this three times a day. If a sweat breaks out, it should be kept up with an
ounce of theriac or orvietan, dissolved in the same kind of vehicle. With this
view the animal should be covered, and toward the end of the crisis strongly
rubbed down.

"The critical tumors require the utmost attention. As soon as there is the
least appearance of them every means should be used to draw them outward. On
those which are hard at the bottom, and show no disposition to suppurate,
cataplasms the most capable of exciting the action of the solids, and of
increasing the inflammation in the part, should be applied. Epispastic or
blistering applications answer this purpose.

"Take half an ounce of cantharides, two drams of euphorbium, both in powder,
mix them with half a pound of leaven, and vinegar enough to make them of the
consistence of a cataplasm or poultice, which keep twelve hours on the swelled
part, and repeat it, if the tumor is not in a state to be opened.

"As soon as the least fluctuation, or even a softness only, is felt, it should
be opened, rather with the actual cautery than with a cutting instrument; and a
knife made red-hot is better than a button-cautery. The tumor must be laid
open from one end to the other, and as deep as the seat of the matter. The
wound may be dressed with digestive and unguentum Aegyptiacum, equal parts of
each; and at every dressing, that is, twice a day, the part must be washed with
a mixture of one quart of common water, a pint of brandy, and two drams of
sea salt.

"The rotten parts being cast off, and the suppuration become kindly, the wound
may be dressed with the common digestive, made of turpentine, dissolved in the
yolk of an egg, oil of St. John'swort, and brandy.

"And finally, the bad symptoms being all gone, and the wound being nearly
healed, it will be necessary to give some purging medicine, which must be
repeated pro re nata. This may be done with safety."

The Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris have likewise given an account of a
Peripneumony, which constantly attacks the horned cattle every year, in the
latter end of autumn, and the beginning of the spring, in several parts of
France, and particularly in the Franche-Comte. It (...) known there by the name
of Murie; and the following is the account given of its symptoms.

A dry cough, which at first comes but seldom, but is afterward much more
frequent; a sensible degree of fever; an oppression more or less troublesome,
which increases when the animal has eaten, and which sometimes ceases, though
this is very rare; a distaste to food, which increases with the disease:
creatures which chew the cud, cease that chewing; but this sign is equivocal,
because the same happens to them in all severe illnesses. A stinking breath; a
dryness of the nose, mouth and tongue; and sometimes a discharge of matter by
the nose, different in its degree of thickness: but the three last of these
symptoms do not always happen.

Those which are observed in the dead bodies are, a lividness and stuffing of
the lungs, an echimosis on their surface, suppurated pustules, gangrenous spots
on the surface, as also gelatinous crusts of different colors, which adhere
slightly to it; purulent abscesses, the matter of which insinuates itself into
and wastes the lobes of the lungs, sometimes of one only, and at other times of
both; an adhesion to the pleura, which is sometimes thick, inflamed,
suppurated, or gangrened; a considerable quantity of reddish, purulent, putrid,
sometimes frothy sanious water is found in the breast.

A sinking, a feebleness, a great difficulty of breathing, a continual cough, a
redness of the eyes, a dryness of the tongue, a rattling in the throat, a
stinking breath, are sypmtoms of an approaching death; as the being free from
them affords hope of recovery.

The most common causes of this disorder are, the changes in the atmosphere
from heat and drought to cold continued rains, to which the animals are
exposed; or their being suddenly turned out from warm houses into wet cold air.

The cure must begin with bleeding in the jugular, taking a considerable
quantity of blood, and repeating it on the same day, as also on the second and
third, if the disease runs high. When the blood does not coagulate, but remains
fluid and without cohesion, it indicates that the lungs are then so much
stuffed and obstructed, that only the thinnest parts of it can pass to the
heart, and that farther bleeding cannot be of service.

Emollient and refreshing glysters given and repeated two or three times a day
for the first five or six days, have very good effects. No solid food should be
given to the sick cattle, at least very little, or but just enough to support
them. The best food that can be given them is wheaten flour, either mixed with
warm water, or made into balls with honey, and given from time to time. Their
drink should ^e bran and water, with honey dissolved in it; or an infusion may
be made of the flowers of corn-poppies and violets, of each two handfuls, in
boiling barley-water, to which may be added three ounces of honey: this mixture
should be added to the former.

Rolls or pellets put into the creature's mouth two or three times a day will
have very good effects. They may be made of six flat figs sliced and mashed,
with five ounces of common honey and conserve of roses; or of four ounces of
sirop of violets, the yolk of six eggs, five ounces of rosewater, and as much
flour as to form pellets. Making the sick creature breathe from time to time
the fumes of warm water in such manner that those fumes enter with the air into
the lungs, is found to give great relief.

When the cough is very hard, frequent, and greatly fatigues the animal, the
following bolus may be given, besides the addition made to the common drink.
Take spermaceti and liquorice in powder of each two grains, pillul^e de
cynoglosso one dram, and mix them up with conserve of alth^ea into a bolus.

If the fever and oppression abate, the following bolus may be given in the
morning fasting. Take agarick in powder, flowers of sulphur, Florentine iris in
powder, of each two drams, and make it into a bolus with honey.

If the sinking and putridity, the natural consequences of a great
inflammation, still continue, give the following bolus, viz. flowers of sulphur
six drams, spermaceti two drams, powder of woodlice, gum ammoniac, of each a
dram and an half, myrrh one dram, white honey as much as is necessary to render
them of a proper consistence to be made into two boluses, to be given at two
different times. The Peruvian bark, camphire and honey may be used to
advantage. To this end, take of Peruvian bark three drams, of camphire one
dram, and of simple oxymel as much as shall be sufficient to make them into a
bolus, to be given in the morning fasting, and in two hours after, one or two
hornfuls of a strong decoction of juniper berries, or of elecampane. In case
there be a defluxion from the nose, the following drink may be given, viz.
leaves of periwinkle, of lion's-foot, of fluellin, of ground ivy, of each a
handful, which boil in common water till one third is evaporated, and to the
strained liquor add four ounces of honey, to be given at two different times:
and now the first bolus with the flowers of sulphur need be given only in the
evening. This last drink is peculiarly useful in that malignant peripneumony
which frequently spreads among cattle. This distemper is, however, not
contagious, as some have thought it, and is, so far as can be judged, that
which affected the horses, poultry, and dogs, in 1764, and again the horses in
particular in 1766.

The cure may be finished by one or two purging glysters, made as follows. Take
leaves of senna three ounces, pour upon them two pounds and a half of a boiling
emollient decoction, let them infuse for an hour, strain off the liquor, and
dissolve in it three ounces of catholicon, for a glyster: but this should not
be given till the dangerous symptoms have disappeared, and a chewing of the cud
shows a return of the stomach's being able to do its office in animals which
chew the cud.

As the influence of the air is greater in this disease than in almost any
other, the sick creatures should not be exposed to cold or rain. The buildings
in which they are kept should be neither too warm nor too cold, but had better,
of these two, exceed in coolness. The air should be frequently renewed, and if
the disorder is epizonnic, the air should be be fumigated by throwing from time
to time a small quantity of vinegar upon live coals.

As to the means of preserving cattle from it, the sound should be separated
from the sick, and sheltered as much as possible from the causes of the
disorder; a small quantity of blood may be taken from them; they should be kept
covered, their common drink should be bran and water boiled, and emollient
glysters may be given in case the least tendency to the disorder be perceived.

The Royal Society of Agriculture at Paris close their observations on
particular diseases omitted by Dr. Barberet, author of the Memoir to which they
adjudged their prize for the year 1765, and of which the greatest part of the
foregoing is an abstract, with an account of the dysentery, a disease which
frequently attacks only particular horses, and which sometimes becomes general
and even contagious among them. In this last case, it is always malignant, is
constantly attended with a fever, in the beginning light, but which afterward
becomes so high as frequently to be thought the principal disease. Its symptoms
are, sanious, purulent, bloody stools; griping, tenesmus, an enormous heat of
the entrails, a falling out of the fundament, etc. together with all those
which indicate a fever attended with malignity. On opening the dead bodies, the
intestines are generally found dry, or dilated with wind, containing a purulent
matter, and always with signs of inflammation, ulcerated or gangrened: the
spleen is inflamed and putrid, the rectum especially is in the worst state of
any of the bowels, and clots sometimes of pure blood, sometimes mixed with
sanies, are found in it.

If the sick horse is not too much sunk with the disorder, it is advisable to
bleed him in the jugular. An ounce of oil of olives or of rape, mixed with half
a glass of wine-vinegar and a glass of water, may be given morning and evening.
The common drink should be bran-water, with one third of a decoction of burnt
hartshorn: the food should be only barley, oats, or rye, boiled. An ounce of
disascordium mixed with bran-water acidulated with vinegar, may be given at
times.

Glysters will be peculiarly beneficial. To this end, take of wheat-bran four
handfuls, leaves and flowers of mulletin of each one handful, seeds of
fenugreek and of flax of each half an ounce. The bran, leaves, and seeds,
should be boiled in five pounds of water to a diminution of one third. At the
close of the boiling, the flowers should be added, and let stand to infuse. Two
candles should be melted in the strained liquor for a glyster. In case the
gripings are violent, a glyster may be made of the same decoction, with,
instead of the candles, three ounces of sirop of diacodium, and half an ounce
of ipecacuanha in powder. This glyster has surprisingly good effects. Toward
the close of the disorder, the following detersive glyster may be given. Take
leaves of millepertius and of periwincle, of each a handful; boil them in the
same quantity of water as before directed, and to the same degree of
diminution; and to the strained liquor add two ounces of Venice turpentine
dissolved in the yolks of eggs, for a glyster.

Nitre and camphire are frequently given with good success. Take an ounce of
nitre, dissolve it in two pounds of decoction of sorrel, and give it at twice
with a horn: or, take nitre and camphire, of each two drams, and make them into
a bolus with a sufficient quantity of honey.

The learned and judicious PETER LAYARD, of Huntingdon, M. D. and F. R. S.
whose residence in the country, joined to his universal humanity, necessarily
afforded him frequent opportunities to remark the beginning and progress of the
contagious distemper which prevailed among the horned cattle in Great Britain a
few years ago, particularly from about the year 17^5 to 1770; being then
applied to by government for his advice, gave the following as the result of
many carefully repeated observations he had made on that melancholy occasion.
SYMPTOMS.
"THE first appearance of this infection is a decrease of appetite; a poking
out of the neck, implying some difficulty of deglutition; a shaking of the
head, as if the ears were tickled; a hanging down of the ears, and deafness; a
dullness of the eyes; and a moving to and fro, in a constant uneasiness. All
these signs except the last, increase till the fourth day: then ensue a
stupidity and unwillingness to move, great debility, a total loss of appetite,
a running at the eyes and nose, sometimes sickness and throwing up of bile, a
husky cough, and shivering. The fever which was continual the three first days,
now rises, and increases toward the evening: the pulse is all along quick,
contracted, and uneven. A constant diarrhaea, or scouring of foetid green
faeces, a stinking breath, a nauseous stream from the skin, infect the air in
which the morbid creatures are placed. Their blood is very florid, hot, and
frothy: their urine is high-colored: the roof of the mouth and the barbs are
ulcerated. Tumors, or boils, are to be felt under the fleshy membrane of the
skin; and eruptions appear all along their limbs, and about their bags. If a
new milch-cow is thus ill, her milk dries up gradually, her purging is more
violent, and on the fourth day she is commonly dry. There is such sharpness in
the dung of the diseased, that a visible irritation is observed during some
time in their fundament. They groan much, are worse in the evening, and mostly
when they lie down. These symptoms continue increasing till the seventh day, on
which, generally, though sometimes protracted till the ninth, the crisis, or
turn, takes place.

"Bulls and oxen are not so violently attacked as cows and calves; and of
these, cows with calf, and weakly cow-calves, are in the greatest danger.

"If a cow with calf, at the critical time of this disease, slips her calf, she
then takes her fodder, and recovers. Some may only give signs of such abortion,
and bea^ their calf several days, nay even weeks, before they slip it, and yet
recover. Calves receive the infection from the cow, by sucking her milk; and
may also, if first seized, infect the cow.

"This disease takes place at all times and seasons: but in summer and autumn
it will rage most. The fate of the beast is generally determined on the seventh
day from the invasion; though it has been sometimes delayed till the ninth.

"If eruptions appear all over the skin, or boils as big as pigeons' eggs in
different parts of the body, but especially from the head to the tail, along
each side of the backbone, and so rip^ as to discharge putrid and stinking
matter; i^ large abscesses are formed in the horns, or in (...) part of the
body; if the dung is become more consistent and firm; if the urine is thick,
and not quite so high-colored as before; if the beast has had a shivering
succeeded by a general glow of heat, upon which the fever has abated, and the
pulse beats regularly; if the nose be sore or scabbed; if the eyes look bright
and brisk, and if the beast pricks up its ears upon a person going into the
hovel, and will eat a little hay or peace; these symptoms will determine that
the creature is out of danger.

"But if, on the seventh day, the eruptions, or boils, are decreased in bulk,
or have totally disappeared without having broke or discharged outwardly; if
the scouring continue almost constantly; if the breath be very hot, while the
whole body, limbs, and horns are cold; if the groaning and difficulty of
breathing are increased; if the running from the nose and eyes is lessened; if
the eyes are dim, and sunk into the head, with a perfect stupidity; if the
urine is dark colored, the pulse intermitting, and a cadaverous smell is
observed; we may assuredly pronounce the creature to be near its end.

"Ramazzzini's emphysema was met with.

"All the carcasses that were opened appeared extenuated by the scouring. Upon
opening the skin much stinking air rushed out, and sometimes a purulent and
sanious discharge. The vessels of the brain were turged, and filled with blood
of a very red color and loose texture; the ventricles filled with water. The
membranes of the nose, the glands, the whole extent of the frontal sinus, and
the pith of the horns, were highly inflamed, ulcerated, and full of small
abscesses. There was the same appearance in the mouth and about the glands of
the throat. The lungs were inflamed with livid sphacelated spots, here and
there loaded with hydatides; and the cellular texture was frequently distended
with air. The heart was large, flabby, and dark colored, containing in its
ventricles clots of black blood, of a very loose texture, without serum; the
fat about it was of a bright yellow. The liver was large: its blood and biliary
vessels were fully extended with dark fluid blood, and very deep colored bile:
the substance of the liver was so rotten, as to separate on the least touch.
The gallbladder was stretched to a great size, and full of greenish bile. The
aesophagus was ulcerated in some. The paunch was distended with air, flabby,
and contained a large substance like a dried turf, consisting of fodder
hardened to that degree. There were several appearances of gangrene on all the
stomachs. The honeycomb had no fluid in it, but some pappy fodder. The manyfold
contained between its plaits, a great deal of dried fodder, which clung to
their sides. The rennet-bag was empty, but highly inflamed, and gangrened in
several places. All the intestines were empty, and were beset with red and
black spots. The kidneys and bladder were large, without urine. The kidneys
were of a loose texture, easily torn. The flesh in some was livid, in others of
a lively red; but it soon turned green. The fat that remained was of a bright
yellow. In such cows as were with calf, the uterus was gangrened in several
places, and the water included in it stunk most intolerably. The virulence of
the disease appeared to have sometimes fixed itself on the vital part, and
sometimes on another, and frequently in more places than one.

To CURE.
"The beasts should be kept in well-aired houses and be plentifully bled from
two quarts to one, according to their age and strength. They should be washed
with warm water and vinegar, to clear the skin from filth, and be frequently
rubbed, which affords them much pleasure, as well as benefit. A rowel should be
made as soon as possible in the dewlap, and it should be kept open for some
time after the cure. If the dung be hard, a cooling purge should be given, and
plenty of anti-septic drinks, such as bran-water, vinegar, bitters, salt; but
no hay till they chew the cud. The mouth, barbs, and nostrils, should be washed
carefully and frequently. If a purging comes on by the fourth day, it should be
checked by warm medicines proper to throw the morbid matter off by the skin,
such as snake-weed, and other warm plants, or Venice-treacle, with which Mr.
Montgomery One of the Doctor's neighbors in the country.
cured six beasts out of seven. If the color of the mouth becomes dark, the
creature cold, the dung black and foetid, and the discharge from the mouth and
nose sanious, an ounce of Jesuits'-bark, or oak-bark, with snake-root, or other
warm ingredients, should be given every four hours, to prevent mortification.
If matter is formed in the horns, or any other part of the body, an opening
should be made there, as also in the emphysema, and digested by warm
applications. If a purging does not come naturally after the crisis, the bowels
should be emptied with a smart purge, after which a draught of warm ale may be
given at night. On recovery, the beasts should be gradually exposed to cold
air, and by degrees habituated to their usual food."

INDEX.
A.
AEGAGROPILE, what, and why found only in the maw of cattle, 38. Air, (the) is
the great source of contagious distempers, and means of spreading them, 151 --
154. Dr. Le Clerc's method of investigating the qualities of the air, 159.
Means of purifying the air, and guarding against its bad effects, 175.
Antimony. An antimonial powder for sheep, 99. Antimony, and its preparations,
recommended for the measles in swine, 128. Appoplexy, in sheep, 103. Asses,
Deserve greater estimation than we commonly hold them in, 1. Remark on their
manner of drinking, 3. On their braying, 5. How taught to amble, 4. How to know
their age, 6. At what age capable of generating, ibid. Time of gestation, ibid.
Asses milk, 7. Requisites in a good stallion ass, ibid. Pr^bable origin and
dispersion of these creatures, ibid. High value set upon fine asses in Spain,
8; and in Auvergne, ibid. Duration of their lives, 9. Are subject to few
diseases, ibid; and how those are to be treated, ibid.
B.
Barbaret, (Dr.) his memorial concerning the contagious diseases of cattle,
129, et seq. Bleeding, directions how to bleed a sheep, 104. Borel, (Mr.) his
remarks on the smallpox in sheep, 143 -- 149. Buffon, (M. de) his remarks on
quadrupeds, and their different manners of drinking, 4. On their voices, 5. On
their manner of feeding, 38. His account of an uncommon sort of worms found in
the livers of sheep, 106. Bull, (the) character and principal use of, 27. When
and how most properly gelded, 22. Description of a good stallion bull, 40.
Burnet, the excellency of, for the food of sheep; particularly for curing them
of the rot, 77, 106.
C.
Calf, (a) how to be managed from the time of its birth till it is fatted for
slaughter, 43. How fatted so as to render its flesh most delicate, ibid. What
calves the best for bringing up, and how to manage them, ibid. Reason why a
calf is sometimes unwilling to take the teat, and how to remove the cause of
that reluctance, 44. Carrots, why a better food than turnips for oxen, 35. Are
an excellent and profitable food for sheep, 78. Clover, cautions to be observed
in the feeding of cattle with, 37; and the same of sheep, ibid. Contagious
diseases of cattle, (the) have unfortunately been but imperfectly treated of by
the ancients, 130. Ramazzini's account of that of Modena, in the year 1690,
which appears to have been the smallpox, and the then state of the air, ibid.
That of Hesse in 1693, a consumption of the lungs, and the constitution of the
air, 131. The dreadful disease in Hungary in 1712, imputed chiefly to the very
sudden and extraordinary changes of the weather, 132 -- 133. Symptoms, dreadful
effects, and supposed cause of the epidemic which desolated Italy and Germany
from 1711 to 1714, under the appearance of a malignant dysentery, 134 -- 139.
Uncertainty of the natures of the disease which carried off vast numbers of
cattle in Bohemia, Lithuania, Saxony, the March of Brandenburgh, and the
Duchy of Magdeburgh, in 1730, 139. Symptoms and effects of that which ravaged
France in 1731, ibid. Of that which desolated all Europe from the year 1740 to
1750. deemed a putrid, malignant, inflammatory fever, ibid. Causes and effects
of the epidemic in Minorca, in 1756, 140. Particular account of that which
broke out in Denmark, and spread from thence in 1762, ibid. Observations and
experiments on the smallpox in sheep, which killed prodigious numbers of these
creatures in France in the years 1746, 1754, 1761, and 1764, 143 -- 148.
Inquiry into the causes of the contagious diseases of cattle, 151 -- 158. And
how to treat them according to the appearances they have hitherto assumed, viz.
either inflammatory or putrid, 162 -- 170. General means of guarding cattle
from infection, 174, 181, 183. Symptoms of, and successful manner of treating
the diseases which prevailed among the horned cattle in France in 1762 and
1763, 183 -- 205. Symptoms, effects, and cure of the peripneumony in cattle,
205 -- 210. Symptoms and cure of the late contagious disease among the horned
cattle in Great Britain, 211, 215. Cotes, for sheep, the utility of, and how to
be constructed, 81 -- 86. Cough, (a) cause, effects, and manner of treating,
104. Cow, (the) may be rendered, and how, fit for the labors of husbandry, 20.
The free-martin cow, what, 21. Which are the cows that generally yield the most
milk, 26, 27. Usual season, and sure marks of a cow's being in heat, 39.
Description of a good breeding cow, 40. How to be managed whilst pregnant, at
the time of parturition, and after she has brought forth, 41.
D
Dairy, some general observations concerning dairies, 45. Dropsy, (the) in a
sheep, 107 -- 110.
E
Ewe, qualities of a good one for propagation, 91. Treatment of her before and
after copulation, 92. Time of gestation, ibid. Cares requisite in her yeaning,
93. Uses of her milk, 94. How long capable of yeaning, ibid.
F.
Folding of sheep, the utility and manner of, considered, 80. Benefits of a
covered fold, 82. Food, the bad qualities of, a cause of many epidemic
diseases, 154. Instanced in several cases, 155 -- 156. Means of guarding
against its bad effects, 176.
G.
G^lding, when and how most properly performed on a bull, 22. On lambs, 90. On
pigs, 123. Goats, the nature of, 111. When capable of engendering, 112. How to
be chosen for propagation, 113. Time of the female's carrying her young, ibid.
Necessity of sometimes helping the female when she yeans, ibid. How easily fed,
ibid. Danger of their getting into cultivated grounds, 114. Will readily
copulate with sheep, ibid. Love the hottest climates, but cannot endure damp
places and rich pastures, ibid. Age to which they will breed and live, 115. How
fatted, quality of their flesh, and cause of its strong smell, ibid. Marks of
their age, 116. Their utility when dead, ibid. Goat's milk frequently an
excellent medicine, ibid. The breed of goats far more extensively spread than
that of sheep, 117.
H.
Hastfer (Mr.) his directions for the building of sheep-cotes, 82 -- 83. His
ant-powders and drying-powders for sheep, 97. Receipts for the dropsy in sheep,
108 -- 110. Method of treating the smallpox in sheep, 174. Horns, (the) of an
ox, how denotive of his age by their growth, 23, 24. Hoving, in cattle, the
cause of, and cure, 51. And in sheep, 78.
I.
Indigestion, in cattle, the signs, danger, and cure of, 50.
K.
Kidneys, (the) reason why the kidney on the left side of an ox is always
larger than that on the right side, 22.
L.
Lamb (a) how to be managed from the time of its birth till it is fit for
weaning, 93. When and how most properly castrated, 90. Lancisi's account of the
dreadful epidemic distemper which raged in Italy and Germany, from the year
1711 to 1714, and of the means by which Pope Clement XI. put a stop to it, 135
-- 139. Layard, Peter, M. D. F. R. S. his account of the symptoms and cure of
the late contagious distemper among the horned cattle in Great Britain, 211 --
215. Lead, unfit to keep milk in, and why, 45. Le Clerc, (M.) his method of
investigating the qualities of the air, and thereby judging of the nature of
contagious diseases, 159. Liver, the appearance of, in sheep that have the rot,
105. Lucerne, is the best of plants for fattening oxen, and how most properly
used for that purpose, 37. The same for sheep, 78.
M.
Measles, (the) in swine, causes of, and how to be treated, 128. Milk, the
qualities of good, 42, n. *. How most properly kept in a dairy, 45. Uses of
ewe's milk, 94. And of goats, 116. Mouth, (the) general disorders of in calves,
44. Of oxen, 52. Mules, how bred, 10, 11, 12. Do they themselves ever breed?
ibid. Their qualities and uses, 12. Which sorts reputed best, 14. How fed and
managed, ibid.
N.
Nicolau, (Dr.) his successful treatment of great numbers of infected cattle,
188 -- 205.
O.
Osmer, (Mr.) his opinion of the late contagious disease among the horned
cattle, 49. Ox, (the) character and uses of, 15. Why thought to be in general,
preferable to the horse for ploughing; with directions how to harness oxen for
drawing, 16 -- 17. Remarks on the sleep of horned cattle, 22. How to know the
age of an ox by his teeth, 23. And by his horns, ibid. Marks of a good one for
the plough, 24. At what age, and how, most properly broken for labor, 25. When
to be shod, or cued, ibid. Age to which an ox should be made to work, and after
which he should be slaughtered, ibid. What kind of climate thought to be
fittest for black cattle, 26 -- 46. Which the best sort in Great Britain, 27.
Reason why large beef is most esteemed for salting, especially for the use of
the navy, ibid. Cause of the difference between the manner of feeding of the ox
and that of the horse, 28. Caution to be observed in the pasturing of black
cattle, 32. Reason why they never over-eat themselves, and therefore need not
have their food measured out to them, 33. What sorts of food proper for them,
ibid. Propriety of mixing salt with their fodder, ibid. Freque^^ ^urrying and
rubbing them down recommended, 34. And the custom of leaving them continually
out of doors blamed, ibid. At what age, and how, best to fatten them, 35. Sorts
of food fittest for this purpose, and the length of time required for it, ibid
-- 36. How to know when a beast is well fleshed, and when sufficiently fatted,
37, 38. Some directions concerning their stabling, food, drink, and exercise,
46, 47. How to be treated when they have swallowed any improper thing, 47. In
cases of indigestion, 48. And when hoved, or swelled, 51.
P.
Parsley, the excellency of, for sheep, 78, 107. Parsnips, excellency of, for
the food of cattle, and especially of milch cows, 35. For sheep, 79.
Peripneumony, cause, symptoms, effects, and cure of in cattle, 205 -- 210.
Pimples in the mouth of an animal, how to cure, 44, 52. Plague, effects of the,
on water, 158. Remarkable instance of its lying dormant a very long time, and
yet retaining all its strength, 182. Powder. Ant-powders, drying-powders, and
Pomeranian-powders, for sheep; how made and administered, 97, 98.
Q.
Quadrupeds, their different manners of drinking, 3. And of eating, 38. Remarks
on their tones of voices, 5.
R.
Ram, requisites in a good one for breeding, 91. One will suffice for
twenty-five or thirty ewes, ibid. How long fit for propagation, and what the
duration of his life, 94. Rennet, what, and where found, 45. Rot (the) in
sheep, cured by their eating burnet, 77, 106. Manner in which this disease
affects their liver, 104. What, probably, the best manner of treating it
medicinally, 105.
S.
Scab (the) or itch, a contagious disease in sheep, causes of, symptoms, and
methods of cure, 100, 102. Sheep, general character and properties of, 53. Have
been on the decline for some time past in Great Britain, with respect to their
wool, 54. Peculiarly happy situation of that island for raising flocks of
sheep, 55, 79. Origin of the fine breed of sheep in Spain, 56. Means by which
it is said Britain first obtained a fine breed of these animals, 57. What parts
of Great Britain now most famous for sheep, 56, 59. Some account of the Spanish
sheep, of the management of them, and of their produce, 66 -- 75. What grounds
and situations best for sheep, 55, 75. Sheep are remarkably fond of, and
benefited by, the milfoil or yarrow, 76. Cured of the rot by feeding on burnet,
77. Well fed with lucerne, 78. Cautions to be observed when they fee^ on
clover, ibid. How to correct the inconveniences which may arise from their
feeding on turnips, 79. Carrots and parsnips excellent and profitable food for
them, ib. How, and when most proper to lead them to pasture, 80, 88. Are
benefited by being in the open air, but should not ever be laid wet, 81.
Directions how to house them in very severe weather, 82. When, and how to shear
them, 87. Reasons why the flock should be examined every year, 88. How best
fattened, 89. Cannot be fattened a second time, ibid. When and how best to
castrate lambs, 90. Remarks on their fat and suet, ibid. Qualities requisite in
a good ram and in a ewe for breeding, 91, 92. Yeaning of the ewe, ibid. Rearing
of lambs, 93. Uses of ewes' milk, 94. Age to which sheep may live, ibid.
General causes of their diseases, 95. Remedies recommended for some of them,
particularly such as proceed from too much wet, 96, 97. Methods of treating
their cutaneous diseases, 101, 102. Diseases of the head and throat, 103.
Coughs and shortness of breath, 104. Diseases of the belly, 105. Of the liver,
106, 107. The dropsy, 108 -- 110. No animals so subject to the smallpox as
sheep are, 131, 142, 143. How to be treated in it, 170 -- 174. Shepherd,
qualifications requisite in a good, 65 -- 95. Small pox, a most dreadful
disorder in sheep, 131 -- 143. Inoculating it in them considered, 149. How to
treat it in them, 171 -- 174. Spurry, recommended for the food of cattle, and
especially of milch-cows, 36. Stable, (a) how most properly constructed for
oxen, 46, 47. Swine, the character of, 118. Why the most profitable animals
that an inhabitant of the country can rear, 120. How fed, 121. And how fatted,
122. At what age, and in what weather most proper to castrate them, 123. At
what age fit for propagation, 124. Time of the sow's going, ibid. Wild sows
farrow but once a year, (...) tame ones twice, 125. General way of disposing of
their pigs, ibid. Names given to the wild boar according to his age, 126. Some
circumstances relative to hunting of the wild boar, 120, n. *. Age to which
swine may live, 127. Their vast increase all over the world, ibid. How to treat
the only disease that seems to be peculiar to them, namely, the measles, 128.
T.
Teeth, (the) show, and how, the age of an ox, 23. Throat, general disorders
of, in sheep, 103. Tumors, the several sorts of, enumerated and described, and
how most properly treated, 103. Turnips, good food for oxen; but should be
sliced, and why, when given to cattle, 35. How to correct the inconveniences of
their too-great moisture, when given to sheep, 78.
V.
Ventilation of water recommended, in order to purify it, 177, 178. Vertigo in
sheep, causes and treatment of, 103.
W.
Water, hail-water thought to be very pernicious, 72, n.*. Water may contribute
greatly, and how, to the production of epidemic diseases, 158, 159, 177.
Methods of purifying water, 178. Wool, the British has been on the decline for
some time past, in regard to its quality, 51. The several sorts of Spanish
wool, and which most esteemed, 55, n. *. Nature and qualities of the Irish
wool, 59. Of the Dutch and Flemish wool, 60. Of the Swedish wool, 61. Of the
French wool, ibid. Of the Italian wool, 62. Of the German, Polish, Russian, and
Tartarian wools, 63. Proofs how far the nature of wool may be affected by the
climate of a country, ibid. The wool of North America said to be in general
better than the English, 64, n. *. Worms, an extraordinary sort of worms found
in the livers of sheep, 106.
Y.
Yarrow, or milfoil, an excellent food for sheep, and highly pleasing to them,
76.
FINIS.

