AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE IN PROVIDENCE, JULY 4, A.
D. 1795, AT THE CELEBRATION OF THE NINETEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY JONATHAN MAXCY, A. M. PRESIDENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE.

Published at the Request of the Town.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, AND SOLD AT THEIR BOOK-STORE.
1795.

TO THE WORTHY INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF PROVIDENCE, THE FOLLOWING ORATION IS
MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR SINCERE FRIEND, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT.

J. MAXCY.

AN ORATION.
THE citizens of America celebrate that day which gave birth to their
liberties. The recollection of this event, replete with consequences so
beneficial to mankind, swells every heart with joy, and fills every tongue with
praise. We celebrate not the sanguinary exploits of a tyrant to subjugate and
enslave millions of his fellow creatures; we celebrate neither the birth nor
the coronation of that phantom styled a king; -- but the resurrection of
liberty, the emancipation of mankind, the regeneration of the world. These are
the sources of our joy, these the causes of our triumph. We pay no homage at
the tomb of kings, to sublime our feelings -- we trace no line of illustrious
ancestors, to support our dignity -- we recur to no usages sanctioned by the
authority of the great, to protect our rejoicings; -- no, we love liberty, we
glory in the rights of men, we glory in independence. On whatever part of God's
creation a human form pines under chains, there Americans drop their tears.

A DARK cloud once shaded this beautiful quarter of the globe. Consternation
for a while agitated the hearts of the inhabitants. War desolated our fields,
and buried our vales in blood. But the dayspring from on high soon opened upon
us its glittering portals. The Angel of Liberty descending, dropped on
WASHINGTONS brow the wreath of victory* and stamped on American freedom the
seal of omnipotence. The darkness is past, and the true light now shines, to
enliven and rejoice mankind. We tread a new earth, in which dwells
righteousness; and view a new heaven, flaming with inextinguishable stars. Our
feet will no more descend into the vale of oppressions. Our shoulders will no
more bend under the weight of a foreign domination, as cruel as it was unjust.
Well may we rejoice at the return of this glorious anniversary; a day dear to
every American -- a day to be had in everlasting remembrance -- a day whose
light circulates joy through the hearts of all republicans, and terror through
the hearts of all tyrants.

Liberty is the birthright of man. It is coeval with his existence. It is a
privilege wrought into his constitution, accommodated to his situation, and
proclaimed his own by the concurrent voice of nature and reason. Who shall rob
man of this privilege? It was given him by the Almighty. Man, though made free,
was made to be governed by laws. These however cannot be obligatory, unless
founded in reason and justice. Liberty consists not in exemption from the
control of laws, but in acting according to laws; laws just and equal,
established by the unanimous consent of the community.

WHILE uncivilized man roams through the wilderness, he enjoys the liberty of
nature. His bed is the earth, his canopy the sky. Uncontrouled by the force of
human institutions, and unacquainted with those delicate obligations which
render men slaves in the social state, he acknowledges no power but that of his
own arm, and submits to no decision but that of his own will. But no sooner
does the necessity of mutual relief and protection involve him in the relations
of civil society, than his liberty assumes a new form; better accommodated to
his capacity, because more limited; more useful, because subjected to the laws
of order. This new situation of man originates a multiplicity of rights,
obligations and duties. To secure him in the peaceful and inviolable enjoyment
of the first, to stimulate and compel him to the punctual and invariable
performance of the last, these are the highest objects of civil government.
That system of administration under whose operation these objects are most
expeditiously obtained, and most permanently secured, must be deemed the most
perfect. The more effectually the persons of men are guarded from injury, and
their property from unjust spoliation, the less will they be liable to
contention, more happy at home, more happy abroad; more humane, just and
benevolent; more industrious, wealthy, virtuous and enlightened. What then must
be our opinion of that system of politics adopted and pursued by the founders
of all despotic monarchies? What incomparable lessons of wisdom would they
inculcate upon us? They teach us, by their doctrine and practice, that millions
are created for the use and pleasure of an individual, who is amenable to no
(...) tribunal; who can infringe the rights, dispose of the property and
destroy the lives of his subjects. Sentiments these, which sap the foundation
of that great political maxim, that the safety and happiness of the community
are the highest ends of civil government. Had mankind known, that there was but
one being in the universe of sufficient wisdom and goodness to be invested with
unlimited power, they never would have submitted to dominion founded in
usurpation, supported by cruelty, and administered by injustice. The first
object of men in the career of ambition, is to render themselves independent;
the second, to subject and oppress others. Monarchical governments, however
limited, have never secured to the people the enjoyment of their rights. A
crown, it has been said, is too splendid a price to be conferred on merit. If
so, surely it is too splendid a price to glitter on the head of arrogance, or
hereditary folly. The ambition of kings has never known any limits. Dazzled by
the splendor of crowns, and infatuated by the possession of supreme power;
flattered on every side by the servile compliance of courtiers, and deluded
into a belief that the determinations of their own wills ought to be inviolable
laws of conduct for their subjects, they have fancied themselves the
vicegerents of. GOD, born and designed for no end but the exercise of unbounded
authority. Rapacious of wealth, and ambitious of power, they have never failed
to encroach on those intermediate authorities constituted by the people, and
designed by them as an impregnable barrier against regal invasion.

ARISTOCRATICAL governments, though they may be more favorable than
monarchical to the peace and security of the people, yet they do not secure
those important objects which ought ever to be (...) in view in all systems of
civil policy. When the supreme power is vested in a number, the chance for
wisdom, virtue, and impartial administration of justice, is greater than when
the supreme power is vested in an individual. This may be expected to be the
case, when the members succeed to their places by some possessions,
qualifications or inheritance. But the advantages accruing to government from
that wisdom and experience which are to be expected in a permanent council,
will be counterbalanced by the evils of dissension unavoidable among men
invested with equal power; men whose privileges will render them oppressive,
and whose ambition, unawed by a superior, will hurry on their passions to the
most desperate extremes. Deplorable indeed must be the situation of a people,
whose rights are perpetually exposed to the capricious insolence of combined
aristocratical power. Prudence would dictate the sufferance of one, rather than
a thousand tyrants; but reason and common sense forbid the sufferance of any.

IF we would secure the interest and tranquillity of a community, we must have
recourse to some form of government, where the supreme power is collected,
lodged and preferred* by the voluntary choice of the people. When this is the
case, civil liberty, secure from the grasp of a despotic tyrant, and the
ambitious pretensions of a haughty nobility, will exist in the greatest
perfection, and diffuse its salutary influence through the whole circle of
society. Man, in a state of improvement, subjected to the regulations of
political administration, must relinquish so much of his natural liberty as is
inconsistent with the good of the community. He must not consult and gratify
private inclination at the expense of the public. He must not indulge a haughty
spirit of self-direction and independency, but cheerfully submit to the
control of just and equal laws. In doing this, he secures and enjoys the only
liberty desirable in any state but that of solitude. Did all the members of
society indulge their own dispositions, aim at their own objects, and gratify
their own passions, without any regard to the consistency of their conduct with
the general interest, they would be involved in so many difficulties, from a
mutual interference of private pursuits, that they would enjoy but a small
share of that liberty and happiness which are secured by submission to good
government. The condition of men, their connexions and dependencies in civil
society, are such, that all laws ought to be deemed salutary and just, which
restrain the will and curtail the liberty of each individual, whenever the
indulgence of that will, and the enjoyment of that liberty, would contravene
the operation of those means instituted for the security of public happiness.
Union of men in society, of necessity diminishes their natural liberty. But
each one ought to consider, that he gains vastly more by the diminution of
other mens' liberty, than he loses by the diminution of his own. -- In every
species of civil government, there exists a supreme power, from which there is
no appeal. The rights of the people will be most effectually secured, where
this power is deposited and restricted in such a manner, as to afford no
prospect of success to ambitious designing men. This end is obtained with
greater ease and certainty in a republic than in any other government. The
first principle of genuine republicanism is, that all men, as to rights, are
equal. From this plain undeniable position it follows, that all power not
originating in the consent of the people* all power not exercised according to
their direction, and subjected to their control, is usurpation, injustice and
tyranny. If an enlightened nation cannot enjoy happiness under a government
formed and administered by her own consent, she never can under any. If under a
monarchy men are liable to oppression, exaction, and military domination; if
they are liable at all times to be involved in unnecessary wars, to gratify the
caprice of the reigning prince, or a favorite minister; if they are constantly
liable to insecurity of their persons and property, through the instability or
deficiency of salutary regulations; if under an aristocracy men are liable to
suffer the pernicious effects of combined ambition, or the horrors of
dissension, among rulers clothed with equal authority; if men are liable to
these things, it is because they are deprived of their rights by privileged
orders, and subjected to the control of laws enacted and enforced without
their consent. All the inconveniences resulting from arbitrary power lodged in
the hands of an individual, or of a number, are obviated by the first principle
of free government. If all men are born equal, surely all have an equal right
to a voice in the enaction of laws; all have an equal right to suffrage in the
election of men into places of power and trust. Possessed of these rights, the
people can always manifest their will, and establish regulations accommodated
to their situation. Their exigencies can always be known* and always relieved.
But in governments where the administration of public affairs rests in an
individual, or a few; where offices are disposed of by caprice, or sold to the
highest bidder; where the right to govern is claimed by hereditary succession,
and descends to folly as often as to wisdom; where these things occur, what can
be expected but ignorance in the rulers, with respect to the real condition of
the community? What can be expected but servility and fear in the people,
haughtiness and audacity in the magistrates? What can be expected but the
desolating pestilence of exorbitant avarice and unbounded ambition? That spirit
of wisdom and benevolence so conspicuous in the constitution of the United
States, levels all the pompous distinctions of rank, opens the way of honor
and promotion to all who are worthy, and affords ample security to the persons
and property of the whole community. The circumstances attending the settlement
and growth of this country, till its dismemberment from the government of
Great Britain, tended directly to pave the way to liberty and independence. The
facility with which landed property was acquired, and the certain enjoyment of
the productions of their industry, inspired the inhabitants with disgust for a
state of dependency, and love for a state of freedom. The manner in which they
were trained up from youth to manhood, taught them their rights. No usurping
tyrant here fixed the standard of despotism, and awed them into a state of
vassalage. No haughty nobility engrossed the soil, and reduced the people to
the necessity of starving, or submitting to the drudgery of slaves. Each man
was his own master, walked on his own ground, reaped the fruit of his own toil.
Could it be expected that such men would peaceably cringe under the lash of a
tyrant? Could it be expected that such men would suffer their rights to be
infringed by privileged orders, or the produce of their industry to be
decimated by ecclesiastical oppression? Was the Parliament of Great Britain so
ignorant of the state of this country, as to imagine that the people, whose
daily experience taught them their liberties, would fit still till they were
bound in chains? By what authority could the British government impose laws on
us without our consent, or tax us without allowing us the right of
representation? With what success their arbitrary designs were crowned, let the
late revolution declare. Let this joyful anniversary of our independence
announce it to remotest ages, and stand an eternal monument of the escape of
Liberty from the harpy fangs of Despotism.

THE political situation of our country* resulting from the admirable
constitution and administration of our government, puts us into possession of
many blessings, and opens upon us many prospects, not enjoyed by any other
nation under heaven. No favored orders can here claim the exclusive right of
legislation. All stand on the same level, enjoy the same freedom, and submit to
the same laws. Places of honor* profit and trust, are equally open to all our
citizens. No particular set of men is here supported in idleness and
extravagance, at the expense of the community. No unnecessary taxes are imposed
on the people* nor is it probable there will be, because they affect the
legislators as much as the citizens. Property cannot be more effectually
secured than it is in the United States; for no man here can be deprived of it
but by the operation of laws established by the whole community. The lives and
fortunes of all the Americans are on board one vessel; it is therefore the
duty, interest and happiness of all to take care of it. The present situation
of our country is peculiarly favorable to the cultivation of genius. Great
capacity and extensive acquirements are indispensibly necessary to qualify men
to manage with success the political concerns, and to discharge with reputation
the important duties annexed to the governmental departments of these States.
Important objects are exposed to the attainment of all; -- objects calculated
to arrest the attention and fire the ambition of all who are disposed to render
themselves meritorious of public esteem. That political equality and general
information which prevail under our government, bring forth genius from every
class of citizens. This circumstance renders it probable, that happiness will
here be enjoyed in a greater degree, and in longer duration, than it has been
under any government since the institution of civil society.

THE freedom of the press, so essential to the preservation of liberty, is here
enjoyed in its greatest latitude. The conduct of every citizen invested with
authority, all occurrences foreign and domestic, are presented in one view to
the whole nation. Such is the light diffused through the whole mass of the
people, that none in places of trust can escape the most accurate inspection.
The freedom of the press converts united America into an enlightened congress
of politicians. How can our liberties be subverted, while the people are
universally acquainted with the conduct of their representatives? These are
elected into office for certain periods, at the expiration of which they must
revert back to their former places as private citizens. Are they not under the
greatest degree of responsibility? Are they not under the greatest inducement
to distinguish their conduct with rectitude and wisdom? Will they be likely to
adopt regulations injurious to the community, when they themselves must soon
feel their operation? The situation of this country indicates its original
destination to independence. How could it be expected that such an extensive
continent, at such a vast distance from the old world, would not be inhabited
at some period by men capable of governing and defending themselves? Who in his
senses could imagine, that a country like this, replete with all the
necessaries of life; a country whose ports open to every quarter of the globe,
and whose fleets will one day cover the ocean; who could imagine that such a
country, inhabited by men fond to excess of liberty, would pay submission to
the petty island of Britain? We might almost as reasonably expect, that the sun
and all the planetary worlds would rush down from their shining spheres, to
gravitate round a pebble. By the appointment of heaven we stand by our own
strength, disconnected from foreign influence and foreign power. This
circumstance undoubtedly gave birth to that calm deliberation, which reflected
so much honor on the Americans, in forming and establishing the federal
constitution. From our local situation, we enjoy in a superior degree the
advantages of neutrality. Had we submitted to the rapacious demands of Britain,
how deplorable must have been our situation? How disgracefully should we have
been led off by a foreign master, and plunged in all the horrors of war! How
many Americans must have breathed out their lives on the plains of Europe! How
many of our hands must have been employed in the drudgery of kings, to
undermine the fair temple of liberty! The great Parent of the universe has
peculiarly distinguished the Americans, in encouraging them to assert, and in
enabling them to defend their rights. These however have been most atrociously
violated by that supercilious overbearing conduct, which has usually marked the
British ministry. They, regardless of the rights of neutrality, have committed
spoliations on our property, at which uncivilized barbarians would blush;
spoliations attended with that rapacious meanness and contemptible insolence,
which no pretenses however artful can conceal, no evasions however plausible
can excuse.

AMONG the numerous advantages enjoyed by the inhabitants of these States, we
may rank the exemption from ecclesiastical establishments. The incorporation of
these with systems of civil policy, has never failed to promote bigotry,
hypocrisy and oppression. The requirement of subscription to particular
articles of faith, as an indispensible qualification in candidates for offices
of public trust, is a most flagitious intrusion on the equal rights of men; an
intrusion which screens ambition and avarice under the mantle of religion,
converts religion into a mere engine of state, patronizes vice under the
pompous ceremonies of worship, levels all moral distinctions, and damps that
voluntary ardour of piety which alone is acceptable to the Supreme Being. What
right has the arm of the magistrate to intrude itself into the field of
religious opinion? To what order of men has the Almighty delegated wisdom and
authority to prescribe modes of faith? None but voluntary worshippers are
acceptable to God. Those who choose to worship him, will do it without the
constraints of civil law. All others are hypocrites. Who then can advocate the
necessity of religious establishments, without betraying a want of sincerity?
Religious liberty exists in these States, but not without some restraints.
These restraints have originated in an unjustifiable interference of civil
authority. To the everlasting honor of Rhode Island be it said, that her
legislature has never assumed the authority of regulating ecclesiastical
concerns. Religion here stands, as it ought to, on its own basis, disconnected
with all political considerations.

A SLIGHT view of the condition of mankind in other quarters of the globe, will
at once convince us of the superior privileges and blessings enjoyed in
America. Imagination can scarcely depict the wretched state of the people
inhabiting the immense regions of Asia and Africa. There human nature,
inveloped in darkness, is degraded to the condition of brutes, transferred like
them from one owner to another, and pressed under the load of arbitrary power.
Their hearts never expand under the enlivening beams of liberty. In many parts
of Europe the condition of the people is more tolerable. The spirit of
oppression however predominates, and rears up its hideous form to oppose the
progress of liberty. France, in breaking her chains and seizing her freedom,
has experienced all the horrors of war. Its desolating calamities have rolled
over her fertile plains. Her armies, animated by that ardour which first glowed
in America, have triumphed over all opposition. Despotism has been shaken to
its lowest foundations. Brave Frenchmen! your cause is the cause of all nature;
your victories, the liberties of the world! --

TURNING off our eyes from the bloody fields of Europe, we may rejoice for the
happiness of the United States. In a full persuasion of the excellency of our
government, let us shun those vices which tend to its subversion, and cultivate
those virtues which will render it permanent, and transmit it in full vigor to
all succeeding ages. Let not the haggard forms of intemperance and luxury ever
lift up their destroying visages in this happy country. Let economy,
frugality, moderation and justice, at home and abroad, mark the conduct of all
our citizens. Let it be our constant care to diffuse knowledge and goodness
through all ranks of society. The people of this country will never be uneasy
under its present form of government, provided they have sufficient information
to judge of its excellency. No nation under heaven enjoys so much happiness as
the Americans. Convince them of this, and will they not shudder at the thought
of subverting their political constitution, or suffering it to degenerate into
aristocracy or monarchy? Let a sense of our happy situation awaken in us the
warmest sensations of gratitude to the Supreme Being. Let us consider him as
the author of all our blessings, acknowledging him as our beneficent parent,
protector and friend. The predominant tendency of his providence toward us as
a nation, evinces his benevolent designs. Every part of his conduct speaks in a
language plain and intelligible. Let us open our ears, let us attend, let us be
wise.

WHILE we celebrate the anniversary of our independence, let us not pass over
in silence the defenders of our country. Where are those brave Americans whose
lives were cloven down in the tempest of battle? Are they not bending from the
bright abodes? A voice from the altar cries, "These are they who loved their
country, these are they who died for liberty." We now reap the fruit of their
agony and toil. Let their memories be eternally embalmed in our bosoms. Let the
infants of all posterity prattle their fame, and drop tears of courage for
their fate.

THE consequences of American independence will soon reach to the extremities
of the world. The shining car of freedom will soon roll over the necks of
kings, and bear off the oppressed to scenes of liberty and peace. The clamours
of war will cease under the whole heaven. The tree of liberty will shoot its
top up to the sun. Its boughs will hang over the ends of the world, and the
wearied nations will lie down and rest under its shade. Here in America stands
the asylum for the distressed and persecuted of all nations. This vast temple
of freedom rises majestically fair. Founded on a rock, it will remain unshaken
by the force of tyrants, undiminished by the flight of time. Long streams of
light emanate through its portals, and chase the darkness from distant nations.
Its turrets will swell into the heavens, rising above every tempest; and the
pillar of divine glory, descending from God, will rest forever on its summit.

FINIS.

