A SERMON, PREACHED ON MONDAY, THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY, ONE THOUSAND SEVEN
HUNDRED AND NINETY-FOUR, BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. IN THE
ORIGINAL AND FIRST INCORPORATED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF WILLIAMSBURGH,
SOUTH CAROLINA.

BY THE REV. JAMES MALCOMSON, MINISTER OF SAID CHURCH.

It is not the wisdom of men, that attracts our wonder, or engages our
gratitude; but the hand of God we are led to admire and adore. Page -- And
understood not that a grateful mind by owing owes not, but still pays, at once
indebted and discharged; what burden then? MILTON. CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY
HARRISON AND BOWEN. MDCC,XCV.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALMS, 78. VERSE 42. They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he
delivered them from the enemy.


OF all other crimes, ingratitude is the basest, most mean, and contemptible.
It is degrading to the human character. It is unworthy of connection with the
exalted dispositions of rational beings. It argues a want of feeling -- a want
of goodness, of honesty, and justice. The common opinion of mankind reprobates
the principle; -- but although universally despised, it is too (...)

(...) IT will be readily allowed that all men are not equally involved in the
censure, all men are not alike guilty of the charge. Let it be mentioned to the
honor of human nature, that there are many instances of GRATITUDE, and even
disinterested benevolence, that have, and ought to be recorded. It would be
painful to read every page of history filled with instances of ingratitude, if
we could not place against them many instances of humanity, charity, and
gratitude. History is replete with instances of characters of extraordinary
worth -- the names of persons of the most amiable and respectable characters.
The sacred, volumes -- the treasures of divine truth were written for our
instruction. REVEL EXODUS 2d. 20th. 21st.
the priest of Midian, was grateful to Moses, for preserving his daughters,
from the violence of the shepherds, and gave him his daughter Zipporah to be
his wife. SAUL 1st. SAM. 15th and 6th verse.
was kind and grateful to the Kenites, and would not destroy them, with the
Amalekites, because they were kind to the Israelites, when they came out of
Egypt -- And the character of DAVID will ever be revered, for remarkable
instances of gratitude; -- his kindness to Hanun IId. SAM. 10th. and 2d. verse.
, although badly received, will ever be admired; -- His conduct to Jonathan's
IId. SAM. 9th. and 7th. verse.
family, and to Barzillai IId. SAM. 19th. 32d. to 38th. and 1st. KINGS 2d. and
7th.
, will ever be spoken of, with approbation and esteem.

HAPPY would it have been for mankind, had such characters been more universal,
and such dispositions more predominant in the world: Had this been the case
always, unsuspecting innocence would never have been deceived by those, from
whom gratititude and friendship was due, and in whom confidence was reposed; --
Ingratitude, treachery, and deceit, would have been words without meaning. --
Joseph would not have been neglected in the prison, by the chief butler; --
Such a character as Judas would have been entirely unknown.

HOWEVER great the crime of ingratitude is, when man is guilty of it, toward
man, it is more reprehensible, and of greater magnitude, when men are guilty of
it toward God: And this the Israelites are charged with in the text, -- "THEY
REMEMBERED NOT HIS HAND, NOR THE DAY WHEN HE DELIVERED THEM FROM THE ENEMY."

THE general conduct of the Israelites is a continued history of repeated
instances of ingratitude toward their God -- their preserver -- deliverer and
friend. They were chosen by God as a favorite people -- distinct from all other
nations, and enjoying the blessings of heaven in a remarkable manner. They
experienced the extraordinary interposition of God -- in his provision for
them, and in his deliverance of them, from slavery and bondage. "I am the Lord
thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt and out of the house of
bondage," -- was considered as a principal motive to obedience. A recognition
of their deliverance, would have called forth their gratitude, but they did
not, they would not remember. Their oppression in the land of Egypt was so
grievous and intolerable, that when Moses announced unto them the message of
God, concerning their intended deliverance, "they hearkened not, for anguish of
spirit, and for cruel bondage." Slavery has a tendency to dull the mind, and
stupify the senses -- and so it was with the Israelites, that a few days after
their departure from their place of bondage -- they remonstrated with Moses,
"wherefore have thou dealt thus with us, to carry us out of Egypt. Would to God
we had died by the hand of the Lord, in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the
fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to the full -- for ye have brought us
forth into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger." Although
they beheld the power of god in the destruction of their "taskmasters" in the
Red Sea -- yet they murmured for want of bread. Although they were fed in a
miraculous manner with manna from heaven, yet they murmured for water --
although they were supplied by water from a flinty rock, yet they tempted the
Lord with words of contempt "Is the Lord among us or not."

IN order to give a further display of his power, the Almighty delivers to the
Israelites the law, from Mount Sinai, with thunderings, lightning, and the
noise of the trumpet -- and after he had enjoined some ceremonial observances,
for the regulation of their conduct, he says, "and I will dwell among the
children of Israel, and will be their God, and they shall know, that I am the
Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may
dwell amongst them; I am the Lord their God."

IT might have been expected from these instances of divine favor, that the
Israelites would not readily forget their God, their deliverer, and lawgiver;
yet God's attention to, and care of them, is not more remarkable than their
ingratitude. In the absence of Moses they made a molten calf, and said "These
be thy Gods O Israel which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt!" They went
a whoring after other Gods -- yet their God did not forsake them, but continued
to conduct them through the wilderness, by a mighty hand and outstretched arm
-- when they were brought to the borders of the promised land -- they murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying, "Would God we had died in the land of Egypt,
or would God we had died in this wilderness; and they said one to another, let
us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt." They were so full of
ingratitude, and so obstinately wicked, that they would rather serve the
Egyptians and be slaves, as serve the Lord and be free. Thus we see, and
mankind in all ages have learned, by miserable experience, that a disposition
to submit to, or abet in, the promoting of slavery, is founded on, and derived
from the grossest perversion and corruption of human nature -- to submit to
tyranny is to encourage idolatry, and to promote slavery is to promote
spiritual wickedness in high places. There is something remarkable in
preferring slavery, and bondage, to rational liberty, and freedom, which is the
natural wish, and desire of the human mind; this disposition to slavery cannot
easily be accounted for, unless we consider it as proceeding from a determined
opposition to the will of God: This we may suppose from the conduct of the
Israelites, they frequently felt the severity of God's judgments, yet they did
not fear him -- they were frequently delivered by him from their enemies yet
they did not love him -- they preserred the service of idols to the service of
God -- their language was "who is the Lord that he should reign over us." They
sacrificed unto idols and not unto God -- they provoked the Lord to jealousy
with strange Gods. After they had obtained possession of the promised land, and
rested from a state of warfare with the neighboring nations, their ingratitude
to God, is no less apparent; their neglect of God brought them in subjection to
the king of Hazor, by whom they were mightily oppressed for twenty years,
afterward by Midian for seven years. They were delivered by the generalship of
Gideon -- who was an instrument in the hand of God for that purpose. But
instead of being thankful to God for their deliverance, they ascribe all to
Gideon and offer to reward him with what they had no right to bestow, their
proposal was to make him king. "Rule thou over us, thou, and thy son, and thy
son's son." JUDGES 8th. and 22d.
His answer to their proposal was sufficient to have convinced them of their
ingratitude to God. "I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over
you, THE LORD SHALL RULE OVER YOU." These words require no comment, they are
plain, and sufficiently explicit.

IN the days of Samuel although they enjoyed the blessings of peace, having
obtained a decided victory over the Philistines under the hand of God who
destroyed them with thunder -- yet they neglected the true God and remembered
not his deliverance of them. They murmured against Samuel's sons for which
there might have been some reasons as they were neither honest nor impartial in
the distributing of judgment. -- But they did not rest here -- they asked for a
king that they might be like all the nations -- this request was displeasing
both to Samuel and God. "And the Lord said unto Samuel they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them," from which
we see that all those who wish for an earthly sovereign, abjure the sovereignty
of God. Samuel endeavored to dissuade them from persisting in their foolish
wishes -- he informed them that a king would enslave, and oppress them, but
they refused to obey his voice and said, "nay, but we will have a king to reign
over us," that we may also be like all the nations, that our king may judge us,
and go out before us and fight our battles." Read the 8th. Chap. of the 1st.
Book of SAMUEL
I shall only remark, that however natural it was for the Israelites to wish to
have their battles fought for them, especially as they were fatigued with
fighting, yet we do not find that kings have come up to their expectations
herein, for instead of fighting the battles of the people, we find by bloody
experience that the people have been obliged to fight the battles of kings!

The history of kings can show too well the fulfilling of Samuel's prophecy
"And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have
chosen you -- and the Lord will not hear you in that day." This affords ground
for an observation which may be extended to all men, that the greatest
punishment God inflicted on the Israelites, was in satisfying all their wishes.

WHEN we read in sacred scripture an account of the general conduct of the
kings of Israel of many of their bloody dispositions and wicked reigns, and
compare their conduct with those who have aspired to as great, if not greater
power, in every subsequent period of the history of the world -- we cannot
avoid lamenting the folly and wickedness of men, who allow them to rule and
oppress them. It was in God's wrath the first king was given -- and it is for
the punishment of men, they have been continued. But as the effect ceases when
the cause ceases to operate -- so, it is reasonable to suppose that the
punishment would cease when the crime which punishes itself would cease and
determine.

WE have thus far taken a general view of the conduct of the Israelites, from
their departure from the land of bondage, until they entered into the promised
land -- ungratefully rejected the authority of the king of Heaven, and obtained
an earthly king to reign over them. The words of the text lead us to enquire
into the particular charges which the psalmist here makes against them -- AND
FIRST -- "They remembered not his hand." In the government of the universe
God's agency is visibly displayed. It is not sufficient to say that every event
is brought about by general causes -- and that the world is governed by general
laws. God exercises a particular government. This is evident from particular
instances of effects brought about contrary to the general laws of nature and
providence; a wise observer of human nature and of the ways of God has
informed us -- that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill." ECCLESIASTES 9th. Chap. 11th verse.
And we are informed by an authority which cannot be disputed -- 'are not five
sparrows sold for two shillings? And not one of them is forgotten before God.
But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered LUKES GOSPEL, 12th Chap.
6th and 7th verses*
. Gods presence is boundless -- the whole universe is open to his view --
governed by his wisdom -- and under his powerful control. -- The laws of nature
confess his wisdom and his skill -- and their operations, MAN is formed to
contemplate, admire and adore! -- For God's glory and our good, for his honor
and our instruction -- God frequently interposes in a miraculous manner --
gives a new arrangement to the course of his laws, and astonishes our minds no
less by his favors than his wonders. -- Thus we find that the Old Testament
gives a copious detail of his miracles and his wonders. He commanded, and the
earth ceased to perform its diurnal revolution for several hours; or in the
emphatical language of Scripture, "the Sun stood still;" JOSHUA 10th, 12th.
"And the Moon was stayed."

Although such extraordinary miracles are not now performed, nor perhaps so
necessary, -- we can still trace God's overruling Providence, and the wonders
of his hand. -- The revolutions which take place in the Political, as well as
in the Natural World, are all the effect of God's wisdom and power. To forget
God and deny his Providence, -- to ascribe success to human wisdom -- to the
arm of flesh and not to the mighty hand of God, is the basest ingratitude.
Alas! What is man when compared with God? Or what avails the power of man, when
compared with the power of God? If events were the result of man's wisdom and
contrivance how disordered would the affairs of the universe appear? If God who
opens the eyes of the understanding and imparts of his wisdom -- would withdraw
his influence, the affairs of men would wear an appearance still more
disordered. If God who restrains the wrath of man was to allow it unrestrained
exercise -- what would the consequence be? The history of the world, is at
best, but a black catalogue of the enormities and vices of men! It serves to
show what men are, even under the government of the Wise Ruler of the universe.

In the conduct of divine Providence there are many things mysterious, many
things beyond our comprehension. These things can be but partially understood
here, part will remain to be understood hereafter, -- Although we are imperfect
yet we must discern the operations of God's Providence -- If we ascribe
ordinary effects to him as the cause -- we have much more reason to consider
him as the cause of extraordinary actions. If David who was but a stripling --
a youth unaccustomed to war -- slew Goliath who was a man of extraordinary,
size, who was accustomed to fight and well prepared for it -- surely this
victory must be ascribed to the hand of God. If the Israelites were preserved
from the Egyptians by a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night,
it was the effect of supernatural power. -- If the sea divided its waters to
give them a safe passage on dry land -- and closed again and overwhelmed the
Egyptians -- this cannot be accounted for according to the regular laws of
nature, but must be ascribed to God's extraordinary power -- If the Israelites
who were but a small nation when compared with their enemies, were enabled to
escape from the oppression of the Egyptians and to conquer all nations before
them, so that they obtained undisturbed possession of the land of Canaan, it
certainly was very ungrateful in them to ascribe that deliverance and conquest
to themselves, yet "they remembered not his hand" nor SECONDLY "the day when he
delivered them from the enemy."

What particular instance of their deliverance the Psalmist here alludes to we
cannot determine. It is more than probable it was their deliverance from
Egyptian tyranny; the context seems to favor this conjecture. The Psalmist is
lamenting their disobedience and ingratitude. "How often did they provoke him in
the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert, yea they turned back and tempted
God, and limited the holy one of Israel. They remembered not his hand nor the
day when he delivered them from the enemy; how he had wrought his wonders in
Egypt, and his signs in the land of Zoan."

The Passover which is probably here alluded to, was appointed as a festival
for the Israelites, on which anniversary they were to commemorate their
miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, when the destroying Angel passed over the
houses of the children of Israel, but smote all the first born of the Egyptians
with death. This was a wonderful deliverance, so great, that it might have been
reasonably presumed, there would have been no danger of its being ever
forgotten by them. There is nothing more apt to leave a lasting impression on
our minds than works which are believed to be supernatural. Hence we find that
credulity and ignorance have been the prolific parents of a blind and numerous
offspring. Superstition and all her votaries, can trace their descent from this
source. This has given rise to deism, and even skepticism. Because some are too
credulous, founding their opinions on the suggestions of an extravagant fancy,
and deluded imagination -- therefore others will scarcely believe any thing --
Because sacred scripture informs us of several miracles, therefore some deny
its authenticity. Because they cannot understand, therefore they will not
believe. The Israelites however, are not charged with unbelief, but with
ingratitude. The psalmist does not say they believed not, but they remembered
not: Notwithstanding the impression which the miracles were calculated to make
on their minds, yet they became as a dream of the night, or as a tale that has
been told, and is soon forgotten.

It is natural for us to be elated with gratitude to the author of a favor
recently received; we esteem a benefactor when a sense of his favors are fresh
on the mind; but time with silent influence, is too apt to wipe off the
impression; In order to counteract this, we find that God appointed several
days to be held in religious memorial by the Israelites, they had certain days
appointed for ritual observances, and for commemorating some remarkable events;
for this purpose was the passover appointed by an express command. "And this
day shall be unto you for a memorial and you shall keep it a feast unto the
Lord throughout your generations; you shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for
ever. -- And Moses said to the people -- remember this day in which ye came out
from Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for by strength of hand the Lord
brought you out from this place." Thus it appears that it is not only peculiar
to human nature to remember with gratitude favors lately received, but the
appointment of days for that purpose, shows, that it is sanctioned by the high
authority of divine institution, and founded in unerring wisdom. Thus we find
that the greatest favor ever conferred on the human race -- the salvation of
penitent sinners by Jesus Christ is to be commemorated by all his followers,
until his second coming at the final consummation of all things. "This do in
remembrance of me" is an authority of the highest origin, and most
incontrovertible obligation. This is a commemoration of a great deliverance
from oppression and bondage -- the bondage of sin and death. What person is so
far lost to sentiments of gratitude, as not to remember it? So natural is the
desire of commemorating important events that we find in the histories of all
nations, either barbarous or civilized, certain days have been attended to,
with a strictness bordering on enthusiasm. To this natural desire, divine
authority is added, to perpetuate the remembrance of spiritual and temporal
blessings. In order that our gratitude may have free exercise, it is highly
becoming in us to imitate the divine conduct, by setting apart certain days,
for religious joy and gratitude, on which we may call to our remembrance, the
mighty hand of God. The anniversary of the birth of a patriot or hero, an
illustrious statesman, or commander, is celebrated with the warmest effusions
of joy, how much more grateful ought we to be, on the anniversary of the birth
of a cause, which brings freedom and deliverance, to millions, who were
groaning under the shackles of tyranny, despotism, and the most extreme
indigence* Need I call up to your minds, those patriots who have struggled, and
those heroes who have bled in the cause of liberty and mankind? Need I mention
the names of illustrious reformers, who, in every age of the world, have
outbraved the storms of persecution and with manly fortitude, have opposed the
claims of tyranny both in civil and ecclesiastical affairs? -- Their actions
are recorded, their memories are blessed, their names will be perpetuated. They
will be spoken of with veneration, and gratitude, whilst the sun, moon, and
stars endure, -- even to the latest generation: whilst their names are recorded
on the page of history, let the memory of the cause which they labored to
support be imprinted on our hearts. The latest instance of this kind is the
REVOLUTION IN FRANCE, which has been joyful to upwards of 25,000,000 pleasing
to every friend of liberty, and humanity -- and astonishing to all the world.
THIS DAY being the 14th of July, calls up to our minds the destruction of the
Bastile that place devoted for the innocent victims of tyrannic fury. Five
years are now elapsed, since that happy and astonishing event took place; and
as friends of the human race we rejoice at the deliverance. In this happy
revolution we acknowledge the hand of God, and remember the day on which our
fellow-men were delivered from the enemy. As men we feel the sacred influence
of sympathy, and christianity teaches us to " rejoice with those who do
rejoice, as well as to weep with those who weep." We look forward to that happy
period, when the demon of tyranny will cease to oppress, and afflict mankind;
and we trust in God, that the French revolution is one link, in the great chain
of causes, which will bring about that happy time. But whilst we rejoice in the
cause of liberty, we must lament the numerous sacrifices, which the complete
establishment of it, renders unavoidable. The enemies of the Revolution have
endeavored to tarnish and render it abortive, by encouraging treachery, civil
insurrections and bloodshed; but he who sits in heaven will laugh at their
proceedings and put them all to scorn -- "The wrath of man will praise him, the
remainder thereof he can restrain." He will render the counsels of the wicked
of none effect, that the man of the earth may no more oppress. PSALMS 10th and
18th.
We do not undertake to justify the conduct of every pretended friend to the
French revolution; some have attempted to disgrace it by their intemperate
zeal, and sanguinary measures; -- but even this has served the cause of the
revolution, and in the end it will appear that God can bring good out of evil.
-- It is not the violence of men, nor the intemperance of measures, but the
greatness of the cause, we ought to praise, and rejoice in; -- It is not the
wisdom of men that attracts our wonder, and engages our gratitude; -- but the
hand of God, we are led to admire and adore.

How distressing was the former situation of the people of France, under an
absolute monarchy; -- almost constantly embroiled in wars at the caprice of
their monarch, insecure in their persons, -- forced from their families, and
all that was dear to them, harrassed by their noblesse, an aristocracy which
ate the fruit of their industry, and a body of dignified clergy, who preyed on
their vitals. They were kept in ignorance by those, whose office it was to
enlighten and instruct them. They planted vineyards, without knowing who should
eat the fruit thereof. They carried seed into the field without knowing who
should gather in the Harvest. Their wives and their children, as well as
themselves, were frequently a prey to relentless insult, and cruelty. They were
exposed to all the miseries of slavery, poverty, and distress.

Let their former situation be compared with their present; -- how wonderful
the contrast! If they are obliged to fight, it is in their own defense, and not
as slavish mercenaries. Their laws are of their own making -- their persons and
properties inviolable. Every one can now sit down "under his own vine, and his
own fig tree and none makes him afraid." In some other countries, not only the
bodies but the minds of men are enslaved -- they are obliged to submit to the
decisions of interested though ignorant pretenders to spiritual authority. But
in France priest craft as well as king-craft is done away, -- every
denomination enjoys the blessings of free and candid enquiry. Is it not
surprising that such a change could take place in the course of five years --
although opposed by all the formidable artillery of the combined despots of
Europe? Who would not rejoice at the happy prospect which it affords? Who would
not sacrifice every thing that is dear to him, nay, even life itself, rather
than be deprived of such invaluable privileges?

Whilst we rejoice this day in the emancipation of a great and powerful nation,
let us not be forgetful of the revolution of this country, which may be
considered as introductory to the revolution in France. You had been long
oppressed and insulted, and new chains were forging for you -- Your forefathers
had fled from persecution and you made a noble stand against the spirit of
persecution, which pursued you, and was about to settle here. -- Your
deliverance was brought about by the interposition of heaven. At the
commencement of the revolution, "Your hands had not been taught to war, nor
your fingers to fight." Courage and resolution supplied the place of ignorance
and inexperience. The justice of your cause supplied the place of a numerous
army. -- Your cause was the cause of heaven. -- Your enemies under the artful
profession of being foster-fathers, and foster mothers, carried fire and sword,
havoc and destruction, through your land. -- They were experienced in all the
art of war and had other bloody hirelings in their pay and service. -- They
opposed the powerful principles of truth and justice, courted the vengeance of
heaven, and set God at defiance. -- You had to combat a king whose passions
were paramount to reason and justice -- A wicked ministry who had neither
wisdom nor honesty, a government with the name but scarcely the shadow of
liberty and representation, a people deluded, bribed, and corrupted, by those
who rob, and plunder them; an army of worthless mercenaries, partly engaged
through views of plunder, and partly for the sake of indolence. -- These were
your enemies from abroad, and these are at present the most inveterate enemies
of the French. -- Their conduct has for many years discovered the greatest
pride, insolence, and low cunning. -- They carry on their wars, not by bravery
but by bribery, by encouraging treachery and dissensions, by circulating
calumnies, and promoting massacres. -- Their favorite maxim is "divide and
conquer." Imitating the pride of Roman Glory they aim at no less than the
dominion of the seas, and the empire of the world. To none can the adage be
better applied, than to them. QUEM DEUS VULT PERDERE, PRIUS DIMENTAT."

But you had others to combat with -- your enemies from abroad by corruption
and fair promises caused you to have enemies at home; and "a man's greatest
enemies are those of his own household." Your domestics were armed against you
and you were armed against each other. It was owing to the mighty hand of God
that you were delivered from internal enemies and from the tyranny of a foreign
legislation. This was among the many instances when tyranny begat liberty, and
yet endeavored to destroy its offspring -- when Providence saved the innocent
child and destroyed the wicked and unnatural parent. -- When the Almighty
supported the oppressed, and cut off the oppressor; justly may we say. "Lord
who is like unto thee which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for
him, and from him that spoileth him." In the Lord Jehova is everlasting
strength.

After a long, unnatural, and bloody contest, you have now the quiet and
undisturbed possession of your liberty, and properties. You have no haughty
tyrant to exact obedience from you, at his caprice, and pleasure. You have no
imperious Lords, to insult and oppress you. You have ho dignified clergy, nor
mitred bishops, to impose penalties on you, on account of your private
opinions; or to exact from you the tenth of your labor and industry. If you
have rulers, you appoint them, and they must be responsible. They are your
servants and not your masters: Every official character is chosen by, and from
among yourselves, and their duty and interest are inseparable from yours. As
Christians you enjoy religious liberty, as republicans you enjoy civil liberty;
the one is your prerogative as Christians, the other your birthright as men;
they are inseparable in themselves, it remains with you to preserve them
inviolable, as an inheritance for posterity.

It is our duty as ministers of the gospel, to warn you against corruption, to
exhort you to beware of moral, and political corruption. We warn you to
suppress ambition, to beware of faction, and to "live peaceably with all men."
Beware of entrusting too much power to any, either in church or state. This has
been the cause of eclipsing the purity of religion, and involving the world in
bloodshed. The troubles of revolutions ought to be a lesson to mankind to
prevent the necessity of them. Tho people seldom murmur or revolt without a
cause; but they are justly punished when they give cause for their own
complaints, and this is the case, when through indolence or inattention, they
suffer themselves to be brought under the rod of oppression. The drunkard and
debauchee may complain of sicknness, poverty, and a ruined constitution, but he
is too well acquainted with the cause.

Whilst you continue firm and determined republicans, plain in your manners,
correct in your morals, frugal in your economy, united in your conduct; it may
be said of you "one shall chase a thousand and two put to flight ten thousand."
By this rule of conduct you will be strongly fortified against all your enemies
you will have God for your leader and defender; but if ever you give power,
worship, and reverence to any human creature, you serve an idol, and forfeit
the favor of God!

You have given to the world the best model of human government that ever was
known, since the time that the Israelites were so foolish as to ask for a king.
All other governments that have been called republics, commonwealths, or
democracies, did not secure the rights and liberties of the people; a majority
were overlooked and misrepresented; the nearer that any government has
approached to a republic by equal representation, the more prosperity the
people enjoy, the stronger they are, and the better enabled to oppose all their
enemies. We do not undertake to vindicate your government from all errors, or
to say that it is perfect: but this much we say that if there are any diseases
in your constitution, they admit of a cure, and if incurable, you are well
taught not to shrink from amputation, "If thy right hand offend thee, cut it
off, and cast it from thee." MATTHEW 5th. and 30th*
It is better that a diseased member should be cut off, than that the whole
body should be infected, and rendered incurable.

The enemies of the liberty and happiness of men have asserted, that civil wars
are unavoidable in republics. This we deny, MATTHEW (...)
and facts prove the contrary. The history of the Israelites under a
commonwealth, and under their kings, will show the falsehood of the assertion.
Under a commonwealth the tribes were united -- But in the reign of their first
king their civil wars began. The contest between the families of Saul and
David; between Judah and Israel, and their kings, shows what monarchy is. Let
there be no places of extraordinary honor, or profit, and there will be no
bloody contentious about filling them.

IF the profits arising from the crown of England, and its prerogative, had not
been so great, there would have been less blood shed in the quarrels betwixt
the houses of York and Lancaster. If the loaves and fishes were out of the
question those deluded people would not have been involved in the present war.
They have waged war against principles -- they have declared for the
suppression of reason and philosophy, they have resolved to stifle the
principles of truth -- to stop the progress of liberty -- and they have
appealed to the sword to establish their cause. They have declared they will
never treat with the French as a people, until they have chosen a king. By this
declaration they are enemies to every friend of liberty; WE accept the
challenge and let it be our prayer to the Almighty Ruler of all events to
disappoint their wicked designs, and to fortify us against their intrigues.

THE eyes of the world are directed to the present bloody contest in Europe --
The tongues of the oppressed, and of every friend to liberty are saying "we
wish you success" This should recall to your minds, a recollection of your own
virtuous struggle, for the cause of liberty, and independence. By the hand of
^od you were led on to victory and glory. It ought to be your desire, and
prayer to God for those who are engaged in the same honorable cause, that their
contest may soon have the same glorious issue. The cause of the French concerns
all men, but more immediately the liberty and happiness of these free and
independent states.

WHAT the issue of the present contest may be, is beyond the reach of human
calculation to determine; infinite wisdom is alone competent to decide. But
this much we may safely assert that if the French are unsuccessful, they are
either unworthy of the blessings of liberty -- or God has thought proper to
delay the suppression of tyranny, which is ANTICHRIST until a more proper time.
But why should we suppose that this time is not God's time, for putting an end
to civil and religious tyranny. In a certain sense it may said to be the
desire, the wish and expectation of all nations. The voice of the oppressed is
calling for freedom, the blood of the innocent victims of tyranny is calling
for vengeance.

THE prospect of American affairs was frequently more gloomy than the situation
of the French has yet been -- and why should we distrust the same powerful
hand, by which the Americans were saved and delivered? Can we suppose that the
wise disposer of all events -- would lead them on thus far, through a number of
intrigues and conspiracies -- through the Red Sea of blood, through a
wilderness of troubles, and leave them at last to the savage rage of merciless
enemies, to be carried back to their former state of oppression, and bondage --
and thereby blast the hopes, and disappoint the expectations, of all the
friends of liberty in the world? Such a thought derogates from the perfections
of God, and is an insult to the ruler of the Universe.

BUT it is said the French are deistical, nay atheistical; for they have
abolished all religion. Was this the case, we might answer, that God frequently
makes use of wicked men, to accomplish a good cause. -- But why should we
suppose that they are void of religion? Is it a proof of their want of
religion, because they have abolished human establishments of it? Are they void
of religion because they have changed their calendar -- Are they void of
religion because they have given free enquiry, and liberty of worship to all?
Such charges are made against them, either by those who are careless of
religion themselves, or by those who make it an engine of state policy. To
conclude.

A CONSTANT remembrance of God's protection and deliverance of us, is the best
preservative against dangers. -- If we retain a sense of God's power on our
minds, we will be in less danger of ingratitude, or forgetfulness of his
mercies. And surely it is neither unwise, nor unbecoming, in those who reap all
the benefits of civil and religious liberty, to wish for success to others, who
are gloriously contending for the same happiness. It is the cause of humanity,
the cause of religion, the cause of God. Liberty, like the light of heaven,
whilst it chears the hearts of numbers, is not diminished in its luster. It is
intended for, and ought to comprehend in its influence, all the rational
creatures of God. -- Let us rejoice in the prospect which the present situation
of Europe and the world affords! Let us pray that the rays of liberty as the
path of the just, may shine more and more, to the perfect day -- that God who
executes judgment for the oppressed, would break every yoke, and let the
oppressed go free. AMEN.

FINIS.

