A SERMON, DELIVERED IN THE NEW PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, NEW YORK, JULY FOURTH,
1795.

BEING THE NINETEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF AMERICA: AT THE
REQUEST OF, AND BEFORE, THE MECHANIC, TAMMANY, AND DEMOCRATIC SOCIETIES, AND
THE MILITARY OFFICERS.

BY SAMUEL MILLER, A. M.

ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE UNITED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCHES, IN THE CITY OF
NEW YORK.

NEW YORK -- PRINTED BY THOMAS GREENLEAF, 1795.

New York, July 8 th, 1795. SIR,
THE Mechanic, Tammany, and Democratic Societies, with the Military Officers,
have appointed us to return you their united and sincere Thanks for your
animated and patriotic Sermon, preached at their Request, on the 4 th Instant,
being the Anniversary of American Independence.

We are further directed to request a Copy for Publication.

We are, Sir, With Respect and Esteem, Yours, etc. WILLIAM BOYD, THOMAS L.
KIP, JOHN STRIKER, BENJAMIN EGBERT.

The Rev. Mr. Miller.



ADVERTISEMENT.
SEVERAL Paragraphs in the following Discourse, though in the original Copy,
were omitted in the Delivery, for want of Time. This, however, the Author
supposed, by no means precluded their Introduction here. With all its Defects,
he submits it, without Apologies, to the Candor of THE PEOPLE, to whose best
Interests he would consecrate all his Ministrations.

A SERMON.
EXODUS xii. 14. AND THIS DAY SHALL BE UNTO YOU FOR A MEMORIAL --
PERMIT me, my fellow citizens, to congratulate you on the return of this DAY
-- A day which completes another year of freedom to our favored land -- A day
on which were laid, by the venerable patriots of America, under the all
governing hand of JEHOVAH, those foundations of peace, liberty, and
independence, which we enjoy -- A day, therefore, in many respects, one of the
most interesting that ever marked the annals of the world.

The twentieth year of the important era, which we now commemorate, has, this
morning, dawned upon us. After this long experience, we have still reason to
hail its return, and to rejoice in those events, which the season recals to our
view. After a lapse of time, in which the fervor of revolutionary feelings,
has given way to rational enquiry, and calm conviction; we have still ample,
nay, increasing ground to rise up and call it blessed. We have still reason to
say, with joy, This day shall be unto us for a memorial; we will keep it a
feast of gladness, throughout all our generations.

The day mentioned in our text, is that on which the children of Israel were
delivered from Egyptian slavery, and escaped from the oppressive hands of the
tyrant Pharaoh. The history of their injurious and cruel bondage, and of their
happy deliverance are too familiarly known, by all whom I address, to need a
formal recital at present. Nor shall I detain you by attempting to state the
obvious analogy between their liberation, and that which we this day
commemorate. Let it suffice to observe, that if they were bound by the express
command of God, to keep as a sacred memorial, the day on which they came up out
of Egypt; we are bound by reason, by religion, by patriotism, by every solemn
tie, never to forget the DAY, which proved the commencement of so many
distinguished blessings to our land.

A memorial is something which recals, in a direct and forcible manner to the
mind, the character or transaction to which it refers. Now although the
splendid and glorious scenes which this day brings to our view, are too
interesting, and too important to be ever wrapped in total oblivion, by beings
capable of reflection; yet it is proper to do something more than barely to
remember them. It is pleasing, and it is useful, at stated seasons, to bring
them home to our bosoms, and in a deliberate and solemn manner to recognize
their importance. This is not only an employment highly grateful to the
patriotic mind, but it is much more; it is a tribute which we owe to our GOD;
it adds new life to a flame, which gratitude commands us to keep always
burning; it cherishes and extends the influence of a spirit, which should
forever animate the breasts of freemen.

Let this day, then, be to us a memorial in two respects. -- Let it serve to
recall to our minds, and practically to impress on our hearts, a sense of our
national BLESSINGS, and of our national DUTY.

I. Let this day be a memorial of our national BLESSINGS.

In taking a view of these, you might be led back to the important period, when
our venerable forefathers left the unhallowed shores of oppression -- braved
the dangers of the ocean -- surmounted all the hardships of an howling
wilderness -- and reared, in the forests of this western world, the first
mansions of liberty. You might be presented with a view of their numerous and
complicated sufferings, and the manifest interpositions of providence for their
support and preservation. You might listen to a recital of the various steps,
by which small and dispersed settlements rose to extensive, compact, and happy
societies; and, nurtured by the divine beneficence, grew into consideration and
eminence. You might be led, in short, to review the whole history of this
growing country, from the earliest period of its population by Europeans, to
the memorable time, when a place was given us among the independent nations of
the earth.

But this would be taking two wide a field for the limits of the present
address. It will be necessary to confine our attention to those events, and
those distinguished blessings, which stand in more immediate connection with
the anniversary which we celebrate. These may be summed up under two general
heads. -- Our emancipation from Britain -- and the numerous important
advantages, which have flowed from that grand event, as their source.

When the people of the United States, in Congress assembled, affixed their
hands and their seals to the solemn DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE which has been
just read in your hearing, the world beheld them with amazement* and even many
of our own citizens, under the influence of a natural timidity, trembled at the
sight! Who could behold, without the highest solicitude, a few infant colonies
rising up to oppose an herculean foe; and daring to engage the gigantic
greatness of a wealthy and a haughty power? Unskilled in the "disgraceful
science of human butchery;" unfurnished with the instruments of carnage and
death, and unsupported by any other arm, than that of the MIGHTY ONE OF ISRAEL,
they crowded to the banner of freedom; proclaimed defiance to the thunder of
their enemies; and repelled without dismay, the cruel invaders of their
inestimable rights.

To trace the progress of this contest, through all its varied and irregular
steps, is neither necessary nor possible, at present. It were unpardonable,
however, to omit observing, that the instances of divine interposition in our
favor* through the whole course of the arduous struggle, were too signal and
illustrious to be forgotten by the most careless; and too numerous, not to fix
in grateful astonishment, the most unfeeling mind. For seven years, our land
exhibited a succession of scenes, equally unexpected, wonderful and glorious.
You saw a glow of enthusiasm, which language fails to describe, pervading and
actuating every bosom. You saw an army enduring every imaginable hardship,
without relaxing in its attachment to the cause for which it was suffering. You
saw the counsels of our enemies infatuated, and their wisest plans
disconcerted, in a manner almost miraculous. You saw the life and health of the
illustrious COMMANDER IN CHIEF remarkably and graciously preserved. You saw
powerful FRIENDS AND ALLIES raised up for us, on terms of unexpected advantage.
You saw us rise, like Antoeus, vigorous from every fall. You saw us led on from
time to time, to conquest and triumph; until, at length, the fair fabric of
freedom was completely reared over the tomb of tyranny.

But why do I detain you with this exulting review? Many of those who are this
day indulgently listening to the speaker, were sharers in the toils, and actors
in the triumphs, which have been mentioned. Many who are now within these
walls, could describe, in the glowing language of experience and of actual
vision, what has been so feebly and superficially noticed. Tell us, ye
venerable Assertors of the rights of man! tell us, for YOU alone can properly
tell, how ardent the sacred flame, which, at that eventful period, possessed
and governed your souls! Paint to us, whose age forbade us to be agents in the
important scene, what you felt, and what you saw; what noble principles
inspired your bosoms, and what heroic exertions you were enabled to display.
That, like you, should the voice of national danger call us, we may prove
ourselves worthy of the descent which we boast.

Large, indeed, is our debt to all those, whom GOD has honored to be the
INSTRUMENTS of securing our independence and national felicity. Many of them,
alas! fell as martyrs in the cause, and sealed our glorious emancipation with
their blood. But a large proportion have lived to taste the blessings for which
they fought; and to enjoy those inestimable rights, for which they risked their
all. Let us never suffer this day to pass over our heads, without calling to
mind their services and their virtues. From the highest and most conspicuous,
to the lowest and most obscure, they have all DESERVED WELL OF THEIR COUNTRY.
They are entitled to our affectionate remembrance and regard. Their names, and
their heroic exploits shall never be forgotten, while gratitude has a place in
the bosoms of Americans; or while this land continues to be the abode of free
men, who know how to value, what has been so dearly purchased.

But we proposed to consider this day as a memorial, not merely of our
emancipation from the tyranny of an unnatural parent; but also of the numerous
rich blessings to which that grand event has given rise.

There is, indeed, a propensity in the human mind, to ascribe to particular
favorite events, much more than really stands in connection with them. We are
too apt to view an interesting era, or a signal transaction, as involving more
numerous, and more important consequences, than there is just ground to admit.
But in the case before us, we can scarcely go too far; or attribute more to the
event in question, than the closest enquiry will warrant. The most impartial
mind will readily grant, that a large share of our happiness as a people; and
the whole of our national dignity and rank, flow from the proceedings of that
glorious day, when the venerable sages of America rose, and pronounced her
INDEPENDENT and FREE.

It is owing, under providence, to this bold, but necessary separation, that
the UNITED STATES have assumed a high and honorable place among the nations of
the earth; or rather, have, in many respects, risen above them all. It is to be
ascribed to this, that they have made such rapid advances, in every thing that
tends to promote the welfare and happiness of civil society. However great our
natural advantages, they would all have been in vain, had the shackles of
British power continued to bind and restrain us. Like a promising youth, whose
genius and talents are cramped by a cruel and selfish parent, we must always
have continued a spiritless and grovelling people. Industry would have been
discouraged; and like laborers in a vineyard not our own, we should have lived
under the contracted views, and unaspiring hopes of hirelings and slaves.

But behold the happy effects of freedom shining resplendent throughout every
part of our land! no sooner was the struggle over, by which the galling yoke
was broken in pieces, and cast from our indignant necks, than these, before
gloomy colonies, began to assume a new and promising aspect. Fruitful fields
appeared, where thorns and briars lately grew; and beautiful villages were
spread over those plains, which until then, had only served as miserable
mementos of our poverty and thraldom. And although the relaxation and debility
of the political body, which soon succeeded to the violent struggle it had made
during the war, gave rise to many discouragements, and showed the inefficiency
of the plans which were originally formed; yet these evils were as short-lived
as the causes which gave them birth. By the peaceable and deliberate adoption
of a more effectual CONSTITUTION, and by the happy influence of this excellent
government, the tottering fabric of public confidence has been repaired; the
salutary bonds of social union have been strengthened; the administration of
impartial justice has been restored; and every avenue to national importance,
and the felicity of individuals opened wide.

In short, from the period of our separation from Britain, we may date the
commencement, and distinctly trace the progress of most of those blessings
which we enjoy as a people. Then were sown the seeds of that elevated expansion
of mind, and that ardent love of freedom, which have ever since distinguished
and adorned the American character. From that moment, commerce listed her
drooping head, and looked forward with joy to the prosperous times which she
has since experienced. Then agriculture, and the mechanic arts, were placed
upon a basis, upon which they have already risen to a high degree of
improvement, and still promise much higher advances. Then the interests of
science emerged from the clouds, which until that hour had sat thick and deep
upon them, and began to shine forth with new and increasing brightness. Then,
in a word, were established that EQUALITY OF RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS; that civil
and religious freedom; that reign of law; and all those genuine republican
principles, which are calculated to call forth the best energies of man; to
make the wisest application of the human faculties; and to build up the fabric
of national happiness.

This recital of the happy consequences of our separation from Britain, is not
designed, either to feed our vanity as a people, or to fill us with bitterness
toward the nation from which we have withdrawn. Nothing more is intended,
than, that, on the day consecrated as a memorial of the blessings which have
been recounted, we should realize their existence, and feel their value.
Nothing more is wished, than to bring into view every circumstance which tends
to enhance the value of these distinguished favors, that your gratitude for
them may be the more fervently excited. Americans! if you would be faithful to
yourselves -- if you would be faithful to your posterity -- if you would be
faithful to your God, keep in your breasts a lasting monument of these things.
Never forget, and especially on THIS DAY, never forget, the various dangers
from which you have escaped -- the numerous difficulties which you have been
enabled to surmount, and the grievous oppression from which you have been
rescued. But while you cherish an habitual remembrance of your deliverance from
these evils; cherish also, a spirit of forgiveness toward the author of your
injuries. Let no malignant passions rise, to tarnish your devout gratitude, or
to defile your patriotic joy.

But, THIS DAY should not only remind us of our national BLESSINGS -- We
proposed also to consider it,

II. As a memorial of our national DUTY.

Unto whomsoever much is given, said our Lord, of him shall much be required.
This declaration is applicable, as well to communities as to individuals. In
proportion to the number and value of the blessings heaped upon us, and the
privileges we enjoy as a people, are the solemnity and weight of our
obligations to a suitable conduct. How much more may be rationally expected,
and justly demanded from US, than from the subjects of an African, or Asiatic
tyrant, who, under chains, drag out a few miserable days, or sleep their lives
away, without properly understanding, and therefore, without truly estimating
their rights! They know not the sweetness of liberty, for they have never
tasted it. They can judge but feebly of the horrors of despotism* for they have
never seen any thing with which to contrast the odious object. They, of
consequence, must have very indistinct conceptions of political duty; for
rights and duties always go hand in hand. But with regard to us, my fellow
citizens, the case is widely different. The light which we enjoy, and the
privileges with which we are surrounded, give rise to a variety and extent of
duties, which there is neither time to delineate, at full length, nor ability
to urge with sufficient force. A few of the most obvious and interesting shall
be selected, and offered to your consideration.

The FIRST duty of which the annual return of this day should serve as a
memorial, is, to REALIZE AND ACKNOWLEDGE THE SOURCE, from whence the national
blessings, which we celebrate, have flowed. Who first put it into the hearts of
our venerable and illustrious patriots, to cast off the yoke of oppression, and
to oppose the encroachments of a haughty power, with such firmness and
decision? Who nerved the arms of our brave citizens in the conflict? Who
inspired our legislators and commanders with wisdom and with valor? Who gave
us powerful ALLIES -- encouraged our suffering army -- crowned them with signal
victories -- and conducted us to a glorious peace? Of whom is it that we are
THIS DAY surrounded with so many blessings; and are permitted to keep it as a
memorial, with joy and gladness? Surely these are all the LORD'S DOINGS. It is
true, these great events have been brought about through the medium of human
instruments, and second causes: but while we regard them with becoming
gratitude, let us look beyond them, to the PRIMARY AGENT. Sublime and heroic as
their exertions were, they would all have been in vain, without the support and
direction of HIM who sits as governor among the nations. Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; but God is the
Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another. Psa. lxxv. 6, 7.
Give unto the Lord, therefore, O ye kindreds of the people! give unto the Lord
glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. Psa. xcvi.
7, 8.


Americans! never forget Him who made you what you are. Never suffer yourselves
to lose sight of the hand, that has been so often made bare for your salvation.
Jehovah will not relinquish the honor of his government, nor will he give his
glory to another. If you forget him, he will forget you. If you slight the
Omnipotence, which has been your shield and buckler, you will be made to bend
before it, by a weight of wrath. For pride goes before destruction, and an
haughty spirit before a fall. Prove. xvi. 1^.
Let us, then, take good heed to ourselves, that we love the Lord our God. Let
us avoid all arrogance and presumption; and look to Him as our SUPPORT,
PROTECTOR and GUIDE. For all our success and prosperity, let us give Him the
glory. In every undertaking, instead of resting in an arm of flesh, let us go
for strength and wisdom to His throne. And in all our ways, let us acknowledge
His sovereign rule. That there is an acknowledgement of God incumbent on
society as such, will not be denied, by those who are friends to any religion
at all. It must, therefore, have given sincere pleasure to every serious mind,
that the citizens of the United States were lately called, by the Chief
Magistrate of the Union, in an interesting state of public affairs, to make
such acknowledgement, in an explicit and public manner. May America never want
magistrates, who will be disposed at all proper seasons, to call her to a
similar duty! May she never be destitute of citizens, who will rejoice in every
opportunity of complying with such a call*
Thus may we expect a continuance of his blessing, and confide in his
preserving care. For, behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him;
upon them that hope in his mercy.

ANOTHER duty, of which the return of this day should remind us, is SUITABLY TO
ESTIMATE THE NATIONAL BLESSINGS WHICH WE ENJOY: With regard to most of the
favors which a bountiful God bestows upon his creatures, it may be said, that
their true value is rarely realized until they are withdrawn, and the
consequences of their loss appear. When the most precious jewels become cheap
and common, they sink in our esteem; and the fairest objects in creation, fade
in the eye that is admitted to familiar and unrestrained vision. This is too
much the case with our national blessings; they are so rich, plentiful and
common among all classes of citizens, that few consider their intrinsic
importance. But remember, that Liberty with her large train of attendant
blessings, disdains to dwell among those who respect her not. She will never
tarry long with a people, who venture to slight her dignified character.

Would you know then, my fellow citizens, the value of our national privileges
and blessings? Consider, for a moment, what they cost us* -- a tedious war --
immense treasures -- and the richest blood of our countrymen. Think, also, how
high they have already raised us, among the nations of the earth. Under their
auspices, we have made advances in political grandeur and felicity, more rapid
than the world ever witnessed before. Think, moreover, with what ardour our
fellow creatures have struggled for them in all ages, and how much they have
suffered, to obtain even a distant view of such glorious objects. But, above
all, if you would realize the true value of these blessings, look round on the
state of other nations, and behold them distracted with the din of arms --
overflowing with blood -- or shaken from their foundations with internal
discord! Behold the greater part of the European world, either groaning under
the horrors of war, or else withdrawing from the field, through inability any
longer to continue the destructive conflict! Behold, in short, three-fourths of
the human race* bound in chains, and submitting their necks to the feet of
idiots and monsters, who feast on the miseries of man; and who blush not to
claim a divine authority, thus to scourge and trample on their fellow
creatures! Behold these things! and then say, whether the blessings which we
this day commemorate, do not shine with additional luster? Contemplate this
feint picture of human misery; and then say, whether you do not return with
tenfold more delight and exultation, to these peaceful shores, where every man
sits under his own vine, and under his own fig tree, and has none to make him
afraid?

A THIRD duty of which the return of this day should be to us a memorial, is,
QUIETLY TO ENJOY AND WISELY TO IMPROVE the political blessings which have been
conferred upon us. However excellent our form of government; -- however
numerous and rich the privileges under which we live; they will avail but
little, unless they are used in a temperate, virtuous, and becoming manner.
Political happiness will be sought in vain, either where liberty is turned into
licentiousness, or where the rights and privileges of free men are not
asserted, and used with becoming dignity. Innumerable mischiefs will arise
here, if we turn either to the right hand or to the left. They who will not
submit to equitable laws and strengthen the hands of a wise government, stab
the vitals of the body politic, and undermine all social happiness; while those
who can sit, with a cold indifference, and see their rights infringed; or who
seek not redress, when it can be obtained in a constitutional manner, deserve
to be stigmatized as traitors to their country. -- Now, wisely to enjoy and
improve our national blessings, is, to avoid both these extremes. It is to use
that liberty to which we have been called not as a cloak of maliciousness, but
as the servant of God. It is to cultivate principles and manners conformable to
the republican government of which we boast. It is, in one word, to assert and
maintain our rights in such a manner as will most effectually tend to promote
the good order, peace and happiness of society.

Political prosperity resides, not in the words and letters of the
Constitution; but in the temper, the habits, and the practices of the people.
The one may exhibit a fair and promising aspect; while the other may present a
view humiliating and odious in the extreme. Behold the striking contrast
between the MAGNA CHARTA of Great Britain, and the actual administration and
(...) of that kingdom! In the one, the noble (...) dignified front of Freedom
appears -- but when we turn to the other, we are astonished to fi^^ Oppression
standing in triumph, and almost every political grievance in its train!

With us it rests, then, to make the rich gifts of Heaven, which we this day
commemorate, contribute to our real happiness; or to pervert them to the worst
and most destructive purposes. With us it rests, either, by a wise choice of
public officers -- by a ready submission to wholesome laws -- by moderation,
industry, and every republican virtue, to promote the true welfare of society;
or else, by an opposite course, to convert blessings into curses; and the most
delicious nectar, into gall and wormwood. -- With us it rests, to convince the
world, by fair experiment, that enlightened freemen can govern themselves; or
to furnish the enemies of freedom with an occasion to speak reproachfully, and
upbraid us as the contrivers of visionary schemes.

THE LAST duty that shall be mentioned here, of which the annual return of this
day should remind us, is, to WATCH OVER THE INESTIMABLE PRIVILEGES WE ENJOY,
AND ENDEAVOR TO TRANSMITTHEM, NOT ONLY UNTARNISHED, BUT HIGHLY IMPROVED, TO
THE LATEST POSTERITY.

In this happy country, sovereign power resides with the people. It is theirs
to pull down and build up, to construct and to destroy. This being the case, it
belongs to the body of citizens at large, under Providence, to keep safely the
treasury of Freedom, and, of all that has been given us, to lose nothing. So
that, if privileges be abused; if power be usurped; or if our government become
corrupt and oppressive, we have none but ourselves to blame. Ours is the task
to cherish and confirm the blessings of peace, liberty, and independence, which
we enjoy; to defend them against the attacks of open enemies, and the
machinations of secret foes; and to guard against every thing that is
calculated to diminish their influence.

Would you, my fellow-citizens, fix heavenborn Liberty for ever in the land she
has chosen? Then cultivate the same principles, and always keep in operation
the same causes, which originally gave her birth. Liberty is a living
principle. She lives in the temper and disposition, in the sentiments and
feelings of the people. As long as she exists and flourishes there, she will
rise superior to the powers of the world* and bid calm defiance to the fury of
every foe. But when she ceases to maintain this residence, whatever props and
contrivances may be used for her detention and support; whatever plans may be
devised to conceal her decay, we may bid her farewell for ever. In order, then,
to preserve and transmit uncorrupted to your children, the blessings of
liberty, in which you this Day rejoice; be virtuous, industrious, and upright,
in your respective stations. Fly from yourselves, and discourage in others,
every species of corruption, faction, and party rage -- by which so many fair
political edifices have been humbled to the dust. Seek social peace, harmony,
and love, by every means in your power. Frown into annihilation vice in every
form, and pursue, with unremitted ardour, that righteousness which exalts a
nation. For, believe it, without the general prevalence of virtue and good
morals, among all classes of citizens, it would require an "annual course of
miracles" to preserve your freedom.

But whatever may be the prevailing character of the people at large; still, if
the seats of government be filled with corrupt and unprincipled, men, there is
no less danger of destruction to our Republican Fabric, If we, implicitly, and
without observation or enquiry, commit the management of our public affairs, to
the selfish, ambitious and designing; there will soon be an end of genuine
freedom, and of all political happiness. Let every member of the community,
then, esteem it his duty, to watch with care the conduct of all those to whom
power is entrusted. -- Bear in mind, that in this imperfect and depraved state,
the most exalted human characters are to be considered as fallible; and
therefore should always be treated as if they were capable of doing wrong. Be
attentive, then, to the conduct of every officer in government. Carefully
avoid, indeed, giving indulgence to suspicion or mistrust of any, but upon the
most satisfactory evidence; as few things have a more unhappy influence on the
peace and comfort of society, and I may add, on the existence of republican
government, than this. But never give up your right to keep a watchful eye on
the servants of the public. As long as this right is used in a becoming manner,
it will be a terror to bad men only, who hate the light, neither will come to
the light, least their deeds should be reproved. And when you observe any to
abuse the trust committed to them; when you perceive them to sport with your
inestimable rights, or to sacrifice the public good, to their own
aggrandizement -- assert the sovereignty of the people, by depriving them, in a
constitutional manner, of their perverted power; by degrading them, with the
calmness and dignity of freemen, from those seats which they are found unworthy
to fill.

And let the Magistrates and Legislators of America remember, that to them, in
a particular manner, are entrusted the rights of their fellow-citizens, and the
happiness of their country. Let them remember, that in their hands are
deposited the sacred treasures of Freedom; and that upon their official
conduct, under Providence, in a great measure, depend our national prosperity,
and the perpetuity of our free government. Let them remember, that he who
sacrifices the public good, at the shrine of his own popularity or fortune; he
who sports with a single right, or barters away a single privilege of his
constituents, is not only unworthy of their confidence; but is also, thereby,
striking at the root of his country's happiness; and may be preparing, though
in a remote manner, and though he realize it not, chains and misery for
millions yet unborn.

Again; in order to the security and perpetuation of Liberty, in these
flourishing Republics, it is of the highest importance that there be a GENERAL
DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE among all classes of citizens. The demon of slavery
delights in the horrors of darkness -- before the light of truth, he flies
precipitate; and when knowledge shines around, he hides with shame his odious
head. Let each successive generation, then, be carefully instructed in the
rights and duties of man; and this enemy of social happiness will attack you in
vain. The establishment of public schools, and making their support an object
of legislative attention* is so plainly and intimately connected with the
welfare of all republics, that neither proof nor illustration on the subject
are necessary. Of such establishment, the Eastern States have set us an
honorable and useful example. The States of New York and Pennsylvania seem to
be about engaging in a similar plan; and every State in the Union, it is hoped,
will soon be wise enough to attend to the important object. May we yet see the
time, when good education shall be extended to every class of citizens; and
when a TEACHER OF YOUTH shall be esteemed one of the most important and
respectable members of civil society!
Educate your children in the manners, the feelings, the principles, and manly
ardor of Americans; and they will always be able and disposed to trample down
the risings of arbitrary power. Train them up in the knowledge and practice of
that religion, which is calculated to produce and secure both spiritual, and
political Liberty; and they will always know how to estimate the blessings of
freedom. The author is not one of those who imagine political Liberty to
consist in freedom from all restraint, even that of morality and law. He
therefore, considers the man who opposes religion, and who fights against
christianity (the only genuine system of divine truth) as an enemy to his
country. He is persuaded that nothing has so great a tendency to promote and
establish real Liberty, as the practical influence of this system. He never
expects the happy arrival of the period of UNIVERSAL EMANCIPATION, until the
triumph of evangelic truth shall become universal also. -- How far, then, the
floods of infidelity and vice, which are pouring in on every side, forebode
well to the liberties and happiness of this country, he leaves to the
consideration of his fellow-citizens.
Often recount to them the wonderful works of the Lord, and the great
deliverance which he has wrought out for us; and they will know where to look
for future safety and happiness. Teach them to despise the crowns and sceptres,
the haughty pretensions of family and blood, and all the pageantry of power,
with which little minds are carried away; and they will always rise against
their introduction to these republican climes. Teach them to revere the God of
Heaven as their King; and they will despise submission to earthly despots. In a
word, instill into their minds that noble enthusiasm in favor of freedom, which
animated the breasts of American patriots, at the period which we now
commemorate; and they will ever be free!

Upon the whole; let me repeat the important truth, that it depends upon
ourselves, under God, how long we enjoy that liberty, and preserve inviolate
those rich blessings which we possess. If we become a corrupt and vicious
people, I foresee all the horrors of monarchy fast approaching: I foresee the
odious insignia of slavery coming forward at no great distance: I hear the
rattling of chains, forging for my beloved countrymen: I see the genius of
Liberty retiring to weep over our ruin. Whenever vice and corruption become
general in the United States. When the people bargain and trade away their
votes. When the officers of government deal in the same traffic, buying and
selling offices and power. In a word, when the spirit and soul of Republican
government dies, the foundation of Monarchy will be laid. Should these evils
ever arise among us, and prevail (which God forbid!) by whatever name our
government may be called, we shall be the worst of slaves; because we shall
have the name of freemen.
But if, on the other hand, we suitably estimate, and wisely improve the
blessings of which we are put in possession, we may reasonably indulge the
highest expectations of a continuance and daily increase of our national
felicity and glory. We may confidently anticipate the period, when we shall
rise to a degree of political eminence, which statesmen have long contemplated
in theory, but never yet beheld.

The present aspect of the world is wonderful, and above description affecting!
We behold nation rising up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. We
behold the minds of men, especially in Europe, in a state altogether
unprecedented, and producing events the most amazing. All human calculation
about the consequences, seems to be utterly at an end. What designs the
Governor of the Universe is carrying on, we know not* The christian patriot,
however, cannot help indulging the confident hope, that all these things are
designed to banish tyranny from the earth; to establish the reign of civil and
religious liberty; to second the exertion of those who are struggling for their
rights; to support the banner of freedom not only in those TWO REPUBLICS which
have lately cast off the yoke, but also throughout all lands; and to hasten the
universal prevalence of righteousness and peace. But, whatever may be the
event, The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. Our duty, as a people, in
these circumstances, is incontrovertible and plain. It is to FOLLOW PEACE WITH
ALL. It is quietly to enjoy, and wisely to improve our precious rights; but
boldly to resist every impious invader. It (...) to pray for, and to seek our
own happiness, and the happiness of all mankind.

Finally, my fellow-citizens, remember, that though not in our national
capacity, yet as individuals, we are all candidates for eternity. In a few
days, empires, kingdoms, and republics, with all their boasted greatness, shall
be swept off the stage of time, and be seen no more for ever. But we have
immortal souls: We have a spiritual part, which shall survive the general ruin,
and outlive all the ravages of time. There is a kingdom which is not of this
world, offered and secured to all the faithful disciples of Jesus Christ. There
is a glorious exaltation tendered them, without money, and without price. To
this felicity and glory, then, let each of us aspire! And while we despise
earthly royalty, let it be our highest ambition, to be kings and priests unto
God, even the Father, through riches of free grace in Christ Jesus, our Lord
and Redeemer.

AMEN!

