MANIFESTATIONS OF THE Beneficence of Divine PROVIDENCE TOWARD AMERICA.

A DISCOURSE, Delivered on Thursday the 19 th of February, 1795, being the day
recommended by the PRESIDENT of the United States, for general Thanksgiving and
Prayer.

By BISHOP MADISON.

PUBLISHED at the request of the AUDITORS.

RICHMOND: Printed By THOMAS NICOLSON, 1795.

A SERMON, etc.
SAMUEL XII. 27. Only fear the Lord, and serve him; for consider how great
things he has done for you.
BRETHREN,
THERE are few situations more interesting to the human race, than that which
the people of America this day presents. The temples of the living God are
every where, throughout this rising empire, this day, crowded, I trust, with
worshippers, whose hearts, impressed with a just and lively sense of the great
things, which he has done for them, pour forth, in unison, the grateful
tribute of praise and thanksgiving. Yes, this day, brethren, the voice of
rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous; and with
reason, for the history of nations does not exhibit a people who ever had more
cause to offer up to the great author of every good the most fervent
expressions of gratitude and thanksgiving. Let, my brethren, the sons of
irreligion, wrapped in their dark and gloomy system of fatality, refuse to open
their eyes to the great luminous proofs of providential government, which
America displays; let them turn from a light, which their weak vision cannot
bear; but let the righteous, let those who trust in God, who can trace in that
good and glorious being, the relations of father, friend and governor, let
them, with eagle eyes look up to that full blaze of salvation, which he has
vouchsafed to this new world. Permit me then, upon this occasion, to turn your
attention to those great things, which the Lord has done for us, to those
manifold displays of divine providence, which the history of America exhibits;
and let the subject afford an opportunity to revive within us sentiments of
lively gratitude, and excite sincere resolutions to fear the Lord, and to serve
him; in a word, to increase daily in piety, and in all those noble affections
of the soul which dignify the christian and the patriot.

I. Who can tell how many ages had been swallowed up in the all-absorbing gulf
of time, before the bold navigator first essayed to visit these distant regions
of the earth? Who can tell how long this western world had been the habitation
of the listless Savage, or the wild beasts of the forest? At these questions
Chronology drops her epochs, as incapable of conducting her to periods so
remote, and which have escaped her grasp. The ways of Heaven must often appear to
us, weak mortals, dark and intricate. But the first suggestion, which here
presents itself, is, that providence seems to have thrown a veil over this
portion of the globe, in order to conceal it from the eyes of the nations of
the cast, until the destined period had arrived for the regeneration of
mankind, in this new world, after those various other means, which the wisdom
of the Almighty had permitted to operate, in the old, had proved ineffectual*
In vain had reason, the handmaid of pure religion, long attempted to convince
men of the reciprocal duties, which equality and fraternity impose. Still there
would arise some one, of proud ambitious heart, who, not content
with fair equality, fraternal state,
would arrogate dominion undeserved
over his brethren, and quite dispossess
concord and law of nature from the earth. Milton -- Par. lost.

In vain had even thy dispensation of love and peace, blessed Jesus! long
essayed to disarm ambition of the ensanguined sword, and to diffuse
benevolence, equality and fraternity among the human race. Millions still
groaned under the heavy pressure, which tyranny imposed. Yes, even thy gospel
of love, of universal fraternity, had been, too often, perverted into the most
formidable system of oppression; and mankind, instead of seeing it diffuse the
heavenly rays of philanthropy, too frequently beheld it as imposing a yoke, to
degrade and enslave them. The princes of the earth sought not for the sacred
duties, which it enjoined; but they sought to render it the sanction of their
exterminating vengeance, or their deep laid systems of usurpation. Is not the
history of almost all Europe pregnant with proofs of this calamitous truth? If
you can point to some small portion, where the religion of the blessed Jesus,
untrammeled with political usurpations, was left to operate its happy effects
upon the passions and the conduct of men; or where toleration extended wide her
arms of mercy to embrace the whole family of Christ, the spot appears like a
solitary star, which in the midst of night, beams forth alone, whilst clouds
and thick darkness obscure the rest of the innumerable host of Heaven. Alas!
what avails the voice of reason or religion, when the lust of domination has
usurped the soul! At the shrine of this fell demon, the human race was
sacrificed by thousands Nay, too many of the sons of Europe are still bound
with cords to the altars of ambition, and there immolated, not only by
thousands, but by tens of thousands Do you doubt the assertion, afflictive as
it seems to our brethren of the old world? The last four years have, in their
flight, scarcely wanted a moment to testify the melancholy truth. -- I will not
add the long catalogue of those innumerable scourges, which, from time to time,
have visited Europe; I will not speak of those various tempests, which, by
divine command, have so often shaken the guilty nations of the east, but which
seem in vain to have uttered the voice of warning and reproof: Domination still
rivetted her iron chains: the fangs of governments, avaricious, arbitrary and
vindictive, entered even into the souls of the suffering people. The heritage
of the Lord were only as sheep destined to be shorn or slaughtered, whilst the
unfeeling despot exacted in return, not obsequious obedience only, but even
professions of gratitude for the innumerable blessings, which flowed from his
hallowed protection. -- How were these chains to be burst asunder? How was the
human race to be restored to their inherent rights, rights, which the God of
nature consecrated at the birth of every individual? How was the dignity of man
to be vindicated? How were those sentiments of equality, benevolence and
fraternity, which reason, and religion, and nature enjoin, to reassume their
sovereignty over the human soul, and to dash against the heads of usurpers the
chains, the burdens, the oppressions, which had so long brought down the gray
hairs of the multitude with sorrow to the grave? How could the principles of a
revolution so important, so essential for the happiness of the human species,
be generated, but by raising up, as it were, a new race of men, in some remote,
some blessed clime, where, from their infancy, unfettered by those errors,
which time appears to sanctify, they should be trained not only to a knowledge,
but to a just sense of the duty of asserting and maintaining their rights; and
above all, where the love of equality, the basis of all rights and all social
happiness, should be congenial to man? This favored region, favored indeed of
Heaven, is America. It is here, a knowledge of those political truths, which
the immortal Sydneys and the Locks of former years investigated with
philosophic eye, bursts spontaneous forth. It is here, that men, led by the
hand of nature, their minds unawed and unobscured by opinions and customs as
barbarous and unfriendly to social rights as the dark chaotic ages, which gave
them birth, see and acknowledge as axioms, what philosophers have toiled to
establish by deductions, long and intricate. It is in America, that the germs
of the universal redemption of the human race from domination and oppression
have already begun to be developed; it is in America, that we see a
redintegration of divine love for man, and that the voice of Heaven itself
seems to call to her sons, go ye forth and disciple all nations, and spread
among them the gospel of equality and fraternity. Terms have their days of
fashion, like many other things. The term, Equality, seems to be in the wane;
it has its enemies even in America. But whoever will read Dr. Brown's excellent
essay upon the natural equality of men, will there find this grand principle
justly appretiated; he will find, that it is the only basis on which universal
justice, order and freedom, can be firmly built, or permanently secured. The
view, says the writer, exhibited in this essay, so far from loosening the bands
of society, or weakening that subordination, without which no government can
subsist, will draw more closely every social tie, and more strongly confirm the
obligations of legal obedience, and the rights of legal authority. Certainly
this principle is one of the hinges upon which the christian system turns.


II. These considerations present to our minds the first traces of the
beneficent designs of providence in the history of this new world. Nor ought
it, in the 2d place, to be here forgotten, that the current, or general
tendency of providence is also to be traced back to the source, whence the
present free and enlightened race of America sprung. For surely, our
forefathers, amidst the wreck of human rights, and the convulsive tempests
with which ambition had so often overwhelmed the nations of the east, still
evinced, at times, no small portion of that etherial spirit, that ardent love
of liberty, which glows in the American breast. It was this indomitable spirit,
this attachment to the inherent rights of man, stronger infinitely than the
fear of those storms, which agitate the immense atlantic, or of the fierce and
cruel tenants of the howling wilderness, or the ravages of disease, and famine
and death itself, which urged our forefathers to these distant shores. Yes,
brethren, it was this noble principle, this love of liberty, which defying all
dangers, conducted our forefathers to America; but who does not see, that this
principle, whilst it only could prompt to the bold enterprise, was no where to
be found so pure, so energetic as in Britain? Who does not see, that thus to
have transported it to America, thus to have incorporated it with the primary
social institutions of this country, may be justly deemed an event most
fortunate for mankind, nay, most worthy of providence itself? Had this
principle been equally transported to the fertile plains of Mexico, or Peru,
instead of the Auri sacra fames, they also would have had their Apostles, nay,
their martyrs to liberty. Yes, even Maxico, and Peru, e're this distant period,
would have had their Washington, would have unfurled the banners of liberty,
and would have fought, and bled, and conquered. If then we dare attempt with
mortal eye to trace those causes, by which the Almighty operates, it will not
be thought presumptuous, I trust, not only to ascribe to his directive wisdom
the introduction of a principle, which here fostered, will redeem the captive
nations of the earth; but also, the introduction of it, at a time, when its
active, but daily increasing energy should accelerate the great and glorious
revolution, which it has already effected in America, which it has commenced in
Europe, and which will not be arrested in its progress, until the complete
restoration of the human race to their inherent rights be accomplished,
throughout the globe. Let the tyrants of the earth set themselves in array
against this principle; 'they shall be chased as the chaff of the mountain
before the wind, and like the down of the thistle before the whirlwind.' --
Isaiah.


III. But these reflections, pleasing as they are to the friends of piety, of
reason and of liberty, give way to others, excited by more obvious
dispensations of providence. Suppose, my brethren, when our forefathers here
first rested the soles of their feet, delivered from those waters, which seemed
almost to cover the face of the whole earth, the guardian angel of America
withdrawing the curtain of time, had opened to their view the prospect, which
this day presents; had shown to them, America, free, independent, and holding
an eminent rank among the nations of the earth; had shown to them her sons and
her daughters, numerous as the stars of Heaven, assembled in the houses of
their God, and with one voice, offering up the grateful incense of adoration,
praise and thanksgiving, for the great things that he has done for them; had
shown to them the first instance, which the world has ever exhibited of written
social compacts, together with her plans of government, founded on the eternal
basis of wisdom, equality and justice; had shown to them, the thousand
blessings, which peace, from her horn of plenty, scatters round, with the arts
and sciences gradually advancing in her train; had shown to them, her navies,
loaded not with the desolating weapons of war, but with the fruits of the
earth, vexing with their prows the most distant seas; had shown to them the
bright portrait of that heroic citizen, whose prudence, whose fortitude, and
whose wisdom shine equally refulgent in war as in peace; and lastly, had shown
to them, the fairest portion of the old world, by the example of America, by
the influence of that energetic principle, which she had nurtured and matured,
awaking as from a dream, putting on strength as in the ancient days, in the
generations of old, uprooting the deep founded systems of usurpation, and
gathering the oppressed under the wings of liberty and fraternity: And whilst
he presented the glorious, the animating prospect, should say to them, all
these events, my sons, great and astonishing as they are, shall come to pass
within the short period, of a patriarchal life; would they not have fallen down
upon their faces, and worshipping the God of their fathers, exclaimed. This is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes? We, brethren, fortunate as
we are, have lived to see this triumphal day. And is there a soul here present,
is there one throughout this rising empire, who does not trace, in the eventful
history of America, the conspicuous displays of the hand of providence? Is
there one, who is not ready also to exclaim, it is the Lords doing? Where, in
what records of mankind, will he discover a progress from infancy to manhood,
so accelerated, so astonishing in all its stages, so superior to all those
ordinary means, by which empires are matured? I will not call your attention to
that heroic contest, which so lately distinguished this country, and which,
unequal, bold and hazardous as it appeared in its commencement, soon terminated
in the establishment of liberty and independence, soon held aloft to the
nations of the earth, the sublime example, which called, and still calls aloud,
awake, awake, put on strength, O nations of the earth; awake as in the ancient
days, in the generations of old. Jeremiah.
I will not retrace those scenes of blood, of horror and desolation, through
which the patriot sons of America once triumphant passed. Ministers of the
Gospel! be it yours to bind up and to heal the wounds, which contentions and
wars inflict. But ah! -- who does not remember, when the fate of this rising
empire, nay of mankind, hung trembling between the fury of the oppressor, and
the weakness of the oppressed* how many were our prayers to the God of battles!
how often did we look forwards upon the mightiness of the adversary; how often
backwards upon our own imbecility, upon our wives and our tender infants? In
that awful crisis, who does not remember, that in God alone was our trust? Yes,
O people, saved by the Lord, it was his right hand and his holy arm, which
rescued thee from the strength of the Lion and the Bear; it was the same wise
and gracious providence, which delivered the youthful unarmed David from the
hands of Goliath, accoutred as he was, with a sword, and with a spear, and with
a Shield, which also delivered thee, from the hands of the mightiest of nations.

Do these our conclusions appear to some to favor of presumptive arrogance, or
do we discover to the philosophic mind an enthusiastic imbecility in ascribing
these events, so peculiar to the annals of America, to the particular direction
of providence? Let such bethink themselves, if such there be, that it is a just
reliance upon the superintending providence of God, a reliance dictated by the
concurrent voice of reason, of philosophy and religion, which compels the
humble, the grateful and the wise to consider all those dispositions or events,
which so remarkably coincide with the general plan of the moral government of
the world, as indications of the design and direction of omnipotence. Causes
and effects are, doubtless, in the hands of him who willed their connection. But
his will is the general happiness. They who indulge this idea, so consolatory
to man, will therefore consider it as the homage which is due to the creator,
regenerator and preserver of the universe, to ascribe to his superior
direction, effects so concordant with his goodness, and which so greatly
transcend all human means. Yes, brethren, if the effects, which we have, in
your hearing, thus slightly traced; if the period of time when America was
discovered, the necessity and the consequent production of other means for the
restoration of human rights, than those, which had hitherto operated; if her
origin, and the consequent possession of a principle, which, nurtured and
matured, is now pervading, and will animate and excite the whole family of
mankind to vindicate their lost rights; if her astonishing progress from
infancy to the station, which she now possesses, a progress, which the
opposition of a ten-fold force served only to accelerate: if, become free and
independent, having accomplished the most unparalleled revolution, a revolution
unstained by fratricide, or the blood of the innocent, she has given to
nations the first lesson by which their rights may be preserved, and men
reassume their native dignity, by realizing that sacred compact, which before
existed only in idea, and by accurately delineating the boundary beyond which,
her servants, whether legislators or magistrates, dare not pass; if she has
established upon a rock, the empire of laws, and not of men; if America, as a
tender and affectionate daughter, is ready, from her exuberant breasts, to
afford the milk of regeneration to her aged and oppressed relatives; if, in
short, from a beginning the most inauspicious, she has thus outstript all
political calculation, thus risen to this day of glory, thus ascended on high,
thus triumphed over every obstacle, and if all these be effects worthy of the
divine interposition, then we will still cherish the fond idea, we will cling
to the full persuasion, that our God has been, 'our strength, our refuge, and
our fortress,' a God, who, at the birth of creation, destined man for liberty,
for virtue and for happiness, not for oppression, vice and misery.

IV. But, my brethren, to rest contented with merely viewing the hand of
providence, or in acknowledging the plan of divine wisdom, which is here
operating for the general felicity, would be to halt at the threshhold of the
temple of God. Gratitude, warm and fervent, united to a sincere resolution 'to
fear and to serve him,' is the return, which the Almighty beneficence claims
from every worshipper. It is the first sacrifice of a heart capable of being
touched by acts of unbounded love, by deeds of mercy and kindness so eminently
extended not to us only, but, through our agency, to the whole human race. I
confess to you, brethren, who detest ingratitude even to man, as the sure but
melancholy symptom of a heart, dark, gloomy, and void of every virtuous
sensibility, when I recall to mind the past, contemplate the present, and
pursuing the confederacy of causes, look forward to those blessings of peace,
of order, of justice and of liberty, which are daily advancing with an
accelerated progress, my soul becomes sublimed with the grand idea of the
undeviating love of God to man; I tr^^e in the moral, as well as in the
physical world, the evident vestiges of a Providence, all wise, all merciful,
and all gracious: my hopes, temporal as well as eternal, instead of fluctuating
in the uncertain ocean of those degrading sentiments, which overwhelm the soul
with fear and despondency, are anchored even at the footstool of the throne of
God. Yes, brethren, struck with the awful image of a goodness so generous and
so extended, my heart overflows with gratitude, I form new resolutions to fear
and to serve him, I exclaim with the Psalmist -- 'Let the people praise thee, O
God; let all the people praise thee. O let the nations be glad and sing for
joy; for thou shall judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon
earth.'

But, brethren, important considerations still demand our attention. Has Heaven
been thus propitious; are we possessed of all those blessings which flow from
governments founded in wisdom, justice and equality; does the morning of
America break forth refulgent with unclouded glory? Then it behooves us, above
all things, to inquire, how are these blessings to be preserved? how shall we
ensure to her a meridian splendour, worthy of such a morning? -- This inquiry
immediately resolves itself into another. What is there in this sublunary
state, that can attract the smiles of Heaven, or ensure political happiness,
but virtue? Never was there a mortal so depraved, never was there a conscience
so deaf to that internal voice, which always whispers truth, but must
acknowledge, that virtue only gives a title to hope for the favor of that high
and lofty one, who inhabiteth eternity. Fellow-citizens, let virtue then, I
entreat you, be the ruling principle, the polar star, which should influence
every sentiment, and guide every action, since it alone will conduct us into
the Haven of felicity. -- But will you trust, for the diffusion of virtue, to
that political morality, which a vain philosophy would substitute in the room
of those lessons, which the heavenly teacher delivered? Shall virtue trickle
from the oozy bed of political catechisms, or shall it gush, pure and in full
stream, from the rock of our salvation? Ah! brethren, the moment that we drop
the idea of a God, the remunerator of virtue, but the avenger of iniquity; the
moment we abandon that divine system of equality, fraternity, and universal
benevolence, which the blessed Jesus taught and exemplified; the moment that
religion, the pure and undefiled religion, which Heaven, in compassion to the
infirmity of human reason, vouchsafed to mortals, loses its influence over
their hearts, from that fatal moment, farewell to public and private happiness,
farewell, a long farewell to virtue, to patriotism, to liberty! Virtue, such as
republics and Heaven require, must have its foundation in the heart; it must
penetrate the whole man; it must derive its obligations and its Sanctions, not
from the changeable ideas of the political moralist, or the caprice of the
wisest of human legislators, but from the unchangeable father of the universe,
the God of love, whose laws, and whose will we are incited to obey by motives,
the most powerful that can actuate the human soul. Men must see and feel, that
it is God himself, their maker and their judge, who demands obedience to
duties, which constitute their individual, their social, their eternal
happiness. Then, and not till then, will virtue reign triumphant in the hearts
of citizens; then will she have her sacrifices in the midst of the deepest
obscurity, as well as in the open day, in the most private and secret
retirements, as well as upon the house tops.

There is, we will grant, a sublime philosophy, which may form her sages, and
even her virtuous and heroic sages. But, will her abstract doctrines concerning
moral obligation, stripped of those awful sanctions, which religion annexes,
touch the hearts of an entire nation, the poor, the simple, the unlettered, as
well as the learned and the wise? No, brethren, these sages of philosophy will
appear, once perhaps, in a century; her lessons of wisdom, admitting them to
possess the efficacy contended for, can be extended but to a few; whilst
religion diffuses her soul-saving leaven through the whole political mass. It is
not for the learned and wise only, that she reserves the knowledge of her
heavenly precepts; they are addressed to the whole family of mankind; the whole
universe is her school. She has, moreover, this distinguishing advantage; she
lays her divine hands upon the infant, and whilst she embraces him with the
arms of mercy, stamps upon his tender, susceptible mind, the indelible, but
just and awful idea of a God, the judge as well as the creator of the universe,
a God, whose all-seeing eye delights only in virtue, a God, who has promised
through Jesus Christ, a glorious and ever blessed immortality as the reward of
well-doing, whilst the torturing hour of shame, remorse and misery is shown to
await the impious and the wicked. Thus taught by religion, man becomes
acquainted with his real character; instead of being amenable only to human
laws, whose utmost vigilance he may and often does elude, he sees himself
accountable to a being, as just as merciful, as omnipotent as omniscient. He
finds himself destined, not to the narrow range of the beasts that perish, but
to immortal life. The bright prospect invigorates his soul; sentiments of
conscious dignity elevate him above what is low or mean; his views are fixed
upon what is truly great and good, patriotic and brave; no ^ears appal him, but
confident in his God, he evinces himself, whether in adversity or prosperity,
the inflexible friend of justice and humanity.

And yet, great God! how many are there among the sons of men, urged, we hope,
rather by the delusive phantoms of their imaginations, than by the lust of
wicked passions, who would tear from the human heart, prostrate in the dust,
nay obliterate from the face of the earth every vestige of that divine, that
beneficent system of justice, fraternity and equality, which Jesus Christ
delivered! -- rash, unthinking mortals! listen, at least, to the prayer which
that divine system, ever breathing charity and compassion, still offers up for
its vindictive enemies; 'Father! forgive them, for they know not what they do!'

Fellow-citizens, it is an easy task for those who may have the honor of
addressing an American audience this day, to point out the excellencies of our
civil governments, to show their superior aptitude for the promotion of
political happiness, to evince that obedience to laws, constitutionally
enacted, is the only means of preserving liberty, and that every expression of
the public will is obligatory upon every citizen; to prove, that representative
republics, instead of being the prolific parents of anarchy and confusion, are,
on the contrary, of all the forms of government, under which men have yet
associated, either through compulsion or choice, the most promotive of private
and public happiness, the most susceptible of that energy, which is equally
capable of curbing the licentiousness of the multitude, or of frustrating the
wicked designs of the ambitious; it is easy for them to show, that virtue is
the vital principle of a republic, that unless a magnanimous spirit of
patriotism animates every breast, unless a sincere and ardent love for justice,
for temperance, for prudence, for fortitude, in short, for all those qualities,
which dignify human nature, pervades, enlivens, invigorates the whole mass of
citizens, these fair superstructures of political wisdom must soon crumble into
dust. Certainly, my brethren, it is a fundamental maxim, that virtue is the
soul of a republic. But, zealous for the prosperity of my country, I will
repeat, and in these days, it is of infinite moment to insist, that without
religion, I mean rational religion, the religion which our Savior himself
delivered, not that of fanatics or inquisitors, chimaeras and shadows are
substantial things compared with that virtue, which those who reject the
authority of religion would recommend to our practice. -- Ye then who love your
country. if you expect or wish, that real virtue and social happiness should be
preserved among us, or, that genuine patriotism and a dignified obedience to
law, instead of that spirit of disorganizing anarchy, and those false and
hollow pretenses to patriotism, which are so pregnant with contentions,
insurrections and misery, should be the distinguishing characteristics of
Americans; or, that, the same Almighty arm which has hitherto protected your
(...), and conducted her to this day of glory, should still continue to shield
and defend her, -- remember, that your first and last duty is 'to fear the Lord
and to serve him;' remember, that in the same proportion as irreligion
advances, virtue retires; -- remember, that in her stead, will succeed
factions, ever ready to prostitute public good to the most nefarious private
ends, whilst unbounded licentiousness, and a total disregard to the sacred
names of liberty and of patriotism will here once more, realize that fatal
catastrophe, which so many free states have already experienced. Remember, the
law of the Almighty is, they shall expire, with their expiring virtue. God of
all nature! Father of the human spirit, preserve these prosperous, these happy
republics from so dreadful a calamity. May thy gracious providence, which has
hitherto nurtured, protected, and conducted them to this day of praise and
thanksgiving, ever be the supreme object of their regard? May the blessings
already received, inspire every heart with just sentiments of gratitude, and
with the inflexible resolution to perform those duties which become us as
christians, and as citizens. May peace and happiness, truth and justice, order
and freedom, religion and piety ever proclaim thy praises, thy providential
goodness, thy love to man, not only in this land of liberty, -- but wherever
the human race is found* -- Amen.


