Opem salutiferam attuli.

THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK. INSTITUTED 12th JULY, 1794.

CITY OF NEW YORK: PRINTED BY JOHN BUEL. M, DCC, XCV.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE Humane Society OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK. TO WHICH ARE
SUBJOINED, THE ADDRESS Of the MEDICAL COUNSELORS to the Citizens; and the most
successful Methods of Restoration hitherto discovered; with the medical
cautions and advice which appear best suited to accomplish the principal and
more immediate objects of the Institution. PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE SOCIETY.

"Here let Humanity come in aid of life and restore the Sufferer to the bosom
of love and gratitude -- then will He wipe away the tear of sorrow from the eye
of conjugal and filial affection."

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. BUEL, No 152, WATER-STREET, M, DCC, XCV.

CONSTITUTION OF THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
With a view of promoting the interests of humanity, a number of respectable
Citizens have associated under the name of " THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK, and have agreed to the following Constitution: -- which is now
submitted to the consideration of their Fellow-Citizens. Experience in some of
our sister States, as well as in in Europe, has evinced, that similar
institutions have been attended with the most happy effects. It cannot be
doubted, but the same generous and laudable spirit which has been so often
exerted by the inhabitants of this State, will be displayed, in supporting an
Institution, which can have no other object in view than benevolence to mankind.

ARTICLE I. THIS Society shall consist of one President, two Vice-Presidents,
six Medical Counselors, twelve Trustees, one Secretary, one Treasurer, and an
unlimited number of Contributors, or Members.

2. Five Trustees, including the presiding officer, and two Medical
Counselors, with an indefinite number of members, shall constitute a quorum.

3. The Society shall meet semi-annually, viz. On the third Wednesday in March,
and on the third Wednesday in September. And the president, or in his absence,
one of the vice-presidents, shall call a meeting of the society at any time,
when requested by two of the medical counselors, and four of the trustees.

4. The medical counselors shall correspond with other societies, to promote
the objects of the institution; procure books and manuscripts on the subjects
of animation and resuscitation, which they shall keep for the benefit of the
society -- Give out all prize questions, and judge of the merits of all essays
offered on the prize questions -- Procure, and keep in good order, apparatuses,
recommend methods of treatment for persons suffering suspended respiration --
Publish medical advice on these subjects -- Recommend to mariners the best
methods of counteracting the pernicious effects of foul air, bad water and
provisions, excessive cold and heat -- Recommend to the trustees, any persons
who may merit honorery rewards, by their exertions in saving their fellow
citizens from death, or imminent danger -- Report to the society all successful
and all unsuccessful cases, that may come to their knowledge -- And do all
other things that may tend, most successfully to promote the designs of the
institution. And in case of a vacancy, they shall have the sole right of
electing a new counselor.

5. The trustees shall take charge of the funds of the society; adjudge
honorary rewards for meritorious exertions in saving persons from apparent
death and imminent danger; particularly in shipwreck, on our coasts; and for
the faithful preservation of the property of the owners of such vessels; and
manage all the prudential affairs of the society.

6. The president, or in his absence, one of the vice-presidents shall give
public notice of all meetings of the society and preside at the same.

7. The president, vice-presidents and secretary, shall be ex-officio, members
of the board of trustees, and they, with the treasurer and other trustees,
shall in future be annually elected by ballot, on the third Wednesday in March;
and any member shall be allowed to vote by proxy, in case he cannot attend the
election in person.

8. Any person who shall bring the first intelligence to any of the medical
counselors, of an accident producing apparently sudden death, shall be
entitled to receive from the trustees, a sum not exceeding five dollars, nor
less than half a dollar.

9. Any person who shall, by meritorious exertion, save another from death,
shall receive a sum from the trustees, not exceeding forty dollars, nor less
than one.

10. The trustees and counselors shall annually appoint a person learned in
medicine, to deliver a discourse on animation or resuscitation, before the
society on the third Wednesday in March.

11. The Secretary shall keep a fair copy of all the proceedings of the
society, and record all things that the counselors and trustees shall direct.

12. The Treasurer, if required, shall give bonds to the trustees for the
faithful discharge of his duty, and he shall pay no money except to the orders
of the trustees, regularly signed by the president, or one of the
vice-presidents.

13. All gentlemen of the faculty, who may assist to render the methods of
resuscitation, recommended by the society effectual, shall give their
attendance without fee or reward.

14. Any person, either an American citizen or foreigner, who shall pay, or
cause to be paid to the treasurer, one dollar, annually, shall have his name
enrolled in the list of contributors, and be entitled to all the rights of a
member; and any person who will pay, or cause to be paid to the treasurer,
twenty-five dollars, shall be a perpetual member, without further annual
subscription.

15. This Constitution shall not be altered unless the proposed alterations be
offered to the consideration of the society at one meeting, and agreed to at
the next succeeding meeting, by two thirds of the members present, by two
thirds of the medical counselors, and by two thirds of the trustees; and the
votes of each department shall be taken separately.

New York, July 12, 1794.
At the semi-annual meeting, in March, 1795, the following gentlemen were
elected to their respective offices for the ensuing year, viz. Rev. WM. LINN,
D. D. President. Genesis LAMB, Vice President. Hon. RUFUS KING. Esquire.
Vice President. Hon. DAVID GELSTON, Treasurer. Mr. WILLIAM PAIN, Secretary.
TRUSTEES.
Hon. MELANCTON SMITH, Rev. Mr. PILMORE, Rev. Mr. SEIXAS, JONATHAN RUSSEL,
WILLIAM DUNLAP, WILLIAM ALUM, DE WIT CLINTON, and J. R. VAN DEN BROECK,
Esquires.


And, At the same meeting, a report was made to the society, by Amasa Dingley,
Elihu H. Smith, and Charles Buxton, Medical Counselors; containing an Address
to the Citizens, and Directions for the Restoration of persons suffering sudden
apparent death, and various other accidents; with medical cautions and advice:

Resolved, In order to carry the purposes of the society more fully into
effect, that, The Address and Medical Directions be printed for the information
of the public.

By order of the society, WM. PAIN, Sec'ry
.
ADDRESS TO THE CITIZENS. Fellow Citizens of the City and State of New York.
THE numerous sudden deaths, from various causes, of which every year furnishes
examples, should excite the attention of every humane and well regulated
community. The value of life must be felt among all nations; even among those
who make the destruction of it their study and occupation. But in a country,
where, from the happy organization of its government, the worth of man is duly
appreciated, and where agriculture and commerce form his chief business, life
obtains a higher estimation, and assumes a more distinguished importance. It
were, superfluous, therefore, on this occasion, to expatiate on the propriety
of any institution which has for its object the preservation and continuance of
existence: Equally superfluous would it be, to appeal to Europe, for precedents
to establish the propriety of an undertaking like that in which we have
engaged. -- That in many cases of apparent death, life has afterward been
discovered to be present; -- that, by the application of proper means,
thousands have been rescued from the state of apparent death, and restored to
the wishes and embraces of their families and friends; -- that some regular
plan is best fitted to effect this desirable restoration, -- and that
Associations of the nature of the present institution, are most effectual for
the accomplishment of that purpose; -- are facts which admit of no dispute; and
which, had no prior establishment of the like nature ever been formed, are
sufficient to justify, and render important in the view of all men our present
undertaking.

In a City like this, and in a State so extensive, and so exposed to all those
accidents which actually occasion sudden apparent death; it is a matter of
serious regret, that so little of this kind has hitherto been attempted; and
that this little has produced no effect, as far as has come to our knowledge.
Indeed the only provision made for the restoration of persons from a state of
apparent death, appears to us not only wholly inadequate, but for the most
part, absolutely pernicious. And hence we are the more strongly incited to
pursue our design; since it is evident that while the expectations of the
Citizens are placed on that which can serve no good end, the hope of any
benefit from attempts at restoration, thus conducted, must be delusory and
vain. -- To afford some more certain hope, something on which the Public may
rely with greater assurance of effect and advantage, we offer the following
directions, as the result of our most diligent enquiry into the subject; giving
notice at the same time, that the objects of our association will never be lost
sight of, -- and that we shall continue to publish from time to time, such
additional information, both on the subject of resuscitation and on other
matters, connected with the public health, as may result from a more enlarged
sphere of observation, from more extensive personal experience, and from the
labors of the learned in various parts of the world.

NOTICE.
THE following Directions are the result of careful attention to the various
subjects to which they relate. Particular respect has been paid to the reports
of the Humane Societies of America and Europe. -- The greatest attention was
due to the ingenious and successful experiments, and to the publications of
those Physicians and Philosophers who have made these useful inquiries their
favorite study -- The Medical Counselors have duly attended to the latest
discoveries and improvements in Medicine, added those observations which they
have found most safe and successful in this kind of practice in repeated
trials, and avoided Technical terms as much as possible.

The Facts are arranged in the most plain and easy manner, so as to be put into
practice by all who are able to read, and will pay proper attention to the very
useful and highly important objects of the society.

Sudden apparent death may arise from drowning, hanging, drinking cold liquors,
and eating ices in warm weather, the vapors of wells, cellars, fermenting
liquors, and from the fumes of burning charcoal, and various metallic
substances; from lightning; from exposure to excessive heat or cold; from
confined rooms, and various other causes.

SECTION I. To recover those who are apparently dead by drowning.
1. The body should be taken out of the water with as much care and tenderness
as the circumstances will permit; endeavoring always to keep the head raised a
little more than the body.

In every case, hanging it by the heels, under the erroneous supposition of
discharging water from the lungs, rolling it on a barrel, or putting it across
a log, and every kind of jolting and shaking, must be absolutely avoided as
extremely injurious.

2. The body should be carried on a wide board, or in some other easy manner to
the nearest convenient place, into as large a room as can be had; the clothes
must be immediately taken off, the whole skin wiped dry with flannel and
examined so as to determine whether any wounds have happened to it, and the
body should then be wrapped up in warm blankets. It should then be laid on a
table, if at hand, with the head a little raised, and if the weather be cold,
before a fire. All crowds of people must be kept off; and no more than six
persons must ever be admitted, and on many occasions they will be too many.

3. As soon as possible, after the foregoing directions have been attended to,
a bellows, The bellows most convenient for this operation should have a
flexible pipe or tube, one end of which should be made to pass into the nostril
close and easy. -- If bellows proper for the operation cannot be procured, a
pipe or quill may be used, some person blowing into the nostril through the
quill; but this is never to be done when a proper bellows can be had. At some
future time it is intended to publish a more particular account of instruments
to inflate (...).
which must be clear of all dirt and dust should be applied to one nostril,
while another person should close the other nostril and the mouth, and at the
same time press back the lower part of the windpipe, where it is largest, or
that part sometimes called Adam's apple. The person who holds the bellows must
then blow gently, and repeat the blowing five or six times; when this is done
and the breast is a little swelled, a third person must press the belly up, so
as to force the air out; this must be done quick and effectually. The first
must then repeat the blowing three or four times, and the third again press up
the belly and force out the air.

N. B. This operation must be repeated steadily, five or six times, and
occasionally or frequently renewed, at the discretion of the attendants, so as
at length to imitate natural breathing as much as possible.

4. After the lungs have been filled with air a number of times by the means
above mentioned, the whole body, but particularly the breast, is to be rubbed
with the hand; and if oil and the spirit of hartshorn can be procured, let them
be mixed in equal quantities, and rubbed on the breast and whole body; or if
these cannot be procured, the body may be briskly rubbed with flannels
moistened with rum or gin made a little more than blood warm. During this time,
the means recommended in the third article, viz. the use of the bellows is
still to be continued.

5. As soon as the patient is able to swallow, and before, if means This may be
best done by means of a flexible tube or siphon, which is to be introduced into
the gullet so as to convey liquors to the stomach. -- Into the upper end of the
tube, a small funnel should be put, for conveying the liquors more readily.
can be found to introduce it into the stomach, he should take from twenty to
one hundred drops of the essence of pepper mint in a glass of water, or a
tea-spoonful of Vitriolic Ether, mixed with about ten or fifteen tea-spoonfuls
of pure water; but if these are not easily procured, let him swallow half a
gill of brandy, spirit, or wine, as is most convenient, and the dose should be
repeated at the discretion of the persons who may have the care of the patient.

6. The feet and legs should be put into water, about blood-warm, and in the
space of five or six minutes after this is done, warmer water should be poured
into the vessel so as to raise the temperature to about 98 degrees of
Fahrenheit's thermometer, which is two or three degrees above the blood heat in
man. The feet should be continued in the warm bath, half, or even an whole
hour, during which time the body should be gently raised a little, and then
supported with pillows and bolsters, or in any other convenient way, while
brisk friction should be used over the whole body and limbs, especially the
feet and legs; at the same time sneezing should be provoked by tickling the
nostrils with a feather, or some other irritating substance.

7. If these means appear to give no relief within thirty, or at most forty
minutes after the recovery is attempted; warm water, with as much spirit of
hartshorn, rum, or other distilled liquor mixed with it, as will produce a
stimulating effect, ought, without any farther delay, to be used for a clyster;
this operation must be frequently repeated; after which the belly should be
moved with the hands of one of the assistants, and the liquor be injected as
far up the bowels as possible, till a motion ensue, upon producing which much
of the success of the revival will depend.

N. B. Bleeding in the arm or jugular veins, cutting open the wind pipe,
vomiting, and the use of tobacco being remedies of very doubtful and uncertain
effect, perhaps always injurious, are absolutely to be avoided, unless by the
express direction of a skillful person, who may judge by the symptoms, in what
particular cases these remedies ought to be tried.

8. Electricity We fully agree with those who observe that electricity and
other remedies of a difficult nature, are not to be proposed to common
operators. "They have neither instruments, heads, hands, or time for such
experiments -- and it is dangerous to lead them from the other parts of the
salutary practice, to the exercise of which they are equal" But whenever it is
practicable to use electricity, the above directions are found to be the best.
being a most powerful agent, is a very proper remedy, when employed by those
physicians, or others, who understand its operation, and know how to use it
with safety and with a probability of success. In all cases, the machine should
be made to excite powerfully, otherwise the attempt to use it will be a loss of
time, and so the precious moments of recovery may be lost for ever. When it is
practicable to use electricity, the patient may be properly placed on an
electrical table, that is, insulated, and then electrified as much as possible;
after this is continued four or five minutes, the hand of one of the attendants
should be applied close to the body, so as to take strong sparks, which should
be drawn from the left side over the heart. If this should produce no
appearance of life or motion, light shocks (which should be increased each
operation) should be sent from the breast bone through to the back, or from
side to side, so as to excite the heart to action, if possible. Rubbing the
electrified body with a woollen cloth, will also be very proper, and this
should be continued for the space of half an hour.

9. In all cases, one of the principal objects should be to restore a healthful
degree of heat to the body, without which animal motion or life cannot be
renewed. This is to be done by perseverance in the foregoing directions, and
particularly by applying warm cloths to the body, which should be moistened
with hot spirits, and by rubbing the body with them, and by applying hot bricks
made wet with vinegar to the soles of the feet. If possible, two vigorous and
healthful persons should be persuaded to strip themselves naked and lie on each
side of the body, embracing it closely and imparting their animal heat to the
patient. But a warming-pan with burning coals, should never be used, on account
of the intemperate heat and the fumes of the coals.

10. In all cases of sudden apparent death, where no organ essential to life
appears to be destroyed, the foregoing methods are to be persisted in, at least
FOUR HOURS, with uninterrupted perseverance; and no others are to be used
without the express advice of a physician, who should be called to the patient
as soon as possible. Whenever the methods employed are successful, great care
ought to be taken to restore the equal action of the system; to relieve the
convulsive motions; to make every thing quiet and easy about the patient; to
keep the bowels free, to use moderate bleeding when the symptoms in the
recovered person require it, and to regulate the diet and exercise.

N. B. All hurry, indiscriminate and violent efforts and operations are
carefully to be avoided, and all injuries to the skin, every thing is to be
done with discretion and moderation; no disagreement about the mode of
treatment should be suffered to take place at the critical time of attempting
recovery, which is too apt to be the case among the confused crowd of advisers,
who are generally collected together on the occasion; some from the best
motives to afford assistance, and others from curiosity.

SECTION II. OF HANGING.
As some persons, either through melancholy, or distraction, attempt, by means
of hanging, to destroy themselves; and as accidents producing like effects,
sometimes happen, it is thought not improper to publish some directions how to
proceed in such cases; and here it is to be remarked, that, as sometimes there
may be an advantage in bleeding, it will be particularly necessary to have
recourse to medical advice: The same general methods of cure are to be pursued
in this case as in that of drowning.

SECTION III. Of drinking Cold Liquors, and eating Ices in hot weather.
To prevent the bad effects of Cold Liquors.

1. It will be best never to drink while very hot: or,

2. To drink a little at a time, holding it in the mouth some moments before
swallowing: or,

3. To hold the vessel some moments with both hands, till the liquor may be
supposed to be tempered: or,

4. To wash the hands and face, and rinse the mouth and throat before drinking;
and then to drink moderately, and often repeat it.

The eating of ices having become a fashionable luxury in hot weather, it is
the more necessary to mention the bad effects of this practice: In general,
they are apt to produce cholic, cholera morbus, and dysentery, or some other
disease of the stomach and bowels; and frequently in women, especially those of
a delicate habit, this practice produces a suppression of the menses, and an
ensuing loss of health.

In many cases the taking of ices will be highly salutary. In some diseases
they may be used with great advantage, as in burning, or inflammatory fevers,
and for local applications in certain other diseases; but they never can be
swallowed with safety, unless the following cautions be attended to: viz.

1. Hold the vessel in the hands of few moments before taking the ice into the
mouth.

2. Let the ice, particularly ice Creams, be completely dissolved in the mouth
before it be swallowed. This many are apt to neglect, on account of its
producing pain in the teeth; but if the ice should be conveyed into the
stomach, it will produce a much more serious evil than the toothache.

3. All persons in health, who regale themselves with the eating of ices, as a
mere delicacy in the warm season; immediately after taking them, should swallow
a glass of wine, or some spirituous drink.

To remove the bad effects when they have taken place.

1. Immediately cause the patient to drink a glass of some spirituous liquor.

2. If laudanum can be had, let him take from 10 to 100 drops, according to his
age, habits, and the violence of the pain. N. B. People habituated to the use
of ardent spirits, require much larger doses of laudanum than others; but in
all cases it will be safest to use other stimulants, on account of the bad
effects of large doses of opiate medicines.

3. Let the patient be removed to a place where he can have warm applications
made to his body, particularly to the pit of his stomach, so as to restore the
heat thereof.

4. Continue these means some time, and rub the body with warm flannels;
occasionally administering warm spirituous drinks.

5. If the person be apparently dead, proceed as in the case of drowning.

6. Nothing farther is to be attempted without medical advice, which will
frequently be necessary to prevent diseases from being the consequence of such
a practice.

SECTION IV. Of the Vapors of Fermenting Liquors, Limekilns, foul air of
Mines, and the Fumes of wells, cisterns, and other close places.
Where there is danger of bad effects from any thing of this kind, there should
be previous attempts to procure a free circulation, of air, in every possible
way.

Fires, the explosion of gunpowder, quicklime, and limewater will be useful.

When it is necessary to go into wells and cisterns, and other close places
containing poisonous vapors, a lighted candle should be first let down into
those places; but as experience has proved, that it is not always safe to
venture even where a candle will burn; and that some men by custom will live
where others cannot; it is important that the greatest precautions be used in
entering places where there is reason to fear a danger of this sort. It will be
necessary therefore that no person enter without being within the observation
of others, and so situated as that they may afford him assistance,

When a person is apparently dead, the same means as are directed for drowned
persons, are proper.

But as such accidents sometimes happen where even these are not to be had; it
is to be observed that persons have been recovered by having been stripped,
placed in the open air, and having cold water dashed on them for some time.

Warmth and frictions have in other instances been attended with the happiest
success.

In a particular manner, the face, temples, whole head and breast of the
patient should be rubbed with strong vinegar, which should be applied to the
nostrils by means of any common cloth.

SECTION V. Of Suffocation by burning Charcoal.
In general, the treatment is the same as recommended in the preceding article.
But, the particular directions for avoiding the bad effects of the fumes of
these substances, are,

1. Not to remain near them when burning.

2. To burn them in a chimney or open air.

N. B. The burning of charcoal in pots and close stoves should most carefully
be avoided in the cabins of ships and vessels, and in all tight rooms, where
chemical or mechanical works are going on, because fatal events have often
taken place, where this caution has been neglected.

3. To avoid being so placed as that the current air will blow the fumes upon
you; this is particularly necessary in all operations with copper, mercury,
lead, arsenic and cobalt.

4. It will be well to have a tub of water in all rooms where charcoal is
burnt, and where metalic processes are carried on.

5. In all cases of sudden faintness, or fits, where works of this sort are
carried on, vinegar being one of the most common, has also in repeated trials
been found to be one of the best of remedies.

SECTION VI. Of Lightning.
To avoid its bad effects.

1. A Conductor.

2. When in a house, the middle of the room is the safest place.

3. When exposed to the storm abroad, the middle of a plain is safer, avoiding
single trees, especially chestnut trees.

4. When in a wood or forest, avoid standing under, or near any very tall trees.

5. During the rising and continuance of a thunder storm, avoid touching the
conductors of any building, or being very near them, especially at an open
window.

6. In the country, shun all trees where scythes and other metallic implements
of husbandry are hung up.

In case of the suspension of animal motion, the remedies are the same as for
drowning; except that much stronger shocks of electricity should be sent from
the breast, through to the back, and from one side of the breast to the other;
and this should be done with as little delay as possible, in order to excite
the heart, and the system of blood vessels connected immediately with it, into
motion.

SECTION VII. Of Still-born Infants.
These are to be treated, when the organization seems to be perfect, and there
are no appearances that the child had suffered death many hours before the
birth, much in the same manner as persons who suffer by drowning; but more
gentle and tender treatment must be observed; the temperate healthful warmth
must be kept up; the lungs must be inflated by blowing air into the nostrils,
and at the same time keeping the mouth shut; the head is to be kept raised, and
gentle frictions with warm water are to be used all over the body. In numbers
of instances, where this plan has been pursued for the space of an hour and an
half, or even longer, the animal motion has been restored.

SECTION VIII. Of extreme Refrigeration, or the effects of eating the sub-acid
fruits to excess; such as currants, cherries, apples, peaches, melons, etc. etc.
The effects are very similar to those that arise from drinking cold liquors
and eating Ice-Creams in the hot season; and in general the same method should
be observed to effect a cure. But to prevent the injurious effects of taking
fruit intemperately in the hot season, it will always be advisable to take a
little good wine, or ardent spirit, immediately after eating the fruit. The
eating of a little good old cheese with some bread, immediately after the
fruit, is also a very salutary practice.

N. B. There are but few cases that can be relieved by emetics, and whenever
these are administered, it should be done by the advice of some judicious
person, and with great caution.

SECTION IX. Of Extreme Cold.
To prevent the Effects.
1. As the extremities, and particularly the feet, are first effected, it will
be necessary to guard the parts with woolen cloths, which should be clean and
dry, if possible; the feet should be guarded with socks within the shoes or
boots, or which is better, over them; these maybe of woolen yarn, or of furs,
or cloth, and should cover the whole foot and leg.

2. Persons always sustain cold best who avoid hunger, take a due proportion of
sleep and are temperate in the use of spirituous liquors.

3. It will be proper to give as much motion to the body and limbs as the
situation will admit; where this cannot be done, and there are two or more
together, let them place their feet against each others bodies, or what will be
much better, against the breast and belly of a dog, or any other animal covered
with hair.

4. Danger first shows itself in numbness and sleepiness. -- When a person
perceives this, he should force himself to exercise; and when several are in
company, any one in whom these symptons are perceived, should be obliged to
take all possible motion; in this situation, it will be of the greatest
consequence to inspire resolution and courage in those who appear to fail
first; and it will be advisable to excite the passions, particularly anger,
hope and pleasant emotions of the mind, to produce a greater degree of
animation.

To Cure.
When the animal motion is stopped, proceed as in the article of drowning;
except so far as what relates to the frozen parts of the body. When this is the
case, the following directions will be safe and very useful.

1. Place the body in a cool room, without fire.

2. Use the bellows as in drowning, at the same time rubbing the whole body
with cloths dipped in cold water; these means must be persisted in for several
hours; and all hot applications are to be most carefully avoided at first, and
afterward introduced gradually as in the article of drowning.

3. In case any member should become frozen, let it be immersed into cold
water, into which a small quantity of snow or ice has been put; when it has
remained in this state twenty or thirty minutes, or till the frost appears to
be taken out, let the cold water then be used without the ice for the space of
an hour at least, so as to keep the part from the air, and restore the warmth
and circulations gradually.

4. The patient, during all this time, and for many hours after, should be kept
in a room without any fire; a brisk purge should be administered; after the
operation of which, the frozen part, having been continued for a proper length
of time in the water, should be anointed with a little oil, and the part being
wrapped up properly, the patient should go to bed.

All spirituous drinks should be avoided, and the patient should be very
abstemious in his diet, to moderate the subsequent inflammation or
mortification.

The effects of scalding or burning are to be treated in a similar manner,
provided the applications can be made immediately after such accidents.

N. B. All hot poultices should be avoided in the case of frost; but yeast will
be of great utility, applied all over the diseased part, in a cool state, and
renewed once in two or three hours.

SECTION X. Of the Heat of the Sun.
The degree of danger when exposed to the sun, may be judged of from the
following symptoms, viz.

1. Headache, with throbbing and giddiness.

2. Disposition to faint, and stupidity.

3. Heat and dryness of the skin, and redness of the eyes.

4. Difficult breathing, speaking and moving.

To prevent these Symptoms.
1. Avoid all considerable motion, exercise or labor when exposed to the
powerful of the sun.

2. Avoid spirituous liquors and full meals at such times, especially when
there is a necessity for much motion.

3. Wear a white hat, or one covered with white linen or paper, and a white
dress in general, will be advantageous.

4. It will be well to seek a shade on the first appearance of any of the above
mentioned symptoms, and to losen all tight things about the body, particularly
the neck.

To Cure the above Complaints.
1. The patient should be removed into a cool place, and all ligatures about
him should be loosened.

2. Put the feet, and if possible the legs, into warm water, supporting the
body at the same time.

3. Cover the head with linen dipped in cool water, or vinegar, which is to be
preferred.

4. If the pulse be absent, or very feeble, give the patient spirit and water,
in small quantities at a time; if on the contrary the pulse be remarkably
strong, use moderate bleeding, and let him take cooling drinks, such as
lemonade, butter-milk, vinegar and water, etc. These should be taken
moderately, and often repeated.

SECTION XI. Of Intoxication, or Drunkenness.
The symptoms are too well known to need any description.

The treatment must be varied according to different constitutions and
circumstances; and in case of sudden apparent death, the foregoing rules must
be observed. In general, it may be recommended to lay the body in an easy
posture, and in a cool place, with the head a little raised; to loose all tight
things about the body and limbs, particularly the neck; to suffer the patient
to sleep, to make him smell the fumes of strong vinegar, and to rub the body
gently with vinegar and water. After the debauch is over, the bowels should be
moderately purged, or opened with a clyster, unless the strong liquors have
done this before; or produced vomiting, which should never be much urged with
medicines. Let him drink freely of cool water at the time of intoxication, and
swallow a few spoonfuls of olive oil, or some other mild oil; but afterward,
when he begins to suffer debility and sickness at his stomach, let the stimulus
of ardent spirits be changed for something more durable, such as good soup,
well seasoned with salt and pepper, occasionally using some cordial drink,
which the effect of habit in those who have made too free a use of strong
liquors, will often absolutely require; exercise, and even labor in proportion
to the strength of the patient, should also be enjoined.

There are but few who have resolution enough to conquer a tippling habit; but
this number would be greater if they knew how to proceed; for their benefit the
following advice is offered.

The only effectual method to get rid of habitual intoxication is, to diminish
the quantity of strong liquor daily and gradually, which, with inflexible
resolution, will destroy the habit; or to change the stimulus of strong liquors
for something more durable, and which is not endued with any stupifying
property: For this purpose, proper food should be taken, and an electuary
composed of the powder of Peruvian bark, wild valerean, or Columbo root, with
the oil of Cloves, or some other essential oil, has, in many cases, been found
very useful; a piece as large as a nutmeg, should be taken several times in the
day, especially when a sinking faintness is felt at the stomach.

All who have studied the nature and properties of the stomach, know that the
tone of that organ is destroyed by the excessive use of strong liquors; the
liquor of the stomach becomes vitiated and sour, and the food is consequently
not properly digested and converted into good nourishment, so that the whole
body soon becomes injured.

In this situation, one of the best things that can be done, is to abstain
entirely from from all spirituous liquors; such as rum, gin, brandy, whiskey,
Roman and hot purl, mint juleps, and all other mixtures of spirituous drinks,
many of which are rendered still more pernicious by being mixed with metalic
and other poisonous substances.

To relieve the patient from some of these evils, the newly expressed juice of
lemons or limes has been found very serviceable; but what is much better, let
him take from twenty to one hundred drops of the spirit of hartshorn, in a
small cup of water, several times in the day; this will tend to destroy the
morbid acid in the stomach, and to keep out the wind, as dram-drinkers express
it, much more effectually than drams themselves, and by being a substitute for
the stimulus of the stupifying liquors, it will prevent languor, faintness and
that dejection of mind, which too frequently drive the restless victim to the
delusive relief of the bowl and the glass.

Temperance in eating should also be strictly observed, the want of which is
often, productive of as bad, or even worse effects than intemperance in
drinking.

Persons who fall sacrifices to these habits generally imagine that they are
troubled with bilious disorders; and of their own choice, or by the foolish
advice of others, as ignorant as themselves, they fly, for every little
uneasiness arising from the derangement of the digestive organs, to the use of
emetics, by which they are but too often hurried out of existence, especially
when this is accompanied with a liberal use of the lancet.

SECTION XII. Of Convulsions, Swoons, Fits and Trances.
These sometimes produce the common appearances of death, while the patient is
in a recoverable condition. As these events arise from some peculiar state of
the imagination, violent operations of the passions, or from some disease of an
earlier date, as Epilepsy, catalepsy, hysterics, etc. no very particular
directions can be given in this place, except calling for proper help and
advice in dangerous cases, as soon as may be.

And it is always to be remembered, that persons have sometimes been recovered
from apparent death, after sudden and violent sickness, as in the case of jail
and other malignant fevers. After the proper methods of recovery have been
tried for a sufficient length of time, and without success, the interment of
the body ought to be delayed in all instances, till evident appearances of a
beginning putrefaction have taken place, for in almost all cases where the body
remains apparently whole, putrefaction is found to be the only certain evidence
of the absolute extinction of life, or suspension of animal motion. If this
caution be not properly observed, after all the usual methods of recovery have
been tried in vain, the person may afterward suffer the indescribable horrors
of those, who, we have too much reason not to believe, have, in some instances,
while the spark of life remained in a latent state, been prematurely committed
to the grave. By these cautions the "terror of premature interment," and the
anxious fears in the minds of the surviving relatives, that such an event may
have happened, can at all times be made to vanish.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Constitution of this Society is calculated to embrace a great variety of
subjects of a literary, philosophical and practical nature, which may lead to
the diminution of human misery; and it is proper to observe, that it is on a
more liberal plan than that of any foreign institution of a similar nature.

By the 14th article of the Constitution, any person, either an American
Citizen, or Foreigner, without the formality of balloting, may become a member,
on paying to the Treasurer the annual subscription, and his name will be
enrolled in the list of Contributors.

Those benevolent Citizens who are disposed to promote the useful purposes of
this Infant Society, are requested to call on the Secretary or Treasurer, and
make themselves members of an Institution which may possibly afford the
successful means of saving their own lives, or the lives of some of their
dearest friends.

By the 5th article of the Constitution, the Trustees are to take charge of the
funds of the Society. Those persons whose situation does not admit of their
becoming active agents in the affairs of the Society, are informed, that they
have an opportunity for a useful exercise of their generosity, by making
donations to the Society; which will be received by any of the Officers, and
carefully appropriated to accomplish the designs mentioned in the Constitution.

It is probable that the Society will deem it expedient and useful, some time
in the ensuing year, to offer a premium on a prize question, to be given out
for the examination and discussion of persons of genius and learning, in all
places.

There have been no regular reports of the cases of suspended respiration, that
have happened since this Society was formed; but in future, regular reports
will be made at the several meetings. Various arrangements are now made to
carry the particular objects mentioned in the Constitution successfully into
effect.

THE END.

