ONE THOUSAND VALUABLE SECRETS, IN THE ELEGANT AND USEFUL ARTS, Collected from
the Practice of the best Artists, AND CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE VARIOUS
METHODS

Of engraving on brass, copper and steel. Of the composition of metals. -- of
varnishes. Of masticks, cements, sealing wax. Of the Glass manufactory. Various
imitations of precious stones and French paste. Of colors and painting, useful
for carriage painters. Of painting on paper. Of compositions for limners. Of
transparent colors. Of colors to dye skins and gloves. To color and varnish
copper-plate prints. Of Painting on glass. Of colors of all sorts, for oil,
water and crayons. Of preparing the lapis lazuli, To make ultramarine. Of the
art of guilding. The art of dying woods, bones, and. The art of casting in
moulds. Of making useful sorts of ink. The art of making wines. -- Of making
vinegars. Of Liquors, essential oils, etc. Of confectionary. Of preparing
various kinds of (...) Of taking out spots and stains. Of fishing, angling,
bird-catching, And a variety of other curious, entertaining and useful
articles.
FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for B. DAVIES, No. 68, Market Street, and T. STEPHENS,
No. 57, South Second-Street.

1795.

THE PREFACE,
To the First American Edition.
AT a period, when the United States of America are advancing rapidly in the
career of improvement, and her citizens afford such ample encouragement to all
the arts, that meliorate and embellish life, every attempt to add to the
general stock in this way will, doubtless, meet with that share of attention,
which it deserves. It is on this presumption only that the following pages are
offered to the public inspection; -- and the Editors are happy in believing
that a work, like this, calculated to promote industry and stimulate genius,
will be received as an acceptable contribution.

Although the useful and necessary arts and manufactures, which have mostly
hitherto employed the industrious citizens of America, have acquired a degree
of perfection, which rivals the productions of Europe, those, which are
distinguished by elegance and refinement are but little known, or at best in
their infancy. We are still indebted to the work shops of other nations for the
greater part of the finer articles we consume. But as a taste of this kind is
daily spreading among us, and as wealth which affords the means of
gratification, is likewise increasing, it will be sound policy, as well as good
economy to produce all that we can among ourselves, and no longer to remain
tributary to foreign markets. This will be the surest means of establishing our
independance on the for nest basis.

Whilst the inhabitants of Europe are distracted by the din of arms, and their
principal employment is to contrive the most expeditious means of destroying
one another, let the happy citizens of these infant States turn their attention
to the useful and elegant arts of peace; -- let them avail themselves of the
discoveries of these ancient nations in the happier years that are past; until
we no longer stand in need of their supplies, or remain exposed to the
fluctuations of their fortune.

The work now offered to the public is well calculated to promote this
beneficial purpose, being a large and various collection of important secrets
in the finer arts and trades; secrets which bave resulted from repeated
experiments made by the first artists in England, France, Italy and Germany,
and which open an extensive field for the exercise of American ingenuity and
improvement.

The Art of engraving, to which we are indebted for so many elegant copies of
the finest works of genius, and which is in it is infant state here, will derive
great advantage by a due observation of the directions and receipts contained
in this volume.

The various combinations and composition of metals; the art of varnishing; of
making maitichs and cements; ^uriositi^s in glass and precious stones; the art
of mixing colors for painting; of gilding; of dying wood, bones, ivory, etc.
and the various methods of casting in moulds, explained in these sheets, will
conduce greatly to facilitate the progress of these ingenious arts in the
United States of America.

Besides these principal articles there are many other matters in this
collection that are not confined to the use of the artist, but will be equally
profitable to every reader, who wishes to be acquainted with a number of
curious and useful receipts, applicable to the common occasions of life.

To render this work more easy to be understood, and of course to extend its
utility, all the receipts are rendered as free as possible of that technical
obscurity, which is peculiar to the arts, and which makes subjects of this kind
disgusting to common readers.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Art of Engraving. Art. 1 A WAX to lay on iron or steel 1 2. A
mordant water to engrave on steel ib. 3. To engrave with aquafortis, so that
the work may appear like a basso -- relieve. 2 4. Acquafortis for engraving 3
5. To engrave on brass, or copper, with aquafortis ib. 6. To engrave prints by
aquafortis 4 7. Another ib 8. The method of engraving with aquafortis 5 9. To
engrave on wood 7 10. To engrave on copper with the graver ib. 11. To engrave
on steel or iron; such as blades of swords, knives, etc. 8 12. A water to
engrave on iron or copper 9 13. Another more mordant water ib. 14. An ardent
water to engrave steel deeply, or even eat it off entirely. 10
CHAP. II. Of Metals. 1. A secret to cause the transmutation of iron into the
finest German steel. 11 2. To make tin ib. Art. 3. To break an iron bar as big
as the arm 12 4. Another for the same purpose ib. 5. To compose a metal of a
gold color ib. 6. Another composition of metal 13 7. To dissolve gold in your
naked hand ib. 8. How to give some perfection to imperfect metals 14 9. To melt
all sorts of metals in the shell of a nut, without burning it 15 10. To
increase the virtue of a loadstone ib. 11. To restore g^^d to its weight, after
it has lost it in regal water ib. 12. To operate the transmutation of silver
into gold ib. 13. Fixation of gold into silver 17 14. To extract mercury from
lead 18 15. Another mercury from lead ib. 16. Permutation of lead into silver
ib. 17. Fixation of saltpetre 19 18. Transmutation of iron into copper ib. 19.
Another to the same purpose ib. 20. Another ib. 21. To preserve the brightness
of arms 20 22. To manage steel so, that it may cut iron as it were lead ib. 23.
To soften steel ib. 24. To extract mercury from antimony ib. 25. A magical
mercurial ring 21 26. To melt the aforesaid mercury ib. 27. The virtue of those
rings 22 28. A fixation of copper which will be found to yield six ounces out
of eight, on the test ib. 29. To whiten copper so as to make very fine figures
with it 23 30. To give the finest color of gold to copper, in order to make
statues, or other works with it ib. 31. To imitate tortoise shell on copper ib.
32. To perform the same on horn ib. 33. To soften metals 24 34. To wash brass
figures over with silver ib. 35. To operate the transmutation of iron into
steel ib. 36. Another receipt for the same 25 37. To take immediately rust from
iron 27 38. To obtain good silver from p^wter ib. 39. To soften iron ib. Art.
40. To melt iron so that it will spread under the hammer 28 41. To give iron a
temper to cut a porphy^y ib. 42. To soften all sorts of metals ib. 43. To
soften a sophistic metal ib. 44. A good temper for arms ib. 45. Another very
hard temper 29 46. To melt iron and make it soft ib. 47. To whiten iron like
silver ib. 48. To render iron brittle, so as to pound it like glass ib. 49.
Ingredients which serve to the melting of iron 30 50. To melt or calcine the
blade of a sword without hurting the scabbard ib. 51. A spirit which will
dissolve all sorts of stones without excepting the most hard ib. 52. To refine
pewter ib. 53. To fix mercury 31 54. To extract mercury from lead ib. 55. The
composition of cast mirrors and cylinders ib. 56. The true composition of
metallic mirrors, or looking-glasses, used among the ancients ib. 57. To make
unequal and ardent mirrors 32 58. To give tools such a temper, as will enable
them to saw marble 33 59. To soften iron, and harden it afterward more than it
was before 34 60. To operate the transmutation of iron into ^amask steel ib.
61. To guard iron against rusting ib. 62. To cut pebbles with ease ib. 63. To
whiten copper 35 64. A projection on copper ib. 65. A receipt for the
preparation of emery 36 66. A factitious amiant; or the way to make an
incombustible cloth 37 67. To render tartar fusible and penetrating ib. 68. To
extract mercury from any metal ib. 69. To dye in gold silver medals or la^inas,
(...) and through 39 70. To refine pewter ib. 71. To make a perpetual motion
ib. 72. A secret fire 40 73. An oil, one ounce of which will last longer than
one pound of any other ib. 74. To make a coppel with ashes ib. Art.75. To
solder iron, or any other metal, without fire 41 76. To make a solder with fire
ib. 77. To make borax 42 78. To render iron as white and beautiful as silver
ib. 79. To calcine pewter, and render it as white and as hard as silver ib. 80.
Another to the same purpose ib. 81. To whiten brass 43 82. Another method ib.
83. To extract gold from silver 44
CHAP. III. Of the composition of varnishes. 1. A gold varnish 45 2. How to
prepare the lintseed oil with the hepatica-aloes, for the above purpose 46 3.
How to draw the tincture of rocou used in the composition of the above varnish
ib. 4. A varnish for iceing ib. 5. An excellent varnish ib. 6. Another as good
47 7. A red varnish ib. 8. A black varnish 48 9. How to make a good ivory black
for the above purpose ib. 10. A varnish for floors 49 11. A varnish from
Flanders ib. 12. A varnish to lay on ^anvas sashes ib. 13. A varnish of
shell-lac, for miniatures and other pictures ib. 14. Another varnish for
pictures ib. 15. Another sort 50. 16. The Chinese varnish ib. 17. How to
imitate a black jasper, or variegated black marble ib. 18. Another way 51
Art.19. An ex^^llent varnish to give a fine gloss to the abovementioned
jasper, or variegated black marble ib. 20. A varnish which dries in two hours
time ib. 21. A varnish for copper-plate prints 52 22. An admirable varnish ib.
23. A varnish fit to lay on all sorts of colors ib. 24. A varnish known under
the appellation of Beaume-blane, or white ba^m ib. 25. A varnish to be used on
plaster, and any other sort of materials 53 26. An excellent varnish, in which
may be put and diluted, whatever color you like. -- It suits, equally well,
goldsmiths and limners ib. 27. A Chinese varnish suitable to all sorts of
colors ib. 28. Another Chinese varnish more particularly calculated for
miniature painting 54 29. How to make a red, with a varnish, of a much higher
hue than coral itself ib. 30. To make it gridelin color ib. 31. To make it
green ib. 32. Another way for the same ib. 33. To make it yellow 55 34. To make
it blue ib. 35. Another sort of varnish ib. 36. A clear and transparent
varnish, fit for all sorts of colors ib. 37. To make sashes with cloth, which
will (...) very transparent ib. 38. The composition of varnish fit for the
above sashes 56 39. A fine white varnish ib. 40. A curious and easy varnish to
engrave with aquafortis 57 41. A varnish to prevent the rays of the sun from
passing through the panes of window-glasses ib. 42. To raise a relief on
varnish ib. 43. To render silk stuffs transparent, after the Chinese manner;
and paint them with transparent colors likewise, in imitation of the India
manufactured silks 58 44. To make a transparent blue hue, for the above purpose
ib. 45. To make a transparent yellow hue, for the same use ib. 46. To make a
transparent green Art.47. To give the abovementioned painted silks, all the
smell and fragrancy of the India ones ib. 48. A most beautiful Chinese varnish
60 49. The true receipt of the English varnish, such as in that country is laid
on sticks and artificial-made canes ib. 50. A fine varnish for all sorts of
colors 61 51. A varnish to lay on, after the isinglass 62 52. A varnish to
gild with, without gold ib. 53. A varnish water proof ib. 54. Callot's varnish,
mentioned in Chap. I. p. 2. 63 55. A varnish to lay on paper 64 56. How to cast
figures in moulds ib. 57. Another varnish ib. 58. L' Abbe Mulot's varnish ib.
59. A varnish to lay over plaister-works or figures 65 60. A very fine red
varnish ib. 61. A varnish to gild certain parts of stamped leathers, silvered
in some places with pewterleaves, and otherwise adorned with running stalks of
flowers, of various colors, figures, and other sorts of embellishments 66 62.
To imitate porphyry 67 63. To imitate serpentine. ib.
CHAP. IV. Of Mastichs, Cements, aling-wax, etc. etc. 1. A substile mastich to
mend all sorts of broken vessels 68 2. Another ib. 3. A mastich to make
rock-works ib 4. An excellent mastich 69 5. A mastich for broken wares ib 6.
Another mastich ib. 7. Another ib. 8. A ceraent ib. 9. A glue to lay upon gold
ib. 10. A size 70 Art. 11 An exceeding good size, called Orleans size ib. 12. A
cement for delft, and other earthen wares ib. 13. Another, for the same
purpose, which resists water ib. 14. A cold cement for cisterns and fountains
ib. 15. A lute to join broken vessels 71 16. A strong glue of soft cheese ib.
17. To make a strong mastich ib. 18. To make corks for bottles 72. 19. To
imitate rock works ib. 20. To rub floors with, whether boards, bricks, etc. ib.
21. A composition to make a relief to gild over, or even to raise an embroidery
ib. 22. Sealing wax: Recipe 1st. 73 23. Another sealing wax: Recipe 2d. ib. 24.
Another. Recipe 3d. ib. 25. Another. Recipe 4th. 74 26. Another. Recipe 5th.
ib. 27. Another. Recipe 6th. ib. 28. Another. Recipe 7th. Excessively good ib.
29. Another. Recipe 8th. 75 30. An excellent sealing-wax, by Girardot. Recipe
9th. ib. 31. A color for the above wax. ib.
CHAP. V. ^^ the Art of Glass Manufactory, and the making compositions to
imitate Precious Stones, commonly known, in this country, by the name of French
Paste. 1. The general composition of the paste to make spurious precious
stones, such as emeralds, sapphires, rubies, etc. 76 2. To make emeralds, and
other sorts of precious stones 77 3. To calcine calcedony stone and crystal, in
order to compose precious stones with them 78 4. To make emeralds. 79 5. For
topazes ib. Art. 6. For sapphires ib. 7. For amethysts ib. 8. For hyacinths ib.
9. For rubies 80 10. Another way to make emeralds ib. 11. Another composition
for hyacinths ib. 12. Another for rubies ib. 13. To make diamonds 81 14. A
water to harden artificial stones ib. 15. A water, or rather, a dye, to put
under diamonds both true and false, when they are set 82 16. How to make white
sapphires, to imitate true diamonds ib. 17. A better way of doing the same ib.
18. A color to make rubies 83 19. To whiten amethysts 84 20. To make emeralds
light and hard ib. 21. To give crystal a perfect hardness 85 22. A cement to
render crystal like diamonds, and give the sapphires of Alenson a hardness to
cut glass with ease ib. 23. To make crystal throw off as much fire as diamonds
ib. 24. Another way of making diamonds 86 25. To give the white Amethyst the
color of true diamond ib. 26. To imitate calcedony ib. 27. To make a crysolite
ib. 28. To make diamonds with jargons 87 29. To make what they call doublers in
rubies and emeralds, as they do at Milan ib. 30. To soften crystal 88 31.
Another ^eceipt to soft^n crystal, or any other colored stone, so that you may
cut is like cheese; and restore it afterward to its primary hardness 89 32.
Another equally useful to soften crystal and steel ib. 33. A paste which will
procure as beautiful emeralds as natural ones ib. 34. Another way of making
emeralds 90 35. To whiten imperfect diamonds, or those which have been
discolored 91 36. To counterfeit diamonds ib. 37. Various dies for precious
stones 92 38. A color for glasses and enamels ib. Art. 39. Another ruby color
93 40. Another of the invention of Saint Marie the enameller ib. 41. A
composition, which is the fundamental basis of all enamels ib. 42. To make an
enamel as white as milk 94 43. To make an enamel, turquoise color 95 44. How
to prepare the scories of copper for the above purpose ib. 45. To make blue
enamel 96 46. To make green enamel ib. 47. To make a black shining enamel ib.
48. To make an enamel, purple color 97 49. Another ib. 50. A yellow enamel ib.
51. To make a crystaline matter which serves as a basis to red-color enamels
ib. 52. How to make a fine preparation of Fusible Magnesia, to be employed in
the making of red enamels 98 53. To make a red enamel, of a most bright and
beautiful ruby hue 99 54. To make an enamel, true Balais-ruby color ib. 55. To
make a bright enamel, escarboucle color 100 56. To give rock crystal the
various colors of topaz, rubies, opal, heliotrope, and others ib. 57. The
method of counter-drawing on artificial stones, the original camaieaus,
intaglios, and other gems, which are kept and preserved in the several museums
in Europe 102 To jasper glass globes 103 58. To give globes a silver color ib.
A good method for tinning the abovementioned glass globes ib. 59. To make the
same in colors 104 60. To stick these globes upon one another ib. 61. To make
transparent frames ib. 62. Another ib. 63. Another way, which will make the
frame look as made of glass, and even a great deal more clear 105 64. A white
paint to preserve the putty which is put round the panes of glasses against the
injuries of the weather ib. 65. To clear glass ib. 66. How to distinguish a
true from a false stone 106 67. Another to the same purpose ib. Art. 68. To
make pearls, and swell them to what size you please ib. 69. To dye crystal ruby
hue, with lake 108 70. To make a sapphire 109 71. Another composition for the
sapphire 110 72. To make an amethyst. ib.
CHAP VI. Concerning Colors and Painting. I. To paint in varnish on wood.
(Useful to Carriage Painters.) 1. The preparation of the wood, previous to the
laying of colors, and the general process observed in laying them on it. 111 2.
To make a black ib. 3. To make a blue 112 4. To make the Grideline. ib.
II. To Paint on Paper. 5. For the red ib. 6. To make a fine yellow ib. 7. To
make a gre^^ ib. 8. To transfer a print on vellum, and then paint it. ib.
III. Composition for Limners. 9. How to prepare most colors for limning 113
10. To make what is called lamp-black ib. 11. Another way of making black ib.
12. To make a blue 114 13. To make a turquin blue ib. Art. 13. A fine green for
limning ib. 15. Another for the same purpose ib. 16. To make what is called the
Sap-green, or blackberry green ib. 17. To make lake ib. 18. To make a liquid
lake 115 19. Another way ib. 20. For the vermilion ib. 21. For the making of
carmine ib. 22. Of the choice of colors fit for expressing the various
complexions. 116
IV. To make transparent colors. 23. For the green ib. 24. For the red ib. 25.
For the yellow 117 26. For the blue ib. 27. Another blue, very like ultramarine
ib. 28. A pale red to paint on enamel ib. 29. Process of making the purple, for
painting on enamel; a most admirable secret 118 30. How to make a fine flesh
color 119 31. A good way to make carmine ib. 32. Another way ib. 33. The whole
p^ocess of making ultramarine, three times experienced by the author 120 34.
Another very fine and well experienced ultramarine ib. 35. A very good and
experienced pastil to make ult^^marine of. The doses as for one pound 121 36.
The way of mixing the lapis with the pastil, to make ultramarine 122 37.
Another secret to compose a fine blue, fit for washing in drawings, inst^ad of
(...) which is both too dear, and too strong, to be used for that purpose 124
38. The true secret of making (...) green 125 39. To make a dark green whether
for the grounds of (...) pictures, or so washing on paper, or, in short, for
(...) and terraces. ib. 40. To make the bistre, for the wash 126 41. The secret
for a fine red for the wash ib. 42. A secret to make carmine at a small expense
127
V. Composition of colors, to dye skins or gloves. Art. 43. A lively Isabel ib.
44. For the same, paler ib. 45. For a pale filbert color ib. 46. For an amber
color 128 47. For the gold color ib. 48. For the fresh color ib. 49. The straw
color ib. 50. A fine brown ib. 51. To make a fine musk color ib. 52. To make a
frangipane color 159 53. An olive color ib. 54. For the wainscot color ib. 55.
How to make skins and gloves take these dies ib. 56. To varnish a chimney. 130
VI. To color, or varnish copperplate Prints. 57. To varnish copperplate prints
ib. 58. How to color these prints, in imitation of pictures in oil-colors ib.
59. A varnish which suits all sorts of prints, and may be applied on the right
side of it -- It suits also pictures and painted wood. -- It stands water, and
makes the work appear as shining as glass 131 60. To make appear in gold, the
figures of a print ib. 61. A curious secret to make a print imitate the
painting on glass 132 62. Another to the same purpose 133 63. The method of
chalking, for those who are not acquainted with drawing 134 64. How to prepare
a transparent paper to chalk with 131 65. Another, and more speedy method, of
making a transparent paper, to be used instantly ib. 66. A varnish to render
transparent the impression of a print which has been glued on glass and the
paper scratched off, as mentioned in Art. 61. and 62. 136
VII. For painting on Glass. Art. 67. How to draw on glass ib. 68. A color for
grounds on glass 137 69. Preparations of lake for glass ib. 70. Preparation of
the blue purple, for glass ib. 71. Preparation of the green for glass ib. 72.
Preparation of the yellow for the same 138 73. Preparation of the white ib. 74.
The proper varnish to be laid on glass after painting ib. 75. How to paint on
glass without fire. ib.
VIII. Preparations of colors of all sorts, for oil, water, and crayons. 76. An
oil to grind colors with, when the works are much exposed to the injuries of
the weather ib. 77. To marble and jasper paper 139 78. To clean pictures ib.
79. Another for the same purpose 140 80. A secret to render old pictures as
fine as new ib. 81. An oil to prevent pictures from blackening. -- It may serve
also to make cloth to carry in the pocket against wet weather ib. 82. A wash to
clean pictures ib. 83. Another way 141 84. Another way ib. 85. A very curious
and simple way of preventing flies from fitting on pictures, or any other
furniture, and making their dung there ib. 86. To make indigo ib. 87. To make a
yellow ib. 88. An azure of mother-of-pearl 142 89. A white for painters which
may be preserved for ever ib. 90. Another white for ladies' paint ib. 91. A
good azure ib. 92. An azure from silver, done in less than a fortnight 143 93.
To make an azured water ib. Art. 94. Another way of making azure ib. 95. A fine
azure 144 96. Another way ib. 97. Another way ib. 98. To make an admirable
white lead, fit for oilpainting and coloring of prints 145 99. The preparation
of verdigrise ib. 100. A fine liquid green ib. 101. To make the Stil-de-grain,
which we call Brown pink ib. 102. To make a fine vermilion 146 103. A secret to
draw without either ink or pencil ib. 104. To make an imitation of enamel on
tin, for chimney-branches, etc. ib. 105. A very valuable secret to make
exceeding good crayons, as red as chalk. This secret is of the discovery of
Prince Robert, Brother to Prince Palatine ib. 106. To render the stone-cinnabar
and vermilion finer: and at the same time, to prevent them from blackening. 147
107. The true process used in the composition of the Eastern Carmine 148 108.
The true process observed in making the lake 150 109. To make the fine
columbine lake 151 110. A fine red water for minature painting 152 111. The
receipt of the fine Venetian lake ib. 112. Directions for coloring prints 154
113. Directions for the mixture of colors 155 114. Directions for painting
fresco 156 115. Directions for the choice, use, and composition of the colors
employed for the above purpose 157 116. Directions for painting in oil on a
wall. Method 1. 159 117. Method 2 ib. 118. Method 3 ib. 119. Directions for
painting in oil on wood 160 120. Directions for painting in oil on canvas ib.
121. Which colors are used for the purpose 162 122. Which oils are used in
painting 164 123. To take off instantly a copy from a print, or a picture 165
124. Directions to make the Spanish carnation ib. 125. To make the Spanish
ladies rouge 166 126. A fine lake made with shell-lac ib. 127. Directions to
make cinnabar, or vermilion 167 Art. 128. Another very different method of
making cinnabar ib. 129. An azure as fine as, and which looks similar to
ultramarine 169 130. The same another way, as practiced in Germany 170 131.
Another very fine azure ib. 132. Another. ib.
IX. Preparation of the lapis lazuli to make ultramarine. 133. 1st. The general
manipulation of the whole process; each single part of which is treated of in
particular afterward 171 134. 2d. Directions to be observed in the process of
preparing the strong cement, in which the lapis lazuli is to be incorporated,
to draw afterward the azure from it. 173 135. To make another cement, of a
softer nature, for the said azure 175 136. Directions to prepare and purify the
lintseed oil for the azure ib. 137. The lie to wash the ultramarine with. 176
138. Another sort of lie for the same purpose 177 139. Directions for the
choice of the vessels in which the most impure ultramarine is to be washed, in
order to be mixed afterward with the other azure. ib. 140. Observations proper
to be made for discerning the virtue, and good or bad qualities, of the lapis
lazuli, from which you intend to compose ultramarine 178 141. The method of
calcining, and otherwise preparing, the lapis lazuli, in order to grind it
afterward 180 142. Directions for making the liquor fit to grind the lapis
with, in order to make the ultramarine ib. 143. The method of grinding the
lapis lazuli on porphyry, and the signs which attend it 181 144. The method of
incorporating the grinded lapis lazuli, with either of the strong or soft
cements 183 145. Directions for extracting the azure out of the cement 184 Art.
146. Observations on the colors of the azures at their coming out of the
cement, and the signs which attend them 187 147. The washing and purifying of
the azures after they are got out of the cement ib. 148. Another way of
purifying the same azures with yolks of eggs 188 149. Another particular and
scarce secret for purifying azures ib. 150. How to run the azures, after having
been thus cleansed, washed, and purified 189 151. The method of making the
green azure 190 152. Another sort of a green azure 191 153. A very fine method
for marbling paper. 192

CHAP. VII. Relative to the Art of Gilding. 1. The method of gilding with size,
or with oil ib. 2. To gild with size, or what is called in burnishgold 193 2.
To gild without gold 199 3. Another to the same purpose ib. 4. A gold without
gold. 200 5. The preparations of the gum water ib. 6. To write in gold or
silver ib. 7. To gild on glass, earthen, or china wares ib. 8. To write, or
paint in gold color ib. 9. To write, or paint in silver, especially with a
pencil 201 10. To whiten and silver copper medals ib. 11. A water to gild iron
202 12. To whiten exteriorly copper statues ib. 13. To write in gold letters,
on pots, or boxes ib. 14. To gild silver in water gilding without the
assistance of mercury ib. 15. The liquor, called the sauce, which is to be used
for coloring silver plates, gilt with the above described powder 203 16. A
water which gilds copper and bronze. A secret very useful for watch and
pin-makers 204 17. Another ib. Art. 18. A water to gild steel or iron, after
being well polished ib. 19. To silver copper figures 205 20. To silver, or gild
pewter ib. 21. A composition to lay on lead, tin, or any other metal, in order
to hold fast the ready gilt leaves of pewter which are applied on it; useful
for gilding on high steeples, dooms etc. ib. 22. To clean and whiten silver 206
23. The preparation of gold in shell ib. 24. To bronze in gold color ib. 25.
Another to the same purpose 207 26. How to matt burnished gold ib. 27. How to
do the same to burnish silver ib. 28. The method of applying gold, or silver in
shell, on the wood ib. 29. To gild sandy gold 208 30. The varnish fit to be
laid on gilding and silvering ib. 31. The method of bronzing ib. 32. A water to
gild iron with ib. 33. To make the fine writing gold 209 34. How to get the
gold or silver, out of gilt plates ib. 35. To gild paper on the edge ib. 36. To
gild on vellum 210 37. Another way ib. 38. Another way ib. 39. A gilt without
gold ib. 40. To gild without gold 211 41. To gild on calf or sheepskin ib. 42.
Gold and silver in shell ib. 43. To gild marble ib. 44. To apply gold on glazed
wares, crystal, glass, china, etc. ib. 45. Matt gold in oil. 212 46. To dye any
metal, or stone, gold color, without gold ib. 47. To whiten copper ib. 48. To
whiten silver without the assistance of fire ib. 49. To whiten iron like
silver. ib.
CHAP. VIII. The Art of Dying Woods, Bones, etc. Art. 1. The composition for
red 213 2. Another red ib. 3. Another way 214 4. To dye wood of a purplish
color ib. 5. A blue purple ib. 6. Another ib. 7. A blue for wood ib. 8. A green
ib. 9. A yellow 115 10. Another yellow ib. 11. Another finer yellow ib. 12. To
dye wood in a fine polished white ib. 13. To dye in polished black ib. 14.
Another way 216 15. To imitate ebony ib. 16. Another way ib. 17. Another way
ib. 18. Another ebony black 217 19. Another way ib. 20. A fine black, easily
made ib. 21. To dye wood silver fashion ib. 22. To dye in gold, silver, or
copper 218 23. To give a piece of nut, or pear tree, what undulations one likes
ib. 24. To imitate the root of nut tree ib. 25. To give a fine color to the
cherry-tree wood ib. 26. To marble wood ib. 27. To imitate white marble 219 28.
To imitate black marble ib. 29. To marble and jasper ib. 30. For the aventurine
220 31. A counterfaction of coral ib. 32. To soften amber, otherwise karabe 221
33. To take the impression of any seal ib. 34. Another way 222 35. To get birds
with white feathers ib. 36. To soften ivory ib. 37. To dye ivory thus softened
223 38. Another way to soften ivory ib. Art. 39. Another way ib. 40. To whiten
ivory, which has been spoiled 224 41. Another way ib. 42. To whiten green
ivory; and whiten again that which has turned of a brown yellow ib. 43. To
whiten bones ib. 44. To Petrify wood, etc. 225 45. To imitate tortoise-shell
with horn ib. 46. A preparation for the tortoise-shell ib. 47. To dye bones in
green ib. 48. Another way ib. 49. To dye bones, and mould them in all manner of
shapes 226 50. To dye bones in black 227 51. To soften bones ib. 52. To dye
bones in green ib. 53. A salt for ha^dening soft bones ib. 54. To make figures,
or vases, with egg-shells 228 55. To dye bones and ivory of a fine red ib. 56.
To make a paste in imitation of black marble ib. 57. A receipt to dye marble,
or alabaster, in blue or purple 229 58. To bronze wooden, plaster, ivory, or
other figures, so that the bronze may stand water for ever ib. 59. The varnish
fit for bronzing 230 60. A water to dye bones and wood ib. 61. To dye bones and
ivory an emerald green ib. 62. To dye bones any color 231 63. To whiten
alabaster and white marble ib. 64. To blacken bones 193 65. Another way to dye
woods and bones red ib. 66. The same in black ib. 67. For the green 232 68. To
dye wood vermilion color ib. 69. To soften horn, so that you may cast it in a
mould as melted lead. ib.
CHAP. IX. Of the Art of Casting in Moulds 1. To cast ^ figure in bronze 233 2.
How to (...) such sorts of figures 242 Art. 3. Of the choice and composition of
metals 243
CHAP. X. Of Making curious and useful sorts of Ink. 1. A good shining ink. 244
2. To write on grease, and make the ink run on it ib. 3. An ink-stone, with
which ink-stands may be made, and with which you may write without ink 245 4.
To write with common clear water ib. 5. A good ink both for drawing and writing
246 6. To make very good ink without gall-nuts; which will be equally good to
wash drawings and plans, and strike very neat lines with the pen ib. 7. An
invisible ink ib. 8. Another way 247 9. To make good india ink ib. 10. Red ink
ib. 11. A green ink ib. 12. To make an ink which appears and disappears,
alternately 248 13. The invisible method of conveying secrets. 1st. Ink ib. 14.
An ink to write over the other. 2d Ink ib. 15. Another ink which effaces the
second, and makes the first appear. 3d. Ink. 249 16. An ink which will go off
in six days ib. 17. Another, which you may rub off when you please ib. 18.
Powder ink ib. 19. An exceeding good writing ink 250 20. A gold color ink,
without gold ib. 21. Another way ib. 22. To write in silver without silver 251
23. A good shining ink ib. 24. A blue ink ib. 25. A yellow ink. ib. 26. A green
ink, which may keep two years ib. 27. A shining ink 252 Art. 28. A way of
writing which will not be visible, unless you hold the paper to the sun, or to
the light of a candle. ib. 29. A secret to revive old writings which are almost
defaced ib. 30. To write in gold or silver letters 253 31. An iris on white
paper ib. 32. A shining ink ib. 33. A common ink 254 34. How to prepare
printers ink ib. 35. The preparation of the ink which serves to write
inscriptions, epitaphs, etc. on stones, marble, etc. ib. 36. The various ways
of making an ink for writing. 1st Method. 255 37. Another way. 2d Method ib.
38. Another way. 3d Method ib. 39. Another way. 4th Method 156 40. Another way.
5th Method ib. 41. Another way. 6th Method ib. 42. Another way. 7th Method 257
43. Another way. 8th Method ib. 44. Another way. 9th Method ib. 45. An ink
which may be made instantly 258 46. Another way to the same purpose ib. 47. A
portable ink, without gall-nut or vitriol ib. 48. Another portable ink, in
powder ib. 49. Another portable powder to make ink instantly 259 50. Another
sort of powder to the same purpose ib. 51. A yellow ink 260 52. Another way ib.
53. Another way ib. 54. Another sort of yellow liquor ib. 55. Another way 261
56. Another way superior to all the rest ib. 57. Of the use of sugar candy in
ink ib. 58. A sort of black ink fit for painting figures and to write upon
stuffs, and linen, as well as on paper ib. 59. To prevent ink from freezing in
the winter 262 60. How to renew old writings almost defaced ib. 61. A green ink
ib. 62. Another way ib. 63. To write in gold letters, on iron or steel ib. 64.
An ink which writes like silver, without silver in it 263 Art. 65. To write on
silver in black which will never go off. 263
CHAP XI. Relative to Wine. 1. To make a wine to have the taste and flavor of
French muscat 264 2. To make the vin-doux ib. 3. To make vin-bourru, of an
excellent taste ib. 4. To imitate a malvoisie ib. 5. To change red wine into
white, and wite into red 265 6. To prevent wine from fusting, otherwise tasting
of the cask, and to give it both a taste and flavor quite agreeable ib. 7. To
make a vine produce a sweet wine ib. 8. To make a sweet wine of a very
agreeable flavor, and besides very wholesome ib. 9. To clarify in two days new
wine when muddy 266 10. To make the wine keep mout or unfermented for twelve
months ib. 11. To make a wine turn black ib. 12. To clarify a wine which is
turned ib. 13. To correct a bad flavor in wine 267 14. To prevent wine from
spoiling and turning ib. 15. To prevent thunder and lightning from hurting wine
ib. 16. To prevent wine from corrupting ib. 17. To restore a wine turned sour
or sharp ib. 18. To restore a wine corrupted and glaity ib. 19. To prevent wine
from growing sour, and turning into vinegar ib. 20. To make a new wine taste as
an old wine 268 21. To restore a wine turned ib. 22. To restore a wine fusted,
or tasting of the cask ib. 23. To prevent wine from pricking ib. Art 24. To
make wine keep 268 25. To clarify wine easily 269 26. To prevent wine from
turning ib. 27. To correct a musty taste in wine ib. 28. Another method ib. 29.
To correct a sour or bitter taste in wine ib. 30. To restore a spoiled wine ib.
31. To sweeten a tart wine 270 32. Another way ib. 33. To prevent tartness in
wine ib. 34. To heighten a wine in liquor, and give it an agreeable flavor ib.
35. To give wine a most agreeable flavor ib. 36. How to find out whether or
not there be water mixed in a cask of wine 271 37. To separate the water from
wine ib. 38. To ungrease wine in less than twenty-four hours ib. 39. To restore
a wine ib. 40. To correct a bad taste and sourness in wine 272 41. Another way
ib. 42. Another way ib. 43. To cure those who are too much addicted to drink
wine ib. 44. Another method, no less certain ib. 45. To prevent one from
getting in^oxicated with drinking 273 46. To prevent intoxication by drink ib.
47. Another way ib. 48. Another way ib. 49. Another method ib. 50. Another way
274 51. A method of making people drunk, without endangering their health ib.
52. Another way ib. 53. To recover a person from intoxication ib. 54. To
prevent the breath from smelling of wine ib. 55. To preserve wine good to the
last ib.
CHAP. XII. Concerning the Composition of Vinegars. Art. 1. To make good wine
vinegar in a short time 275 2. To change wine into strong vinegar ib. 3. To
make very good and strong vinegar with the worst of wines ib. 4. To turn wine
into vinegar in less than three hours ib. 5. To restore such a wine to its
first taste 276 6. An excellent preparation of vin^gar ib. 7. To render alkali
ib. 8. To make, in one ^onr, good rose vinegar ib. 9. Another method to make
such vinegar in an instant ib. 10. To operate the same in one hour's time, on a
larger quantity of wine 277 11. The receipt of the vinegar called the Grand
Constables's Vinegar ib. 12. A secret to increase the strength and sharpness of
the vinegar ib. 13. Another way to do the same 278 14. The secret for making
good vinegar, given by a vinegar-man at Paris, ib. 15. To make vinegar with
water 279 16. To make good vinegar with spoiled wine ib. 17. A dry portable
vinegar, or the vinaigreen poud^^. ib.
CHAP. XIII. Of Liquors and essential Oils. Art. 1. To make wine as good as
Spanish wine 280 2. Another way to imitate Spanish wine 281 3. To make the
Rossolis ib. 4. To make a Rossolis which may serve as a foundation to other
liquors 282 Art. 5. To make ambrosy ib. 6. For the nectar ib. 7. A common
Rossolis 283 8. Another Rossolis ib. 9. Another way ib. 10. To make Eau de
Franchipane 284 11. Orange-flower water made instantly ib. 12. Muscadine
rose water ib. 13. To make raspberry, strawberry, cherry, or other such waters
ib. 14. Lemonade water at a cheap rate 285 15. Apricot water ib. 16. To make
exceeding good lemonade ib. 17. To make orangeade the same way ib. 18. To make
Eau de Verjus ib. 19. To make orgeat-water 286 20. Other waters ib. 21. To make
a cooling cinnamon water ib. 22. To make coriander water 287 23. Anise-seed
water ib. 24. Citron water ib. 25. Cinnamon water ib. 26. To make cedrat water
ib. 27. To make cedrat another way 288 28. Janiper water ib. 29. To make good
hydromel, otherwise metheglin ib. 30. To make Eau d' Ange 289 31. Another Eau
d' Ange ib. 32. Another Eau d' Ange ib. 33. A light and delicate Rossolis,
known under the denomination of Populo 290 34. Angelic water ib. 35. The
preparation of musk and amber, to have it in cordials 291 36. To make
Eau-de-Cete ib. 37. To make the compounded, Eau-clairette ib. 39. The cinnamon
water 292 40. To make a strong anise-seed water, or animated brandy ib. 41. To
make white Ratafia, called otherwise Eau-de-Noiau, or kernal water ib. 42. To
make good Hypocras, both the red and white sort ib. 43. To make good Rossolis
293 44. An essence of Hypocras, to make this liquor instantly, and at will ib.
Art. 45. (...) exceeding good Ratafia 294 46. An essence of ambergrise ib. 47.
Another, and shorter way of making the same 295 48. A smelling water ib. 49. A
receipt to compose one pint of Rossolis, with which you can make forty ib. 50.
To make a Rossolis after that of Turin 296 51. How to make (...), a Persian
species of punch ib. 52. An exceeding fine essence of Hypocras 297 53. To make
Vin-des Die^x ib. 54. Burnt wine 298 55. To imitate muscat wine ib. 56.
Eau-clairette simple ib. 57. A violet water ib. 58. To make a clear and white
Hypocras 299 59. For the white Hypocras ib. 60. To make the true Eau-de-Noiau
ib. 61. To make Eau de Fenouillette, such as it comes from the Isle of Ret^ ib.
62. To make an hypocras with water 301 63. Of the various liquors with which
hypocras may be made 64. A Rossolis, Turin fashion ib. 65. An admirable oil of
sugar 302 66. Another oil of sugar, without the assistance of fire ib. 67. An
admirable essence of red sugar ib. 68. Another oil of sugar, excessively good
303 69. How to extract the essential oil from any flower ib. 70. Essence of
jessamine, roses, and other flowers 304 71. To draw an oil from jessamine, or
any other flowers ib. 72. To draw the essential oil of roses 305 73. The oil of
cinnamon ib. 74. An essence of jessamine ib. 75. Essence of ambergrise ib. 76.
Essence of capon, and other fowls 306 77. Virginal milk ib. 78. How to make the
Hipotequ^ 307 79. An exceeding good ptisan ib. 80. How to color any sort of
liquor ib. 81. A lady's fine rogue, not at all hurtful to the skin like other
rogues, wherein there always enters a mixture of lead or quicksilver ib. 82.
An exceeding fine smelling water, made at a very small expense 308 Art. 83. The
receipt of the Eau imperiale, or Imperial water ib. 84. The receipt of the
syrup of orgeat of Montpelier 309 85. A receipt to make an imitation of coffee
310 86. Another way ib. 87. Directions for preparing the true coffee 311 88.
Directions for the preparing of tea 312 89. A receipt for the making of
chocolate. 314
CHAP. XIV. Relative to the Confectionary Business. 1. Preserved nuts 315 2.
Orange-flower paste 316 3. Paste of jessamine ib. 4. Apricot Paste ib. 5.
Current paste 317 6. A verjus paste ib. 7. How to make syrups with all sorts of
flowers, which shall be possessed of all their taste, flavor, and fragrancy
ib. 8. Raspberry syrup 318 9. Apricot syrup ib. 10. The verjus syrup 319 11. A
general manner of making syrups, applicable to almost all sorts of fruits,
especially currants. ib. 12. To make liquid current jam ib. 13. To make the
same with cherries 320 14. Another way to preserve cherries, with or without
stones ib. 15. To make the liquid raspberry jam ib. 16. The (...) (...) 321 17.
The sa^^ ^ith powder sugar ib. 18. Peeled verjus 322 19. To preserve March
double, or single violets ib. 20. To make a dry preserve of the same violets
ib. 21. Another way to make them liquid 323 22. To preserve apricots, when
neither too ripe nor too green ib. 23. How to make a dry preserve of them 324
24. To preserve green apricots ib. 25. To make the Cotignac liquid 326 26.
Another way ib. 27. How to make the caramel 327 28. To make Raisinet ib. 29. To
preserve quinces in red ib. 30. To do the same in white 328 31. To preserve
Roussel^t, Muscadine, and other sorts of pears ib. 32. A preserve of green
almonds 329 33. To make the same into a compotte ib. 34. To make dry portable
cherries ib. 35. The preserve of orange-flowers, whether in loose leaves, or in
beds, or even in grapes of bunches 330 36. A marmalade of orange-flowers 331
37. To make an apricot, or peach jam ib. 38. An apricot jam, after the French
way 332 39. To make raspberry, current, and cherry jam ib. 40. To make a good
current jelly 333 41. To make a verjus jelly ib. 42. To make an apple jelly ib.
43. To make the conserve of orange-flowers 334 44. A conserve of violets ib.
45. A conserve with raspings of Portugal oranges and lemons, conjointly or
separately ib. 46. To make almonds a-la-praline 335 47. To whiten cherries,
currants, raspberries, grapes, strawberries, and other such like fruits ib. 48.
To make iced maroons ib. 49. To make the Royal massepins 336 50. To make Savoy
biscuits 337 51. To make bitter almond biscuits 338 52. To make meringues ib.
53. The same with cinnamon, or chocolate 339 54. Another way of icing,
contrived ^or the sake of certain ^^^^pulous persons ib. 55. To make gimb^^^tes
ib. 56. To make biscotins 340 57. To make lemon lozenges 341 58. How to
preserve orange-peels all the year round, but especially in the month of May
ib. 59. To make a paste with whatever fruit it may be ib. 60. The Genoa paste
342 61. Quinces-jam, and other fruits ib. 62. Genoa biscuits ib. 63. The
queen's cakes, or biscuits 343 64. Macaroon ib. 65. A method of making cakes
exceeding fine ib. 66. Another particular method of making cakes ib. 67. A
cream made without fire 344 68. A cream which cuts as a rice pudding ib. 69. To
make an exceeding good boiled cream ib. 70. To make whipped cream 345 71.
Another sort of a cream. ib. Of Summer Compottes, or stewed Fruits. 72. The
raspberry compotte ib. 73. The apricot Compotte 346 74. Another way of doing
the same ib. 75. To do the same fruit, as well as peaches when ripe 347 76. To
make a compotte of the same fruit as above, and even plumbs broiled ib. 77. To
make a compotte perdigon plumbs ib. 78. The same for mirabelles, purple and
black damask, Saint Catherine, and other plumbs 348 79. Compottes of verjus in
grain ib. 80. Compottes of peeled verjus ib. 81. The compottes of pears called
muscat, the first and most early 347 82. The compotte of the largest forts of
pears, such as Beurre, Messire-jean, Bergamotte, Vertelongue, Bzidery,
Mouille-bouche, Amadotte, Doublefieur, Bon-chretien'd'hyuer, Franc-real, etc.
ib. 83. A compotte of pears a-la-braise ib. 84. A compotte of quinces 350 85.
Compotte of apples, Portuguese fashion ib. 86. A jelly compotte of apples ib.
87. A compotte of apples a-la-bouillonne 351

CHAP. XV. Relative to the Art of preparing Snuff. Art. 1. How to reduce
tobacco into powder ib. 2. How to purge snuff, and prepare it for admiting of
odours ib. 3. How to perfume snuff with flowers 352 Art. 4. Another way to do
the same 353 5. Another method ib. 6. Snuff of mille-fleurs ib. 7. The odoring
snuff after the method practiced at Rome 354 8. The snuff with the odor of
civet ib. 9. Amber-snuff ib. 10. The odouring snuff, Maltese fashion ib. 11.
The true Maltese method of p^eparing snuff 355 12. The Spanish method of
preparing perfumed snuff ib. 13. To give a red or yellow color to snuff. 356
CHAP. XVI. Of the Art of taking out Spots and Stains. Art. 1. To take off
iron-moulds from linen 357 2. To take off carriage-wheel's grease from clothes
ib. 3. Against piss spots ib. 4. To take of all sorts of spots from cloth of
whatever color it may be 358 5. A general receipt against all sorts of spots
upon every sort of stuff ib. 6. Against oil-spots ib. 7. A washing ball to take
off spots ib. 8. To take out pitch and turpentine spots 359 9. Against
ink-spots, whether on cloth or linen ib. 10. Another more simple remedy against
ink when just spilled ib. 11. Against oil spots on satin, and other
silk-stuffs, even on paper 360 12. A preparation of balls against spots 361 13.
For silks ib. 14. To restore gold and silver laces to their former beauty ib.
15. To restore Turkey carpets to their first bloom ib. 16. To make tapestries
resume their first brightness, when their colors have been tarnished and
spoiled 361 17. To take off all the spots of wax from velvet of any color
except the crimson ib. 18. To take the same off from silks and camblets ib. 19.
To wash gold or silver, or silks embroidery, on either linen, or any stuff
whatever, and render it like new ib. 20. To take the spots of from silk and
woollen stuffs 363 21. To color velvet in red ib. 22. To revive the color of a
cloth ib. 23. To take the spots off from a white cloth 364 24. To take off the
spots from crimson and other velvets ib. 25. To take off an oil spot from cloth
ib. 26. A composition of soap to take off all sorts of spots 365 27. To take
the spots off from a white silk or crimson velvet. ib.
CHAP. XVII. The Art of Fishing, Angling, Bird-catching, etc. 1. How to entice
a great quantity of fish to resort to a certain place 366 2. Another receipt to
the same purpose ib. 3. Another way ib. 4. Another way 367 5. Another
superstitious method ib. 6. Another on the same subject 368 7. To prevent the
birds from spoiling a field sown with grain ib. 8. How to get a good many birds
369 9. Another way ib. 10. Another way ib. 11. Another way 370 12. To preserve
and multiply pigeons ib. 13. Another for the same purpose ib. 14. How to fatten
pigeons. ib.
CHAP. XVIII. Relative to subjects entertaining, and useful. Art. 1. To whiten
wax 371 2. Another way of whitening wax in large manufactories ib. 3. How to
multiply wax 372 4. To make mutton suet candles, in imitation of wax candles
373 5. To make soap ib. 6. To prevent any thing from burning in the fire 374 7.
To prevent burning one's fingers in melting lead ib. 8. Fire which cannot be
extinguished by water 375 9. To prevent the oil of a lamp from smoking ib. 10.
Another receipt for the same purpose ib. 11. To make an incombustible wick ib.
12. A stone which is inflammable with water ib. 13. A receipt to make the true
phosphorus, extracted from urine, and which is inflammable by the air, so that
two pieces of wood may be lighted by it. 367

SECRETS CONCERNING ARTS and TRADES.
CHAP. I.
SECRETS relative to the Art of ENGRAVING.
I. A wax to lay on iron or steel.
TAKE the bulk of a nut of white wax: melt it, and add to it the size of a
musket ball of cruse of Venice. When both are incorporated together, form this
composition into small sticks. With them rub your piece of steel, or iron,
after having previously warmed it sufficiently to melt the wax, which you will
spread well over it with a feather. When the wax is cold, trace whatever you
will on it, and pass afterward, on the lines you shall have drawn, the
following water.

II. A mordant water to engrave on steel.
1. Take good verjuice in grapes, the strongest you can find; alum in powder,
and a little salt dried and pulverised. Mix all together till perfectly
dissolved: then pass some of that water on the lines of your drawing, repeating
the same, till it is sufficiently deep engraved. That engraving will appear
white, as silver, on a white ground.

2. Or else take verdigrise, strong vinegar, ammoniac and common salts, and
copperas, equal parts. Set all together-aboiling, for a quarter of an hour:
then strain it through a rag, and run some of that water on your plate. In
about half an hour afterward it will be perfectly engraved.

3. Callot's varnish, of which the composition shall be found hereafter, in the
chapter on varnishes, is an admirable composition to lay on the plate you
propose to engrave.

III. To engrave with aquafortis, so that the work may appear like a basso
relievo.
Take equal parts of vermilion and of black lead: two or three grains of
mastick in drops. Grind them all together, on marble, with lintseed oil; then
put this composition into a shell. Next to this operation, cut some soft quils,
and let your steel or iron be well polished. Try first whether your color runs
sufficiently with your pens: and, if it should not, you must add a little more
oil to it; without making it, however, too limpid; but only so as to have your
pen mark freely with it, as if you were writing, with ink, on paper. Then rub
well your plate of steel with wood ashes, to clean and ungrease it; after
which, you wipe it with a clean rag, and draw your design upon it, with your
pen, prepared as before, and dipped into your liquor. If you want to draw
birds, or other animals, you must only draw the outlines of them with your pen,
then fill up the inside of those lines with a hair pencil; that is to say, you
will cover all the space, contained between the first outlines drawn with the
pen, with the same color, which you will lay with a brush, to preserve all
that part against the mordacity of the aquafortis. When that is done, you see
your work dry for a day or two. When driect thus, you take some fire, made with
charcoal, into a chafingdish, and bake over it your color, by degrees, till it
becomes quite brown. Take care, notwithstanding, not to burn it, for fear you
should scale it when you come to scratch, with the point of a needle, those
etchings, or places, which you want to be engraved, with the following
aquafortis.

IV. Aquafortis for engraving.
Take verdigrise, roch alum, Roman vitriol, and common salt, of each three
ounces; which you will pound into a very fine powder. Have a new pipkin, in
which you will put a little more than a quart of water, and your drugs, all
together. Let them thus infuse a couple of hours; then place them over a
charcoal fire: and when the water has a little simmered, take the pot from off
the fire, and let it cool so that you may dip your hand in it without scalding.
Then have an earthen cup, with which you take of that water, and pour it over
the work you mean to engrave; so that it may run well, and freely, over all the
places which are to be marked, and then off into a pan placed under to receive
it. Continue thus to water your work for three quarters of an hour. Then you
will pour upon it clear pump water, to wash off the mud which the aquafortis
shall have occasioned. You are then to try, with a needle, the depth of the
lines of your engraving; and, if not at your liking, you must begin again
watering it, as before. The only care you are to have, is, that your liquor
should not be too warm: for then it would spoil the work. It is better to use
it lukewarm only, and be longer at it.

V. To engrave on brass, or copper, with aquafortis.
You must put in your color more mastick in drops, and bake it also rather
^ore over the fire, after it is laid on your plate, so that it should turn
almost black. And, if it be a flat work, as generally are all those on
copperplates, you must raise around it a border of wax to prevent the
aquafortis, which you are to pour on it, from running off, and which is to be a
separating aquafortis with which you cover the plate to the thickness of a
crown piece. After it has been thus left covered with that aquafortis, for a
little while, this becomes green; then is the time to throw it away, and to
pour, in its place, some pump water, when you will examine whether the lines be
sufficiently deep or not. If not, pour again fresh aquafortis on your plate,
and thus you will obtain works of basso relievo by contrary; that is to say,
raised grounds. You may thus engrave all sorts of works.

VI. To engrave prints by aquafortis.
Take some ceruse, which you will grind well with clear pump water, and size it
with isinglass. Lay this composition with a coarse brush, or pencil, on the
plate which you want to engrave. When it is dry, draw on it whatever design you
please. Or, if you want to counterproof a copperplate print, blacken all the
back of your print; and, placing that blackened part on your plate, prepared as
before, go over all the strokes of your print, with a smooth ivory, or wooden
point, which will stamp the black of the print, in all those places, on the
plate. Then you will go again over all the black strokes, which are laid on
your plate with a pen and ink: and, taking afterward a steel point, very fine
and well tempered, you will etch your plate with it, in following all the
strokes marked (...) it, and pour aquafortis, as before directed.

VII. Another.
Take white lead, and grind it well with mastick in drops. Cover your plate
with it by means first of a brush, and then smooth it with the soft part of a
goose feather. Let this dry for a day or two; then give a second coat of this
composition over the first; and spread it with the palm of your hand. When dry,
bales it over charcoal, till it comes a little yellow; then draw what you will
over it, with a black lead pencil; and proceed afterward, as before directed.

VIII. The method of engraving with aquafortis.
1. You must have a very well polished plate, and perfectly clean. Set it to
warm over a chafingdish, in which there is a charcoal fire. While on it, cover
it with a varnish, either dry or liquid, for there are two sorts. Then you
blacken that varnish with the flame of a candle, over which you pass and repass
the plate on the varnished side.

2. This being done, you have no more to do than to chalk your design on that
plate, which is infinitely more easy than to engrave with a graver. For, if you
rub the back part of your drawing with some sanguine stone (red chalk) or any
thing else, and lay it afterward on your plate, to trace it with a point, the
sanguine, which is on the back of the draught, will easily set off on the
varnish. So that you may follow afterward all the lines of the design, and be
infinitely more correct in all the turns, and the expression of the figures.
This is the reason why all the painters, who have their own works engraved,
take the trouble of drawing also the outlines of their figures, that the spirit
and beauty of their design may be preserved. Indeed it must be confessed, that
we always discover a great deal more art in those pieces which are engraved
with aquafortis, than there is found in them that are done by the graver. And,
even in many of these, the aquafortis is often employed to sketch lightly the
contours, or outlines, of the figures, and to have them more correct.

3. True it is, that it is sometimes found necessary to t^^ch a ^ittle over,
with the g^^ver, certain parts which are not strong enough, or that the
aquafortis has not eaten in sufficiently. For it is not easy, in a great plate,
to get all the several parts so proportionably, and a-propos, eaten in, as
there should be nothing to find fault with.

4. It is not enough for an engraver to work with the point of his needle, or
scooper, in all the different places of his work, with the strength and
delicacy necessary to make appear, as he wants them to be, the most remote and
the nearest parts. It is again requisite that he should take care, when he
comes to put the aquafortis on his plate, it should not bite equally every
where. This is prevented as follows, by a mixture of oil and fallow, which you
will drop in it, from a lighted candle.

5. To this effect he must have a framed wooden board, overlaid with wax, on
which he fixes his plate a little slant way: then pours aquafortis on it, so
that it may only pass over it, and run into an earthen pan, placed under to
receive it. Therefore, he takes care to examine when those parts, which are not
to be so deeply eaten in, have received a sufficient quantity of aquafortis: in
which case, taking off his plate, he washes it with pump water, by pouring it
only over; dries it gently before the fire, then covers the most remote parts,
and them which he wants to preserve weakest, with the above mentioned mixture
of oil and tallow, that the aquafortis should not act, any more on those
places. Thus covering at several times, and as much as he pleases, such places
of his plate as he wants to keep not so strong as others, it results that the
figures, which are forwards in the picture, are constantly every time washed
with the aquafortis which eats in them, till he sees they are sufficiently
engraved, and according to the degree of the strength, which he is desirous of
giving them.

6. That sort of aquafortis we have mentioned and described in this chapter, at
the article of the water for engraving on iron, and which is composed with
verdigrise, vinegar, common and ammoniac salts, and copperas, is also made use
of to engrave on copper, in pouring it on the plates, covered either with hard
or soft varnish, and scratched, or etched, agreeably to the design you intend
to engrave on them.

7. As for what concerns the refiner's aquafortis, commonly called white water,
it is never used but upon the soft varnish; and never as the former, which is
called green water, by pouring it only over the plate, and letting it run off
into a pan under it. A border of wax must be made round the plate, on which,
this being laid flat upon a table, some of that white water is poured, after
having previously tempered it more or less with a proportionable quantity of
common water, which is called pickling.

IX. To engrave on wood.
You begin by preparing a board, according to the size and thickness you want
it, and finely polished on the side it is to be engraved. The sort of wood,
which is generally chosen for such a purpose, is either pear tree or box. And,
of the two, this last is even still preferable, both on account of its being of
a superior hardness, and also less liable to be worm-eaten. On that board you
draw first your design, such as you want it to appear in printing. They, who
have not the talent of drawing as there are a great number, make use of the
very drawing you give them, which they paste on their board, by the right side,
with a paste made of good flour, water, and a little vinegar. You must take
care that all the strokes of the drawing should touch well, and stick on the
wood: and, when the paper is very dry, wet it gently and with the tip of your
finger rub it off by degrees, so that the strokes only of the drawing should
remain on your board, as if you had drawn it with ink and a pen. These strokes,
or lines, show you all that you are to spare, or preserve; all the rest you are
to cut off and sink down with delicacy by means of a sharp and well-tempered
penknife, small chisel or gouet, according to the size and delicacy of the
work, for you have no need of any other tool.

X. To engrave on copper with the graver.
1. When the plate, which is to be of red copper, is well polished, you draw
your design on it with either the black lead-stone, or a steel point. When that
is done, you have no further need of any thing but very sharp and well-tempered
gravers to cut in, and give more or less strength to certain parts, according
to the subject, and the figures, you execute.

2. You must also have a certain tool of six inches long, or thereabouts, one
of the ends of which, called a scraper, is made in the form of a triangle,
sharp on each edge, with which you scrape on the copper when you want it. The
other end, called a burnisher, has very much the shape of a fowl's heart, a
little prolonged by the point, round and slender. This serves to polish the
copper, to mend the faults, and soften the strokes.

3. In order to form a better judgment of your work, you must now and then, as
you proceed on, make use of a stump, made with a piece of an old hat rolled up
and blackened, with which you rub your plate, on the place you are working,
which fills the strokes with black, and makes you see better the effect of your
work as you go. You must be provided likewise with a leather cushion, on which
you lay your plate while you engrave it.

4. We shall not give any further account of the art of engraving than this
short epitome, and we shall not attempt to enter into a more particular detail
of the various and curious circumstances attending this noble art. They, whose
curiosity on that subject will prompt them to be more particularly acquainted
with it, may amply satisfy themselves, by taking the trouble to read the
treatise which Abraham Bosse has purposely composed on the art of engraving.

XI. To engrave on steel or iron; such as blades of swords, knives, etc.
1. Take one part of linden-tree coals; two of vitriol, and as much of ammoniac
salt. Grind all together with vinegar, so as to obtain a soft paste of it.
Then, whatever you want to engrave on steel or iron, being first by sketching
it with vermilion diluted with lintseed oil, which you shall have put a-drying
to use it afterward like a pencil. When your drawing is done, cover it with
the abovementioned paste to the thickness of a finger. This composition must
be applied warm; and the more warm it is, the sooner the work will be engraved;
though you must have care not to burn it. When this composition is well dry,
take that powder off, and wash well the engraved place.

2. You may to the same effect take Spanish verdigrise or common salt, one
part; and while you pound it in a mortar, add some very strong vinegar, and
proceed as above.

Some make use of vitriol, alum, common salt, and linden-tree coals, which they
prepare and use as above directed.

XII. A water to engrave on iron or copper.
1. Take Spanish verdigrise, sublimate mercury, vitriol, and alum, equal parts.
Pound it all well in a mortar, and put it in a glass vessel sufficiently large,
with a proportionable quantity of the strongest distilled vinegar. Let the
whole thus infuse for twelve hours, stirring it often. Draw next what design
you like on a coat of wax laid on your iron, or copper, either with a steel
point, or fictitious ochre, mixed with lintseed oil. Then pass some of your
liquor on the places you shall have etched with a needle, or steel point, in
following carefully the strokes of your design, if it be first drawn on wax.
For, in the use of this method, you must not fail to begin by covering first
your plate with it, as we said elsewhere. You may again lay on your design,
prepared as we said, some sublimate alone, finely pulverised; then pour over it
good strong vinegar, which you will let lay for the space of half an hour,
after which wash it with cold water, and clean off your plate.

XIII. Another more mordant water.
1. Take Spanish verdigrise, alumen plumeum, ammoniac salt, tartar, vitriol,
and common salt, of each a quarter of an ounce. When the whole is well pounded,
and mixed with the strongest vinegar, let it thus remain for the space of half
an hour. If you want to have your design raised, make it with fictitious ochre
and lintseed oil, well ground and mixed together, and let it dry perfectly.
Then set the aforesaid water awarming over the fire, in an iron pan well tinned
with lead, and, leaving it on the fire, take your steel plate, and, holding it
in one hand over the pan, take with the other of the warm liquor, with a spoon,
and pour it on your plate; so that, by falling again into the pan, you lose
none of your water. Continue so doing for a quarter of an hour: taking care,
however, your water should not be too warm, lest it should set a-running the
oil which is mixed with the varnish. When this is done, rub the aforesaid
composition with potashes mixed with an equal quantity of quick lime in
powder, and you will find that what was covered with the composition will be
preserved, and raised from the other parts of the plate which are eaten down.

XIV. An ardent water to engrave steel deeply, or even eat it off entirely.
Take two quarts, or thereabout, of thick black wine, the oldest and best you
can find. Dissolve into it quick lime, and brimstone in powder, wine tartar and
white salt, of each equal parts, and as much of the whole as there can possibly
be dissolved in that quantity of wine. You shall next put all that mixture into
a cucurbit, or rather into a retort well luted. Adapt to it a bolt-head to
serve as a receiver. Lute well the joints, then give it the heat gradually.
There will distill a very mordant water, which you may keep in a phial,
carefully stopped for use.

CHAP. II.
SECRETS relative to METALS.
I. A secret to cause the transmutation of iron into the finest German steel.
1. TAKE of clean soot one pound; oak wood ashes twelve ounces, and four of
pounded garlicks. Boil all together in twelve pounds of common water, reduced
to a third, or four pounds. Strain this, and dip in it the iron pigs, which you
will afterward stratify with the following cement.

2. Take burnt wood's coals, otherwise called cokes, and quick lime, of each
three pounds: soot dried, and calcinated in an iron pan, one pound: decrepitate
salt, four ounces. Make of this and your iron several beds alternately one over
another; and, having well luted the vessels in which you shall have made those
beds of iron and cement, give them a reverberating fire, for three times
twenty-four hours, and the operation is done.

II. To make tin.
Take a discretionable quantity of rye-bran quite pure, boil it a minute or two
in vinegar, then add to it a little water, and in that same instant plunge your
sheets of black iron: then take out of the fire, and stop well the vessel. Let
your iron rest there and soak for twenty-four hours, after which time take off
your iron sheet; score them well with the very bran with which they have been
a-soaking, then rub them over a little with grindstones. This being done, make
them soak again in a water wherein you shall have dissolved some ammoniac salt,
whence having taken them off, set them a-draining, and rub them afterward with
rye-bran, and your tin will be done.

Observe that the vessel in which you lay your sheets soaking, must be large
enough to receive them in their full intended size.

III. To break an iron bar as big as the arm.
Take melted soap, with which you will rub your iron bar at the place where you
would have it break. Then with any thing take off and clean away part of that
unction, in the middle of it, about the width of half-a-crown. Then take a
sponge, dipped into ardent water of three distillations; bring it round the bar,
and in six hours it will break.

IV. Another for the same purpose.
In two pounds of aquafortis, dissolve orpine, sulphur, regal, and verdigrise,
one ounce of each; of quick lime, killed in two ounces of triple distilled
vinegar, one ounce. Place the whole in an alembic, with one ounce of saltpetre,
and two of ammoniac salt: and, having given a gradual fire to it, you will take
the spirits which shall have distilled, and put them again over the faeces or
residue, with an addition of two ounces pulverized arsenic. Distill this anew,
and keep what arises from it. In this, if you dip an handkerchief, and turn it
round on an iron bar, in three hours time it will break with the greatest ease.
You must only take a great care to guard yourself against the fumes, in
distilling this composition.

V. To compose a metal of a gold color.
Take refiner's copper six ounces: melt them into a crucible; add one ounce of
a calaminary stone; half an ounce of t^ty, and one of terra n rita, in powder.
Give to this a melting fire for five or six hours running, and no more: then
take off the crucible from the fire. Put this composition in powder, and add to
it two ounces of common mercury, six of sea salt exsiccated, and a sufficient
quantity of water. Set the whole a-boiling, until there appear no more mercury.
Then put the matter into a crucible, and place it between two fires of kindled
coals, avoiding carefully the breathing of the fumes. Give this a melting fire,
for two hours, then wash the composition in water, till this runs off quite
clear. Set this again in a crucible: and, when melted, pour it into an ingot.
This will give you a metal of the most beautiful gold color which can be
desired, and which you may make use of for plates, buckles, snuff-bo^es,
cane-heads, etc. But one cannot recommend too much the avoiding of breathing
the fumes of this composition, while it is making.

VI. Another composition of metal.
Take a certain reasonable quantity of the leaves of Persicaria urens, called
Arsmart, or, vulgarly, Waterpepper, which you will dry in the shade. Melt in a
crucible six ounces of refiner's copper, and, when melted, throw in one ounce
of powder of the arsmart leaves, or even half an ounce; then cover the crucible
with an iron lid, and keep this matter in fusion for the space of one hour,
after which you cast it in an ingot. This process will give you a metal which
(except the color that artists can at any time give it by an industry well
known to them) has otherwise all the qualities of gold. The only defect is,
that it cannot bear testing, and that it must therefore serve only to supply
common copper which rusts easily, and has not so much brightness. It may be
used for candlesticks, and other similar works.

We thought it was proper here to give this receipt, ^s it is to be wished we
could make ourselves those metallic compositions, which we impo^^ from Holland,
and other countries.

VII. To dissolve gold in your naked hand.
Distill hart's blood just killed; and, after having drawn the spirits per
ascensum in balneo-mariae, cohobate again three different times. At the third
distillation you sublime all the fixed: and, when done, lute wel^ the vessel,
and keep the liquor for use. This liquor, carefully preserved, will dissolve
gold in the naked palm of your hand.

VIII. How to give some perfection to imperfect metals.
It is well known that gold is the most perfect of metals. After this comes
silver, the principles of which are very near pure, and equally proportioned
between them as those of gold. All other metals are reckoned imperfect and
crude. Among them however that which approaches nearest to perfection, is
copper. This therefore may easily be purified, by being delivered of all the
superficial and combustible sulphurs with which it is loaded. And who ever will
proceed, according to the following direction, will not fail to obtain it.

1. Take what quantity you please of copper. Set it in a crucible over a
melting fire. While melting in that crucible, throw in at different times some
tuttypowder mixed with equal parts of refined saltpetre. Then, the detonations
being made, take the crucible out of the fire and let it cool. Break the
crucible and separate the scories from the regulus. Put the copper regulus into
an other crucible, and reiterate the same operation three times, till the
copper is extremely fine a^^ true gold color.

2. Now, if you set it a melting for the fourth time, and project on it
persicaria's or hydro-pepper's leaves powder, you will render it still more
perfect: and you might thus purify it so far, as to give it, at last, all the
qualities of gold.

3. Whoever will know how to purify brass from its foreign sulphur, will turn
it likewise into a very (...) silver.

4. You may also whiten lead; and, giving it the hardness of silver, render it
similar to it.

5. Pewter and quick (...) likewise be puri^^^ in separating from this last its
arsenical sulphurs, and fixing it by the supplement of a fixed, metallic,
incombustible and solary sulphur. The other may, by taking off from it its
superfluous saline part, and uniting its mercurial one to the true metallic
sulphur. But this we cannot expect to attain, if not previously versed in the
method of dissolving, analyzing, and dividing or separating, and then
re-embodying again metallic substances: and this is known by none but the sons
of the art, the adepts alone.

IX. To melt all sorts of metals in the shell of a nut, without burning it.
Take saltpetre two ounces; sulphur half an ounce; oak's, walnut trees, or any
other very dry wood's sawdust half an ounce. Let the saw dust be sifted very
fine, and the saltpetre and sulphur reduced to an impalpable powder. All this
being well mixed together, fill the shell of a nut with it to the brim; then
lay over it a piece of gold, silver, or any other metal you please; and, having
covered it again with the same powder, set the fire to it, and you will see
that the metal will melt and remain at the bottom of the shell.

X. To increase the virtue of a loadstone.
You must let it soak, for forty days, in iron-oil.

XI. To restore gold to its weight, after it has lost it in regal water.
Put a bit of tortoise shell to soak, for some time, in regal water. Then put
your gold in it, and, by that means, it will recover its lost weight.

XII. To operate the transmutation of silver into gold.
1. Get a new iron-pan to grow red hot upon a trivet, and then put two pounds
of lead in it. As soon as this is melted, throw over it, by degrees, some good
saltpetre pulverised. This will melt likewise. Keep i^ thus in fusion till it
is at least half dissipated. Should it take fire during that time, it does not
signify; for, it hurts nothing, and the more concocted over again the saltpetre
is, the stronger is the oil.

2. Let this cool, divide the saltpetre from the lead. After having well
pounded it on a marble stone, (...) it into the cellar. There, it will fall
into (...) which you will pour into a cucurbit, with (...) weight of true
French spirit of wine, added by little and lit le at a time; then distill by a
slow fire. Grind (...) marble, as before, what remains in the cucurbit: and,
being turned into deliquium, put it again into the cucurbit with some more
spirit of wine. Take off these dissolutions and cohobations, repeating the same
proc^^ over again as before, till the saltpetre remains at the bottom of the
cucurbit resolved into a true oil which congeals itself no longer, and this
will procure you what is called the Fix-balm.

3. Next to that operation, you will make an aq^fortis with equal parts of
saltpeter, dried vitriol, (...) roch-alum: and, before you put the receiver to
the cucurbit, add steel filings, antimony, verdigrise, in subt^^ powder, tutty
and cinnabar, of each half an ounce, (...) one ounce, according to the quantity
of aquafortis you want to draw. Cohobate the spirits seven times own upon the
faces, which you will grind each time on marble table.

4. Dissolve one ounce of silver in three of this liquor and, on that solution,
still, drop by drop, one ounce your nitre-oil in a bottle made like the
hour-glas^ which after the operation must be at most only half (...) and which
you will cover with another inverted, that the neck of the under one should get
into that the upper one. Or else put it in a mattress with a l^^ neck, which you
will seal hermetically; but, if (...) make use of bottles, take care to lute
well the jo^. Place this over hot ashes, and plunge it in them to (...) height
of six inches. Give under this lamp a fire, (...) should not reach the matter
by three finger's distance. You will get every day to the amount of a silver
pennyweight of silver fixed into gold. And, when the whole shall have been
fixed thus, day after day, the aquafortis which before was green as an emerald,
will become as clear as pump water. Let the composition cool, and divide the
water from the oil, which will never be the worse for use, and must therefore
be preserved. At the bottom of the vessel, you will find the silver fixed into
gold.

XIII. Fixation of gold into silver.
1. Sublime, on a sand fire, some arsenic, with an equal weight of decrepitate
salt. Take the middle and crystaline matter which sublimates, rejecting the
subtle flour which rises on the head, and the dregs which remain in the
bottom. Sublime over again this crystal, and reiterate so many times as
necessary that no flour should longer sublimate.

2. Calcimate some silver with mercury, with which amalgamate it, and this as
many times as you may find necessary, that the water in which you wash your
silver, after the dissipation of the mercury by means of fire, should run as
fair and clean as when you poured it over it.

3. Take one ounce of this calcinated silver, and four of the aforesaid
arsen^^^ sublime the whole so many times as necessary, (...) nothing should
ascend any more. This sublimation may easily be performed in a mattress laid on
its side, which you must turn so as to put always underneath what is sublimed
above. By means of such an industrious practice you avoid the necessity of
breaking your matrasses every time you want to re-sublime what was already
sublimed. At last the matter turns into a stone, which, having pounded, you put
on a digesting bath, 'till it is all reduced into a fixed oil, which you know to
be done by the transparency of the vessel.

4. Take four parts of mercury, and one of that oil, put first the mercury into
the crucible, and, afterward, this fixed oil. Give a gradual fire, till all the
composition be reduced into a lump, which adheres to the crucible. Take it out
and test it; you will find it to be the finest silver in the world.

XIV. To extract mercury from lead.
Take pearl ashes one pound; vine ashes four; quick lime one; and pebbles
calcimated two. Make a strong lie of the whole with distilled vinegar. Dissolve
in this two pounds of lead: and, when the lie is become white, throw in ten
ounces of borax. When this is dissolved, throw the whole into a retort, and
distill it with a gradual fire. You will get, into the receiver, ten ounces at
least, of quicksilver.

XV. Another mercury from lead.
Take lead filings one pound; ammoniac salt four ounces; bricks pounded into a
powder, three pounds. Distill this composition in a retort, on a gradual fire.
The receiver must be very large, half full of water, and the fire must be
continued for twelve hours, pushing it, by degrees, to the very last.

XVI. Permutation of lead into silver.
Take fine lead; calcine it with common salt, or else with that sort of salt
which is extracted from the dregs, faeces, or caput mortuum of saltpetre and
vitriol calcinated both together. Soak the whole warmly with oil of vitriol
till you make it come into an unctou^ paste. This you will put into a pot, or
crucible, well luted, and placed in a pan full of sand, with which you will
cover it over entirely. Make under this a digesting fire; that is to say, such
a fire as is necessary to warm the sand: keep it so for ten days, then take off
your matter and test it. Out of one hundred and five pounds weight of lead, you
will draw five mar^^ or two pounds and a half weight, of silver capable to
stand the test.

XVII. Fixation of salt petre.
Melt some lead in a crucible, and project on it pulverised nitre, reiterating
the projections ^^proportion as the matter fuses, till it is entirely melted.

XVIII. Transmutation of iron into copper.
Iron is easily changed into copper by means of the vitriol. To do this you put
your iron stratum super stratum in a descensorium, and set it over a strong
blast fire, pushed by bellows, till the iron melts and flows into copper. You
must not forget when you have made your beds of vitriol, to water them a little
over with vinegar saturated of salt petre, alkaline, and tartar salts and
verdigrise.

XIX. Another to the same purpose.
Pound some vitriol in powder, and distill the spirits from it by means of the
retort. Replace the spirits on the caput mortuum, then plunge and extinguish in
them some red hot iron laminas, or filings: and, by little and little, the iron
will turn into copper.

XX. Another.
Dissolve vitriol in common water; pass it through filtering paper, then
evaporate the water into a pellicula, and put it in the cellar, for one night,
and you will obtain some green crystals. Redden them in the fire, then dissolve
them three or four times in distilled vinegar, drying them every time, till
these crystals become red. Dissolve them again in the same vinegar and
extinguish in it some red hot iron laminas, filings, or any other iron rubbish;
they, and every one, will by these means, turn into a very fine copper.

XXI. To preserve the brightness of arms.
Rub them with hart's marrow. Or else dissolve some alum powder with the
strongest vinegar you can find, (that of Montpellier (...) serves to make their
famous verdigrise is the (...)) and rub your arms with it. By these means they
keep for ever bright and shining.

XXII. To manage steel so, that it may cut iron as it were lead.
Draw, by an alembic, the water which will come from a certain quantity of
earthworms; join with this water an equal quantity of horse radish's juice.
Then temper, four or five times, in this liquor your iron kindled red hot. That
sort of steel is made use of for knives, swords, and other instruments, with
which you may cut iron with as much ease as if it wen^ lead.

XXIII. To soften steel.
Take a discretionable quantity of garlic, rob then of their coarsest peel,
then boil them in oil of nuts (...) reduced into an unguentum. Cover well your
steel (...) over with that composition to the thickness of half crown. When
this is done, put your steel, thus covered, in the forge, in the live coals,
and it will become soft. To restore it afterward to the temper, called by
artists, red cherry color, you must, after ^^^ing made it red hot, plunge it in
the coldest water.

XXIV. To extract mercury from antimony.
Take antimony and decrepitate salt, of each (...) pound. Mix them together and
put in a retort of (...) quarts. Set the retort on the bare fire, or on the
gradual sand fire. Let the beak of the retort be in water, and at the bottom of
that vessel, wherein the water is, you will find the running mercury of
antimony.

XXV. A magical mercurial ring.
Take verdigrise half a pound, and an equal quantity of copperas. Pulverise
each of them separately, and put these powders into an iron pan which has
never been used before for any thing else. Boil the whole for about two
minutes, in very strong vinegar. then throw into the pan half a pound of crude
mercury, which you will incessantly stir with a wooden spatula. Begin to boil
first by a slow fire, and never cease to stir the whole well for fear of the
adhesion of mercury. In proportion as the vinegar sinks you may add more, not
exceeding, however, the quantity of half a pint, or thereabouts. When this has
boiled about a couple of hours, the matter will remain in a lump at the bottom
of the pan. Let it cool with the small quantity of vinegar which shall remain
after the ebullition, then throw it into a large pan of cold water. Handle this
lump well in that water, in order to purge it from all the munditiae. Throw
that first water away, and put clean water in, and do the same again and again,
keeping handling the matter well in your waters, till the last remains clear as
rock water. When your mercury is thus well fixed, put in a clean piece of linen
to take off the superfluous parts; and what remains well fixed after this
second trial, you must extend on a sheet of white paper, on which, having
flattened it quickly, and cut as hastily, for fear it should grow too hard,
into small bits of the form and size you like, you expose it to the dew of one
night, from the evening to the morning, and then you will find it as hard as
iron.

XXVI. To melt the aforesaid mercury.
Take Alexandrian tuty, and terra merita of each half a pound, separately
pulverised and mixed afterward together. Stratify your bits of the above
mercury, making the first and last strata, or beds, with the powders and a
little thicker than the others. Cover your crucible with another, and lute them
so well that there should no chink remain, which you will examine well after
having dried them in an oven. When perfectly dry, place your crucibles in a
gold or blacksmith's furnace, and surround them well with live coals every way,
by the sides, top and bottom, which you (...) blasting for a quarter of an
hour; and push by strength of bellows during half an hour, then let them cool
gradually in the fire till the next day: when, taking of your crucible, you
will find your matter turned into a gold color. Throw it into a pan of water,
and wa^^ it well till the water remains clear. The whole being granulated, put
it in a small crucible with half an ounce of borrax, and melt it as you would
gold or silver, th^^ throw in it an ingot. With this matter you will make your
rings in drawing this metal through the wiring bench, or otherwise.

XXVII. The virtue of those rings.
They stop the cold in the head, show the disorders (...) may be affected with,
particularly in those well-known monthly diseases of women. At such times the
ri^^ turns of a dull red color. They are also very useful in killing the worms
in small children, if you m^^^ them boil in a varnished new pipkin, with a
glass ((...) four ounces) of water, reduced to a third, and drank fasting.

XXVIII. A fixation of copper which will be found (...) yield six ounces out of
eight, on the test.
Take two ounces of fine pewter, which melt in a crucible, adding gradually to
it, after it is melted, as equal quantity in weight of flour of sulphur. When
(...) is calcinated, and while still a little warm, add again (...) it half an
ounce of common purified mercury, stir^^^ continually with a spatula till the
mercury disappears entirely. There will come a powder, of which if you project
one, on four ounces of red copper, in fusion then stir and cast in ingots, you
may obtain the promised advantage.

XXIX. To whiten copper so as to make very fine figures with it.
Take five parts of copper, which you will melt in a crucible, then throw in
one part of zinc. As soon as the zinc is in it, take it off from the fire, and
stir the matter a little with an iron rod, then cast it in the molds of your
figures. They will look like silver casted ones.

XXX. To give the finest color of gold to copper, in order to make statues, or
other works with it.
Take one pound of copper, melt it in a crucible, then throw in it one ounce of
Alexandrian tuty reduced into a subtle powder, and mixed with two ounces of
beanflour. Take care to keep stirring this matter, and to guard yourself
against the fumes. After two hours of fusion, you will take this composition
off, and wash it well, and put it again in the crucible with the same quantity
as before of the same powders. When melted, for this second time, you may take
it off, and cast it in the moulds you propose, and had prepared for it.

XXXI. To imitate tortoise shell on copper.
Rub copper laminas over with oil of nuts, then dry them over a slow fire
supported, by their extremities, upon small iron bars.

XXXII. To perform the same on horn.
Make a cold dissolution of auripigment in filtered lime water: then, lay some
of this liquor with a brush on your comb or other horn work. Reiterate this, if
you find it has not penetrated enough the first time, and turn it to do the
same the other side.

XXXIII. To soften metals.
Take saltpeter and camphire equal parts. Dissolve them in a lie made with two
parts of oakwood ashes and one of quick lime. Pass this solution through a
filtering paper, and vaporise it over a slow fire in a glass vessel. There
results a borax which, thrown in metals while in fusion, softens them perfectly.

XXXIV. To wash brass figures over with silver.
Take one ounce of aquafortis. Dissolve in it over a moderate fire one dram
of good silver cut small, (...) granulated. This silver being wholly dissolved,
take the vessel off from the fire, and throw in it as much white tartar as is
required to absolve all the liqu^^. The rest is a paste with which you may rub
over any work made of copper, and which will give it the white color of silver.

XXXV. To operate the transmuttaion of iron into steel.
Take beech and willow, burn them together. (...) in coals, extinguish them,
before they are consu^^^^ with water, or rather, with chamber lie. (...) them
well, and sift them through a very fine (...). Then burn likewise ox horns, and
prepare them the same way. Sift well also soot, vine ashes, burnt (...) ashes,
and pomegranates' shells' powder, putting (...) and separately each drug by
itself, and mix them afterward when used, in the following proportion -- (...)
twelve pounds; horns ten: shoes, vine, soot, (...) pomegranate, of each equal
quantity, three pounds, (...) well mixed together. To make one hundred pounds
weight of steel, there is required one hundred and twenty pounds weight of
good, soft Spanish iron, not ^^^^ky; to which, if you give the aforementioned
dose (...) the said powders, prepared as directed, and put to the fire, for the
space of forty-eight hours, you will get the best steel which can be had.

XXXV. Another receipt for the same.
1. Take one bushel of beech coals pulverised and sifted; alder's coals, thus
prepared, one peck; vine ashes and soot, both well pulverised and sifted, equal
parts, half a peck. Mix well these powders, and stratify your iron bars with
them in a crucible well luted; then give a good fire for twenty-four hours.

N. B. Observe that you must take care to use new, and not floted wood, to make
the said ashes.

2. If you want to have your steel white, you must add to all the above powders
one peck of juniper-wood ashes.

3. If you want it purple, you must make a lexiviation of vine and shoes ashes,
soot and garlic, well pounded equal parts, and a sufficient quantity of water
to make the said bullitorium, in which you will steep, cold, your iron bars
before you cement them.

4. You must proportionate the quantity of windholes in each kiln to the
quantity of bars, and of crucibles, for which you intend to fit it.

5. The stratum super stratum ought to be made one, or, one and a half, inch
thick of powder to each bed. -- The bars ought to be ranged cross-way one over
another; and large crucibles are to be preferred to small ones. -- You must
take care to have them so well luted, as not to allow the least air to find its
way in: for there would result an entire miscarriage of the whole operation:
and, besides, your powder would hence lose all its virtue. -- Should you
likewise let it get air before you make use of it, it would become quite dead
and flat. Therefore you are cautioned to keep it always very closely confined,
in well-stopped vessels, of whatever kind they may be. -- That which comes off
from the crucible, after the operation, is not worse for having been thus in
use. It wants, therefore, nothing but an additional supply of fresh powder,
joined to it, to make up what is lost, or diminished, by the frequent handlings
of it, in taking it out, and putting it in, the crucibles again.

6. The kiln ought to be wide by the inferior part, and go narrowly toward the
top, which must end in a conical form. By such means, the heat contracted
becomes strong, and acts with infinitely more power. -- Neither must you
neglect to have it so constructed as to be provided with an ash-hole, or a
place underneath wherein the ashes may fall; and several openings to let the
wind escape.

** An estimate of the costs and profits, of such as operation in France.
The thousand weight of iron, in bars flat on one side, costs about sixty
livres. Two thousands being requisite, at a time, for one single operation,
make one hundred and twenty livres, or, five pounds sterling.

Ten crucibles this will employ; ten livres.

Powders for the two thousands; forty livres.

For two men to sit up, and watch, in order to keep up the fire; four livres.

To prepare the steel, after it is out of the crucibles, and render it
marketable; twenty livres.

All the expense amounts to two hundred livres, or eight pounds eight, or ten
shillings sterling, or thereabout. Iron, thus turned into steel, whether white
or purple, comes, on computation, to two sols, or o^^ penny, a pound; which
makes one hundred livres per thousand weight. -- Thus, the two thousands
weight, which may be made in the same kiln, every week, (...) to two hundred
livres.

If you sell your steel, on the footing of six sols per pound, there is, clear
profit, four hundred livres (...) week; which, in a year, would make 20, 800
livres. -- Now, you may, on this calculation, have as many kil^ as you please;
and each kiln may make a kilnful every week.

XXVII. To take immediately rust from iron.
You must rub your iron with a piece of rag steeped into oil of tartar per
deliquium.

XXXVIII. To obtain good silver from pewter.
1. Take quick lime made from rock or transparent pebbles, and one pound of
common salt. With those two ingredients make a strong lie which you will
evaporate on the fire to the reduction of one third part of what it made
before. Next, melt in a crucible two pounds of pewter, to which, after fusion,
you will add one pounds of haematites. The whole being well incorporated and
melted, throw in it part of your aforesaid lie: and, when quite cold, melt it
again, and throw it again into new lie, repeating the same process for seven
different times, and using fresh lie, prepared as above, every time.

2. The next operation is to take one ounce of amoniac sa^t, an equal quantity
of borax, eight scruples of auripigment, reduce them into a very fine and
subtle powder, and being mixed together, incorporate them into a paste with
the whites of two new-laid eggs, and put all together with the pewter, ready
prepared as before mentioned, in a crucible. When all is in fusion, continue
the fire for one hour; then, take off the crucible. There you will find your
silver, fit to stand the test of all the assayers.

XXXIX. To soften iron.
Take half an ounce of tartar; two of common salt; and two and a half of
verdigrise. Mix all together, and expose it in a porringer to the dew of nine
nights running. This will turn into water, in which, when red-hot, you may kill
your iron.

XL. To melt iron so that it will spread under the hammer.
Take equal quantities of lime, tartar, and alkali salt. Pour over it a
sufficient quantity of cow-piss, to make a thick pap with it, which you will
set a-drying in the sun, or before the fire. Make an iron red-hot in the fire;
then plunge it in that matter. You may afterward melt it as you would silver;
and, ^work^ work it the same way, when cold.

XLI. To give iron a temper to cut porphyry.
Make your iron red-hot, and plunge it in distilled water from nettles,
acanthus, and pilosella, (or mouseears); or in the very juice pounded out from
(...) plants.

XLII. To soften all sorts of metals.
Take sublimated mercury, euphorbium, borax, and ammoniac salt, of each equal
parts pulverised. Project some of that powder over any metal when in a state of
fusion, and you will obtain the desired effect of making it soft.

XLIII. To soften a sophistic metal.
Take black soap and common salt, of each two ounces; human excrements dried
and pulverised, fo^^ ounces; roch alum an equal quantity, and nitre salt half
an ounce. Incorporate all together in a pan, over the fire, with bullock's
gall, keeping stirring with a spatula, till you feel no longer with it any
saline particle. Then take off the pan from the fire, and let the composition
cool. Of this you may throw some (...) the crucible in which your metal is in
fusion.

XLIV. A good temper for arms.
Take tythimalus, or spurge; roots of wild horse radish, bryonia, and purslain,
of each equal quantities. Pound all together, so that you may get at least one
pound of juice. Add to this one pound of red-haired child's water; saltpetre,
alkaline, gem and ammoniac salts, of each one dram. When you have mixed all
well together in a glass vessel perfectly closed and stoped, bury it in the
cellar, and let it there lie for twenty days. Then bring it up again, and put
it in a retort, to which you will adapt and lute well its receiver, and begin
to distill by a gradualfire. Now, when you want to get arms of a good temper,
you have only to plunge them in this distilled liquor, after having previously
made them red hot in the fire.

XLV. Another very hard temper.
Take nettle's juice, bullock's gall, child's water, or strong vinegar, and a
little salt. Incorporate well all this together, and plunge any red-hot iron in
it.

XLVI. To melt iron and make it soft.
Take two pounds of auripigment, and four of oil of tartar. Make the
auripigment soak up all the oil of tartar, and dry it up afterward over a soft
fire. Then put small bits of iron in a crucible; and, when very red, throw by
little at a time about half a pound of that auripigment prepared as before; and
you will find your iron soft and white.

XLVII. To whiten iron like silver.
Melt iron filings in a crucible, along with realgar, or red arsenic. Then take
one ounce of that matter and one of copper; melt all together, and put it in a
coppel. It will give you one ounce of good silver.

XLVIII. To render iron brittle so as to pound like glass.
Take the distilled water from roch alum, plunge in it seven different times
your pieces of iron, or steel, beaten very thin, and made red hot every time.
This operation will render them so brittle, that you may pound them in a
mortar, afterward as you could glass.

XLIX. Ingredients which serve to the melting of iron.
Iron is to be melted with any of the following ingredients; viz. pewter, lead,
marcasite, magnesia, auripigment, antimony, crown-glass, sulpher, ammoniac
salt, citrine-mirobolans, green, or fresh, pomegranate rinds, etc. etc.

L. To melt or calcinate the blade of a sword without hurting the scabbard.
You must drop into the scabbard of the sword some arsenic in powder, and
squeeze over it some part of the juice of a lemon. Then replace the sword into
its scabbard. In a quarter of an hour afterward, or little more you will see
what a surprising effect this will have.

LI. A spirit which will dissolve all forts of stones, without excepting the
most hard.
Take rye-flour and make small balls with it, which you will dry; then put them
into a retort well luted, and place it over a gradual fire to draw the spirits
by distillation. If in the spiritous liquor, which will come from this
operation, you put any stone whatever, it will dissolve.

LII. To refine pewter.
Take fine pewter, and put it into a crucible. When melted, project over it, at
different times some nitre, till it comes to a perfect calcination. Repeat this
three different times, pounding the matter into powder, which you will mix with
charcoal dust. Then, being that melted for the third time, it will resume its
former substance of pewter, with this difference, that it will be refined to an
infinitely superior degree.

LIII. To fix mercury.
Take verdigrise in powder, which you will put in a crucible. Make a hole in
that powder, and place in it a knot of mercury previously impregnated with
white of eggs' water. Cover this knot over with borax, and add again over this
some more verdigrise and pounded glass, one or two fingers deep. Lute well the
lid of the crucible, and give a pretty smart fire, though gradually, and not at
once, for the space of two hours.

LIVE. To extract mercury from lead.
Take lead and beat it into sheets, or laminas, very fine. Put these in a glass
vessel with common salts, a double quantity of the lead. Cover this well, and
bury it under ground for nine days at least. After that time, if you open the
vessel again, you will find your lead turned all into running mercury, or
quicksilver, at the bottom of it.

LV. The composition of cast mirrors and cylinders.
Take one pound and a half of red copper; eight ounces of refined pewter; one
and a half of stellated mars-regulus, otherwise regulus of antimony; half an
ounce of bismuth, one and a half of nitre, and a discretionable quantity (that
is to say as much as you please) of silver.

LVI. The true composition of metallic mirrors, or looking-glasses, used among
the ancients.
1. Take one pound of decapitated, or well purified, copper, which you will
melt; then throw over it three pounds of refined pewter. As soon as they shall
be both in good fasion, add six ounces of calcined red tartar, two of arsenic,
half an ounce of saltpetre, and two drachms of alum. Leave all this in fusion
together for the space of three, or four hours, that all the salts may well
evaporate, then you will cast this composition in the flat sand mould prepared
for it.

2. To give these mirrors the requisite polish, you proceed as follows. Begin
first by taking the coarsest part away with the wheel over a grinding-stone,
after the same method as the pewterers and braziers do, and then you smoothen
them with water till they are sufficiently polished by attrition. The second
step is to take the mirror from that wheel, and put it on the wooden one
covered with leather, after having rubbed it well with emory in order to give
it a fine polish, and eat off the scratches which may have happened to it on
the first wheel. Then you must take it again from this wheel and put it on
another of the same kind, covered likewise with leather, after having
previously rubbed your mirror with prepared boodstone, and washing it
afterward with magister of pewter. Take notice that you are to make your
mirrors observe, on both these last leathered wheels, the same oblique
direction in turning them, and continue so long till the mirror has acquired a
sufficient fineness and brightness.

Unequal and ardent mirrors are rubbed and polished in the same manner.

LVII. To make unequal and ardent mirrors.
1. Take one pound of copper in laminas. Cut them in small pieces to get them
into a crucible, and impregnate them with oil of tartar. Then take a quarter of
a pound of white arsenic in powder, with which you will stratify your laminas,
putting bed upon bed till the crucible is full. Cover this crucible with a lid
of the same earth: lute it well and set it to dry. When done, plunge it to the
lid in the sand, and give it a gradual fire, till it is strong enough to
evaporate the oil. During that time the oil prepares the copper, in detaining
the arsenic and making it pass into it with the same facility as oil passes
through leather. -- You may, if you choose, place your crucible in the furnace
on the bare fire; but then you must manage the fire gradually till the oil is
quite evaporated. This being done, let the crucible cool, and break it; you
will find your copper variegated with several colors, and it would be still
more so, if, instead of arsenic, you had used auripigment.

2. Take of this copper one part, and two of brass. Melt first the brass on a
blasting fire; then throw in your prepared copper. When they shall have been in
good fusion a pretty good while, throw this metal into a pan full of lukewarm
water, over which you shall have placed a birch-broom, to force your metal to
granulate in falling through its twigs into the water. By such precaution your
metal will be so hard as to resist the file; will not be brittle; and acquire
the same qualities as steel, instead of which you may even employ it, on many
occasions, for various sorts of works.

3. Now take of this hardened metal three parts; of the best Cornwall pewter,
and perfectly free from lead, one part. Melt first the metal, as we said
before, on a blasting fire, then put your pewter to it; and, when both are well
melted together, you will throw this composition in the unequal mould to make
the concave, and in the concave to make the unequal mirrors. This composition is
the best which can be employed for the manufacturing of these sorts of mirrors.
It is white, hard, never brittle, and susceptible of receiving the highest and
most finished polish.

LVIII. To give tools such a temper, as will enable them to saw marble.
Make the tool red-hot in the fire; and, when red cherry-colour, take it off
from the fire, rub it with a piece of candle, and steep it immediately in good
strong vinegar, in which you shall have diluted some soot.

LIX. To soften iron, and harden it afterward more than it was before.
1. Make a little chink lengthways in an iron bar, in which you will pour
melted lead. Then make it avaporate by a strong fire, as that for coppelling.
Renew this operation four or five times, and the bar will become very soft. You
harden it afterward in steeping it, when red hot, in mere forge water; and it
will be of so good a temper as to be fit for lancets, razors, and knives, with
which you will be able to cut other iron without its splitting or denting.

2. It has been found by experience, that armor can never be good proof
against firearms, if it has not first been softened with oils, gums, wax, and
other incerative things, and afterward hardened by steeping them several times
over in binding waters.

LX. To operate the transmutation of iron into damask steel.
You must first purge it of its usual brittleness; and, after having reduced it
into filings, make it red hot in a crucible; steep it several times in oil of
olives, in which you shall have before thrown several times melted lead. Take
care to cover the vessel in which the oil is contained, every time you throw
your steel into it, for fear the oil should catch fire.

LXI. To guard iron against rusting.
Warm your iron till you can no more touch it without burning yourself. Then
rub it with new and clean white wax. Put it again to the fire, till it has
soaked in the wax. When done, rub it over with a piece of serge, and this iron
will never rust.

LXII. To cut pebbles with ease.
Boil it a good while in some mutton-suet; and then, you will cut it very
easily.

LXIII. To whiten copper.
Take auripigment and eggs' shells calcined, equal quantities. Put all together
in a pot covered with another, having a little hole on the top. Give it first
the wheel-fire for three hours. Then increase the fire; and, what shall have
been sublimed remix with the faeces again, Sublime anew, and mix again the
faeces, and the flours together. Then for the third time, there will be no more
sublimation; only the flours will swim over the faeces. Now take arsenic of one
single sublimation and crude tartar, of each equal parts well mixed together,
and stratify with this mixed powder some very thin copper laminas. Then push
the fire with violence to the degree of fusion, and granulate it in water,
which you are to put in great agitation for a good while before you throw the
matter into it, in order to prevent thereby your matter from sparkling when you
throw it. In reiterating this operation on the same metal, you will render your
copper as beautiful as silver.

LXIV. A projection on copper.
1. Take fine pewter two ounces, which you will melt in a crucible. When
melted, throw in it by little at a time the same weight of flour of brimstone.
Stir every time with a rod, till you see both your pewter and sulphur well
calcined. Then take the crucible out of the fire, and throw in half an ounce of
crude mercury. Let it cool and pulverise this.

2. Now melt four ounces of molten copper. When in good fusion project on it,
by degrees, one ounce of the above powder, stirring carefully, while you do it,
with a stick. Leave it thus in fusion for a little while, and then you may use
it for making all sorts of plates. It is so beautiful, that, if you test it on
the coppel with lead, it will stand it perfectly.

LXV. A receipt for the preparation of emery.
1. Calcine eastern, or Spanish emery, three, or four times in the fire; then
let it cool. Pound it and make strata super strata of it, with double the
quantity of sulphur-vivum in powder. Leave this crucible in the furnace with a
strong fire during three or four hours. Repeat this process four different
times over, then reduce your emery into an impalpable powder. Put it next into
a mattress, pour over it regal water, that it swim over by three fingers deep.
Put this in digestion for eight hours. Pour off by inclination your regal water
impregnated with the dye. Put new water on your matter, and set it on digestion
again for eight other hours, as the former. Then take your thus tinged waters,
which you will mix and put in a retort. Distill most part of it, till you see
that what remains in the retort is yellow. This is the true oil of emery, in
which you put the bigness of a filbert of camphire.

2. Exsulphurate in a crucible, on a good fire, and during two hours, what
quantity you please of arsenic. Then take two ounces of the aforesaid oil of
emery, one of your exsulphurated arsenic, an equal quantity of salt of tartar
drawn with distilled vinegar, two of sublimate, and two of silver; which you
will have dissolved in an aquafortis made with nitre and vitriol. Put all
together in a mattress so large that the composition should occupy no more than
a third part of it, and of which you shall have cut the neck off, to obtain a
more easy evaporation of the compounds from it. Put this mattress is the sand as
high as the matter, and give it a moderate fire for two hours, then a strong
one for fix, after which you will let the fire go out of itself. When done, you
will find your matter in a stone in the mattress. Take it out and pound it into
powder. One ounce of this powder, projected upon another ounce of salt in
fusion, if you keep it a little while in that state, and throw it afterward
into oil of olives, will increase your gold by a third of its primary quantity
and rather more: And you may thus increase it again and again by repeating the
same operation.

LXVI. A factitious amiant; or the way to make an incomoustible cloth.
Take rotten oak wood which you will calcine into ashes, and mix with an equal
quantity of pearl ashes. Boil all together in ten times its weight of water.
When this has boiled one hour, add as much water to it as there may have been
evaporated, and boil now in it a large stick of alumen plumosum, during one
hour. Take off the vessel from the fire, and carry it into the cellar. In a
month's time you will find your alum as soft as flax. Spin it, and get it
weaved into a cloth. The fire will never have any power over it. On the
contrary, the best way to wash it is to throw it on red-hot coals; and, after
having there let it burn throughout, take it off, and you will find it
perfectly clean.

LXVII. To render tartar fusible and penetrating.
1. Stratify cakes of white tartar with vine branches. When done set them on
fire by the top, and when arrived at the bottom your tartar will be calcined.

2. Dissolve this calcined tartar in aquavitae, then pass it through the
filtering-paper, and next evaporate the brandy. What shall remain is the salt
of tartar, which you must find to be as white as snow. Pour over it the best
and the truest French spirit of wine, so that it should exceed over the salt
the thickness of an inch. Set it on fire. As soon as your spirit of wine shall
be all consumed, your salt of tartar will be fusible and penetrating.

3. Now should you make any iron red-hot, and project on it a little of that
salt, it will penetrate it through and through, and leave after it a vestige as
white as silver in the place where it touched.

LXVIII. To extract mercury from any metal.
1. Dissolve lead, antimony, or any other metal, in good common aquafortis.
When that water shall have dissolved as much of it as it can, pour it out by
inclination, and on what shall not yet be quite dissolved, but corroded only in
a white powder, pour some hot water. Shake then the mattress in which the metal
is, and you will find that the water will finish to dissolve what the
aquafortis could not. Next to this pass it through a filtering paper; and, what
you will find not able to pass, dissolve it now with some fresh aquafortis, or
only water, if it so appear to you that this may do. Continue (...) the same
dissoluting process, till you have obtained a perfect dissolution of all the
powder, and you have made it pass through the filtering paper. Now take all
your several dissolutions, both those made with hot water and those made with
aquafortis, and mix them all together. Make a precipitation of that dissolution
to the bottom of the vessel in form of white curds, by means of a water
impregnated with salt. Edulcorate this twice, with cold common water, and once
with some a little warm, then dry it.

2. Take one ounce of that dissolution, thus edulcorated and exsiccated into
powder; half an ounce of ammoniac salt sublimed over common salt. Grind all
together on a marble stone with a mullar for a long while, that it may be well
incorporated, as thepainters do their colors; and, to succeed better in that
incorporation, impregnate it with distilled vinegar. Now put all this into a
pan, and pour cold water over it, so that it should swim over the matter, stir
it well twice a day with a stick, for three whole weeks. Then take quick lime,
which you will slack with the swimming liquor which covers your matter; and
with equal quantities of the powder which lies under it, and the slacked lime,
make small bullets, which you will put into a retort well luted, and push it on
with a great fire. You will soon see the mercury going into the receiver, which
you must have had the precaution of filling with water, and under which, at the
bottom, you will find it.

3. The same process carefully attended to, may procure you mercury from all
the metals and minerals without exception.

LXIX. To dye in gold silver medals, or laminas, through and through.
1. This curious operation is performed by means of the admirable salt of
Glauber, which is made with nitre and vitriol oil, in the following manner. --
Take what quantity you please of nitre salt, pour over it a sufficient quantity
of oil of vitriol, to have it swim over. When the ebullitions arising from that
mixture shall be ended, distill to dryness; there remains a white salt known
under the name of salt of Glauber.

2. Dissolve in what quantity of warm water you think proper, or be in need of,
a sufficient quantity of that salt as may saturate it, which you know when you
see the water can dissolve no more of it. In this dissolution put a dram of
calx, or magister, of gold. Then put in digestion in it silver laminas cut
small and thin, and let them so for twenty-four hours over a very gentle fire.
At the end of that term you will find them thoroughly dyed gold color, inside
and outside.

LXX. To refine pewter.
Take fine pewter, melt it in a crucible. When done, project over it at several
times some nitre till you see it calcined. Then pound it into powder, and mix
it with an equal quantity of charcoal pulverised very fine. If, in this
condition, you melt it again, it will resume its form of pewter, only refined
in a much superior degree.

LXXI. To make a perpetual motion.
Take aquafortis, in which you will throw some steelfilings well dried. Leave
this mixture to lay for six or eight hours. Then pour out the aquafortis in
another bottle, in which you will throw a small loadstone of good quality, and
stop it well that no air get in. You will observe a perpetual motion.

LXXII. A secret fire.
Have a barrel open by one end, and pierced with a dozen of holes on the other.
Put in it three or four bushels of oat-straw cut very fine, as that which is
given to horses. Get next half a bushel of barley, which shall have soaked for
three days in lime water, and drained in a sheercloth of all the water which
can run out of it. Place this wet barley in a lump over the oats' straw, then
cover it with other similar cut straw, and let it rest till the time that, when
you trust your hand in it, you feel it warm. This heat you may keep up by
throwing, with a gardner's watering-pot, about half a pint of water every other
day.

LXXIII. An oil, one ounce of which will last longer than one pound of any
other.
Take fresh butter, quick lime, crude tartar, and common salt, of each equal
parts, which you pound and mix well all together. Saturate it with good brandy,
and distill it in a retort over a graduated fire, after having adapted the
receiver, and luted well the joints.

LXXIV. To make a coppel with ashes.
Take equal parts of the ashes resulting from vine branches, mutton-bones, and
harts' horns burnt and calcined. Moisten them with a little common water, (...)
press them very hard in a mould called Coppel. Then take ashes from the jaws
and teeth of a jack, which you put over the other ashes to the thickness of a
crown piece, pounding well these also over the others as hard as you can. These
last ashes serve to set off clean the grain of the metals you are testing on
them. The hartshorn ashes serve to bind, or unite, those of vine-branches and
mutton-bones together, and to draw down at the same time the lead. You must use
eight times as much lead as the composition, you want to test by the coppel,
weighs.

LXXV. To solder iron, or any other metal, without fire.
1. Take one ounce of ammoniac, and one of common salts; an equal quantity of
calcined tartar, and as much of bell-metal, with three ounces of antimony.
Pound well all together and sift it. Put this into a piece of linen, and
enclose it well all round with fullers earth, about one inch thick. Let it dry,
then put it between two crucibles over a slow fire to get heat by degrees, Push
on the fire till the lump contained in the crucibles become quite red hot, and
melt all together. Then let the vessels, and the whole, cool gradually and
pound it into powder.

2. When you want to solder any thing, put the two pieces you want to join on a
table, approaching their extremities as near as you can one to another. Make a
crust of fullers earth so, that holding to each piece, and passing under the
joint, it should be open over it on the top. Then throw some of your powder
between and over the joint. Have again some borax, which put into hot wine till
this is consumed, and with a feather rub your powder at the place of the joint;
you will see it immediately boiling. As soon as the boiling stops, the
consolidation is made. If there be any roughness you must smoothen it by
rubbing with a grinding stone, for the file will have no power over it.

LXXVI. To solder with fire.
Make a paste with pulverised chalk and gum-water, which you will put round the
two broken pieces placed on a table, and prepared as before mentioned in the
preceding receipt. The only difference is, that you are to rub over the two
united extremities with melted soap; and, after having thrown some of the above
powder at the place of the joint, you are to hold a kindled piece of charcoal
over it. This will immediately set the matter in fusion, which is no sooner
done but you may take off the paste, and you will find it consolidated,

LXXVII. To make Borax.
Take two ounces of roch-alum; dilute it and mix it with two ounces of alkaline
salt which is used in making of glass. Put all into a pewter pot, and set it
a-doing for the space of half an hour, over a gentle fire; then take it out of
the water. Take next two ounces of (...) salt in powder, as much of alkaline
salt, two pounds of virgin honey, and one of cow-milk. Mix well all together,
and set it in the sun for three days. Then the borax is done.

LXXVIII. To render iron as white, and beautiful, as silver.
Take ammoniac salt in powder, and mix it with as equal quantity of quick lime.
Put them all together into cold water, and mix well. When done, any iron piece,
which you shall have made red hot, will, if you steep it in that prepared
water, become as white as silver.

LXXIX. To calcine pewter, and render it as white, and as hard as silver.
Melt well your pewter in a crucible, so that it may be very fine and clear.
Pour it afterward into a very strong vinegar, then into mercurial water.
Repeat that operation as many times as you please, you will each time give it
an additional degree of hardness and whiteness, drawing near to silver; so much
that it will at last be very difficult to distinguish it from silver itself.

LXXX. Another to the same purpose.
Make again a good lie with vine-branch ashes and vinegar. Throw in it your
pewter when in fusion. Repeat this, seven different times -- Have next some new
goat's milk, in which you shall have added some white arsenic as powder. Melt
your pewter again; then throw it in this preparation. Repeat twelve times the
same; and the pewter will become as hard and as white as silver.

LXXXI. To whiten brass.
1. Take rosin and saltpeter, equal quantities. Pound all in a mortar, and
reduce it into an impalpable powder. Put this into an earthen pan made red-hot,
and thus burn the matter. As soon as done, you must wash and dry it; then grind
it again well into an impalpable powder as before, with the addition of an
equal quantity of auripigment. Then put all this into a crucible, cover it with
another well luted, and having a little hole in the top, which you will stop by
laying only a medal on it. When calcined, take what you will find clear in the
bottom, not what will have sublimed on the top. Make a very fine powder of this
powder; and, with one single ounce of that powder, you will be able to whiten
two pounds of brass, in proceeding about it as follows.

2. Melt first your brass as usual; and, when in good fusion, cast it into very
good vinegar; an operation which you must repeat three times. Then, when you
melt it for the fourth time, you are to project on it, as we said before, one
ounce only (if you have two pounds of brass) of the said powder, which will
render your brass as white as silver. -- N. B. To melt the brass with more
facility, there are some who throw in the crucible a certain discretionable
quantity of mice-dung; and I recommend to do the same. It will be found of no
small service in hastening the fusion of that metal.

LXXXII. Another method.
Brass, copper, iron or steel may be easily whitened by means of the butter
from Cornwall tin, or pewter, prepared with sublimate, proceeding as follows.

Take Cornwall pewter, about one pound; add to it half that quantity of
sublimate. Set it on a strong fire, and sublime. The first water which sublimes
is not good, throw it away. The second is good, which you know by its white
color. Now, if you make a piece or copper, brass, steel, or iron, it does not
signify which, red hot, and steep it in that water, it will become as white as
silver.

LXXXIII. To extract gold from silver.
1. Melt, whatever quantity you please, of lead, in a crucible, over a fire of
clear and bright live-coals. Have at the same time in fusion an equal quantity
of sulphur. Then take your first crucible, in which the lead is melted, off
from the fire; and, before the lead shall congeal, throw in the same quantity
in weight of quicksilver. Stir and mix well this with a stick. When this is
done, pour now your sulphur, from the other crucible, over the mixture of lead
and quicksilver you have just made, and which coagulates, continually stirring
carefully the matter with a spatula, for fear the sulphur should blaze, and be
consumed before it is all poured in. When the whole is come quite cold, grind
it on a marble table with a mullar. Then put all again into a crucible over the
fire, and leave it in fusion till all the sulphur is burnt out, and the matter
be fluid enough to be cast in an ingot. This will lock like the regulus of
melted antimony. It will have even its brittleness.

2. Reduce now this composition into powder; and, with an equal quantity in
weight of it and of silver laminas, make strata super strata of them,
alternately, in a crucible, beginning and ending always with the powder. Then
over the last bed, put about half an inch thick of Venetian glass, or crystal,
reduced into an impalpable powder. Observe however that the crucible should not
be filled so near the brim as to let the glass boil over. Make a fire strong
enough to melt both the matters and the glass, and set them thus in fusion all
together for a good hour at least. Then take off, and let cool your regulus; in
breaking your crucible, make a coppel, or test, in which you will put lead in
fusion, till it is as fluid, as it can be. Throw in your regulus to purify it
by that test, in the same manner as silversmiths do. -- When your silver shall
be fallen to the bottom very pure, put it in laminas, or granulate it; then put
it to dissolve in aquafortis. You will see some small particles precipitating
from it, in the form of black powder. It is fine gold. Wash these in warm
water; then put them in fusion, in a crucible, and you will have very true, and
good pieces of gold, sit for any of the chemical physics, and capable to stand
any test whatever you may put it to.

CHAP. III.
SECRETS for the Composition of VARNISHES, etc.
I. A gold varnish.
TAKE karabe, or amber, eight ounces, and two of gum-lack. Melt first the
karabe in a varnished earthen-pot, or in the retort of an alembic, over a very
strong fire. When this is melted, throw in the gumlac, and let this melt in the
same manner. Then take some of the fire off, and let it cool; observing with a
stick, whether the matter has got all its fluidity. Mix in it six or eight
ounces of turpentine oil. Keep stirring with a stick, in order to incorporate
well this oil with the rest. Add also a spoonful of lintseed oil, prepared with
hepatica-aloes, to the consistence of a balm; which, in order to thin, and
reduce it to the thickness of a syrup, you mix with a sufficient quantity of
oil of turpentine, tinged with rocou.

II. How to prepare the lintseed oil with the hepaticaaloes, for the above
purpose.
You prepare the lintseed oil with hepatica-aloes, by mixing four ounces of
this in powder, with one pound of the said oil, which you do over the fire,
till it has acquired the consistence of a very thick syrup, and you see your
oil beginning to scum, and to swell much -- Then pass it through a piece of
linen; let it cool, and bottle it to keep for the abovementioned use.

III. How to draw the tincture of rocou used in the composition of the above
varnish.
In order to draw the tincture of rocou, put four ounces of it in the oil of
turpentine. Set this over a gentle fire, in the retort of an alembic; and, as
soon as the oil begins to boil, take it off from the fire: stir well with a
stick, and filter it through a paper, to use it as directed before.

IV. A varnish for iceing.
Concoct some turpentine with water, and white wine or brandy. When concocted,
dissolve it in wine and oil of turpentine.

V. An excellent varnish.
Take what quantity you please of verdigrise, grind it with vinegar, put it in
a piece of dough, as you would an apple to make a dumpling. Bake it an in oven
as bread; then cut open your dumpling, and get the verdigrise out of it. Mix it
with wine, and use it. Lay over it a coat of four ounces of gum arabic; then
polish as usual. You will find it will answer all your expectation, and be a
very fine varnish.

VI. Another, as good.
Put, in a glass bottle, one pound of white mastich. Pour over what quantity of
oil may be requisite to cover all the mastich. Place the bottle over the coals,
or very hot ashes. The mastich will melt. Take the bottle off from the fire,
and shake it well, to see that the whole be perfectly dissolved. This varnish
is excessively good to lay over prints, statues, columns, wood,etc. etc.

VII. A red varnish.
1. Take three ounces of gum-lack; half an ounce of sandarack; as much of
mastich in drop, and a pint of true French spirit of wine. Put all in a
mattress, which you must take care to lute well with potter's clay, and stop
with paper. Have a large iron kettle, two parts of which may be filled with
sand. Place the kettle over the coals, and lay the mattress on the sand. Get the
composition to boil in that situation for three hours, Strain it through a
sheercloth; bottle and stop it well, and keep it for use,

2. To make this varnish red, you put one ounce of vermillion to six of the
said varnish. But to dilute the vermillion, you must begin by pouring, first,
some oil aspic over it, and then the six ounces of varnish, which will take
near a quarte of an hour to mix well together.

3. Observe that the wood, on which you want to lay it has been first well
polished. Rub it again, besides, with a pounce of stone and vinegar, that all
the pores may be well filled, and should appear no more. Then lay with a brush,
first a coat of simple varnish, without vermillion. Let this dry for three
hours. Put on next your second coat, of that which is prepared with the
vermillion; then a third and a fourth, according as you want it of a more or
less deep red, and allowing a distance of three hours time between each coat of
varnish to let them dry.

4. If the last coat of varnish, after being dry, becomes rough, rub it with
shavegrass dipped in oil of olive. After which rub it again with a cloth, till
it become bright. Over this, when done, lay a coat of pure varnish, like the
first. And this coat, as well as all the others, must be left to dry, at least
three hours.

5. As for the black and venturine, you must first lay a coat of varnish on the
wood; then, while fresh, sieve the venturine over it, and let all dry for three
hours. When dry, you lay one, two, three, or more, coats of varnish, according
to your judgment or liking, and allowing always three hours to dry between each
coat. Then polish, and give the final coat after.

VIII. A black varnish.
1. Take gum-lac, four ounces; sandarick and black rosin, equal quantities, one
ounce of each. Pulverise all separately, and keep them distinct, to proceed
afterward in their mixture according to the following directions. Dissolve the
rosin over the fire, in a sufficient quantity of spirit of wine; then add the
sandarack to it. As soon as this is also dissolved, add the powder of gumlac,
and stir well till all is well melted together. Strain it, while warm, through
a cloth. If any thing remain in the linen afterward, add some more spirit of
wine to it to dissolve it as before; and strain it again after, like the other.
Such is the first preparation of this varnish.

2. The black color is given to it by means of two drachms only, of ivory
black, to every two ounces of it.

IX. How to make a good ivory-black for the above purpose.
Burn any quantity of ivory you please, in the fire till it is black. Put it
into powder on a stone porphyry. Add some water to it, and make a paste, which
you (...) dry. Then grind it again, as before, with spirit of wine.

X. A varnish for floors.
Put a little petroly or rock-oil with varnish and turpentine, and stir well.
Lay it on your floors with an old hair broom, after having mixed in it the
color you want them to be.

XI. A varnish from Flanders.
Take aetherial oil of turpentine, and Venice turpentine, equal parts. Mix them
over a moderate fire, and use this boiling.

XII. A varnish to lay on canvass sashes.
Take fine and clear turpentine, four ounces; oil of nuts, two. Melt all
together over a fire; and when it begins to boil, scum it, and use it hot with
a brush.

XIII. A varnish of shell-lac, for minatures and other pictures.
1. Take spirit of wine, one pound; picked shell-lac, five ounces; sandarak,
two and a half; white karabe and mastich, equal parts, two drachms of each.

2. First boil and scum the shell-lac and sandarak together, to have them the
whiter. Then add the mastich and karabe to that, and put all in a mattress over
a sand fire, to digest and concoct together by a gentle heat.

XIV. Another varnish for pictures.
Take four ounces, of gum arabic, the clearest and whitest you can (...) Put it
to infuse in a pound of water, over ember (...), for one night. Strain it in
the morning through a cloth, after having added to it the bulk of a nut of
Narbonne-honey, and half that quantity of sugar candy. It is not to be used
with a brush.

XV. Another sort.
Take aquavitae, sugar candy, and whites of eggs, a reasonable quantity of
each. Beat all well together to a froth. Underneath is a liquor: that is your
varnish. You may lay it, with a soft brush, on any sort of picture.

XVI. The Chinese varnish.
1. Take pulverised and sifted sealing wax, two ounces. Put it in a mattress
with four ounces of turpentine oil. Give a gentle fire, that all may melt. If
the wax be red, you need add nothing but the oil. If black, some lampblack is
requisite to be added still. And, with this first composition, you lay on the
first coat.

2. Next to this have aloes and karabe, of each two ounces. Dissolve this in a
varnished pipkin, along with twelve ounces of lintseed oil, till all is well
incorporated. There will fail a ground to the bottom, over which will swim a
very fine and transparent liquor. Of this you are to make your second coat of
varnish, laying it over the other after it is dry.

XVII. How to imitate a black jasper, or variegated black marble.
Take sulphur-vivum, quick lime, aquafortis, and the green rind of walnuts,
equal quantities, one ounce of each. Dilute all together: then lay it with a
brush as what you want to be jaspered, whether a column, a table, or any thing
else. This done, put your table or column,etc. thus blackened, in a dunghill,
for the space of twelve days, and then take it out again. You will find it well
veined and variegated. To give it a fine gloss afterward, you rub it with a
varnish composed as prescribed hereafter. See art. xix.

XVIII. Another way.
Make a large ball, with the drugs prescribed in the above receipt, to compose
your black. Lay it for a week in a dunghill. When, by that means, it is well
variegated, rub your intended piece of furniture with it. This being thus
variegated, you lay on it the following varnish, to give it a fine luster.

XIX. An excellent varnish to give a fine gloss to the abovementioned jasper,
or variegated black marble.
Take oil of spikenard, three ounces; sandarak, well picked and clean, two.
Have a new earthen pot well glazed. Set it before the fire a-warming, without
any thing in it. When hot, throw in it one half of the sandarak, and one half
of the oil. Stir it well, left it should burn or stick to the pot. When it is
nearly melted, throw in the remainder of the oil and sandarak. When all is well
dissolved and mixed, add a piece of camphire, to take away the bad smell of
this composition, and let it dissolve; then bottle and stop it for use. Warm it
every time before you lay it on, for it requires to be used hot.

XX. A varnish which dries in two hours time.
Melt four ounces of yellow amber, in a new earthen pan, over kindled coals.
Take care, in that operation, that the fire should but just reach, and touch,
the bottom of the pan, and none should rise along the sides. Never cease to
stir, from the moment it is melted, with a deal stick, and add, directly, one
ounce of sealing-wax. As soon as this is also melted, add again one spoonful,
or half an ounce of lintseed oil, previously thickened with a little gold
litharge; then take it off from the fire, and cease not to stir as before. When
the matter begins to be a little cold, then is the time of adding what quantity
of turpentine oil you may find necessary to make a true varnish of it.

XXI. A varnish for copperplate prints.
Prepare water with some isinglass. Lay, with a very soft brush, a coat of this
on the print. Next to this, lay another of the following varnish. True French
spirit of wine, half a pound; gum-elemi, two drachms and sandarak, three.

XXII. An admirable varnish.
Take white mastich and lintseed oils, what quantity you please ^ a little
turpentine, pounded glass, burnt verdigrise, and pounded amber. Boil and melt
all together in a new earthen pot. When done, you will find it to be an
admirable sort of varnish.

XXIII. A varnish fit to lay on all sorts of colors.
Take one ounce of white amber; half an ounce of spirit of turpentine; four
ounces of rectified spirit of wine (the true French-sort); one dram of
mastich, and as much of juniper gum. Put all together to infuse for eight days.
Evaporate two parts of it over a gentle fire. What remains is a varnish fit for
laying on all sorts of colors, and which will hurt, spoil, or damage none.

XXIV. A varnish known under the appellation of Beaume-blanc, or white-balm.
Take spirit of wine, four ounces; gum-lac, half an ounce; sandarak, two
drachms; mastich, one. Pulverise the ingredients, and put them, with the spirit
of wine, in a square bottle, large enough to be but half full after the whole
is in it. Dissolve this over a slow fire, and take care the bottle should be
well stopped first with a cork, and besides with wax and leather.

XXV. A varnish to be used on plaster, and any other sort of materials.
To the varnish of copal and spirit of wine, only add some calcined task.

XXVI. An excellent varnish, in which may be put, and diluted, whatever color
you like. -- It suits, equally well, goldsmiths and limners.
Take aspic and turpentine oils, of each one ounce; clean picked sandarak
pulverised, four drachms; gum copal, two. The whole being well pulverised, put
it along with your oils in a mattress, with the addition of half a pound of
spirit of wine; and set it in a balneo mariae. When the matter is dissolved,
strain and keep it for use in a glass bottle well stopped.

XXVII. A Chinese varnish suitable to all sorts of colors.
1. Take one ounce of white amber; one quarter of an ounce of sandarak; as much
of gum copal. Pound well all these together, and put them in a mattress
perfectly dry. To every ounce of these three drugs, pounded and mixed thus
together, put three ounces of spirit of wine. Stop well the mattress with a rag,
over which you will put some paste made with flour, and then another rag, well
tied over. Boil the varnish thus over ember ashes, till the whole is dissolved,
and this varnish is done. The method of applying it is as follows.

2. The piece intended for varnishing being previously well polished, you lay
on it the proposed color or colors, diluted in aquavitae, with some
isinglass. When these are dry, pass on them two or three coats of this varnish,
according to discretion and taste; allowing the proper time between each coat
of varnish to dry: and, when dry, you polish it with olive oil and tripoly,
then rub the oil off with a rag.

Note. That if you intend this varnish for miniature pictures, you are to make
an addition of equal parts of gum copal and white amber.

XXVIII. Another Chinese varnish, more particularly calculated for miniature
painting.
Take one ounce of white karabe, or amber; and one dram of camphire, which
you reduce into a subtle powder, and put in a mattress with five ounces of
spirit of wine. Set it in the sun to infuse, during the hottest days in July
and August, and stir it two or three times a day constantly. After a
fortnight's infusing thus, put the mattress, for one hour only, over hot ashes;
then pass all through a cloth, and keep it in a bottle well corked.

XXIX. How to make a red, with varnish, of a much higher hue than coral itself.
Take Spanish vermilion, grind it on a marble with brandy, and add to it the
sixth or eighth part of lac. -- When done, mix this composition with as much
varnish as you may find it requisite to apply.

XXX. To make it gridelin color.
Dilute with your varnish some blue verditure, lake, and whitening.

XXXI. To make it green.
Substitute for the above ingredients, German green verditure, pewter in grain,
and white lead.

XXXII. Another way for the same.
Grind, with water, on a marble stone, the finest or pine you can find, and a
little indigo. Let it dry, then pound and mix it with varnish.

XXXIII. To make it yellow.
Take some Naples yellow, and mix it well with your vanish; then use it.

XXXIV. To make it blue.
Take ultramarine, lake, and whitening, and proceed as ordered in the other
receipts above mentioned, and according to the direction of your judgment, and
experience from them.

XXXV. Another sort of varnish.
Take shell-lac, in grains, two ounces; two of sandarak; black rosin, two
drachms; and spirit of wine, one quarter. Dissolve and prepare the whole as
above.

XXXVI. A clear and transparent varnish fit for all sorts of colors.
Take oil of nuts, and a little of the finest Venice turpentine. Boil them well
together. Add a little brandy to it, and boil it well also. Should then the
varnish prove too thick, thin it with an additional quantity of oil. And, to
apply it, make use of a very soft hair brush, and lay it carefully over the
colors.

XXXVI. To make sashes with cloth, which will be very transparent.
Take a fine white cloth; the finer you choose it, the clearer and more
transparent the sashes will be. Fix the cloth very tight on a frame. Then make
some starch with flour of rice, and lay a coat of it, as smooth as you can, on
your cloth, with a stiff brush of swine's hair. Lay that starch on both sides
of the cloth, and let it dry. When it is perfectly dry, pass, on both sides
also, of the said cloth, thus prepared, the following varnish, with a soft
brush of swine's hair likewise, having care to lay it on as equally and
smoothly as possible, and let it dry afterward.

XXXVIII. The composition of varnish fit for the above sashes.
1. Take of the finest and whitest wax you can find, six pounds; of the finest
and clearest Venice turpentine, two; one and a half of the most perfect
lintseed oil. Have a new varnished pipkin, larger, at least by one third, than
is requisite to contain all these ingredients. Put, first, in this pot the lint
seed and turpentine oils together, and set it over a small charcoal fire. When
this begins to be a little warm put in the wax, cut in small bits, and take
care to mix all well with a very clean wooden stick, till the wax, being
thoroughly melted, is also well incorporated with the rest.

2. Now, take the pot off from the fire; and, while this composition is still a
little warm, give a coat of it on both sides of the cloth, fixed on the frames,
and prepared as before directed, and let it dry in the shade.

Note. You may render your sashes still more transparent, if on both sides of
them, you lay a smoth and equal coat of the following varnish, with a soft
brush: then let it dry.

XXXIX. A fine white varnish.
Take one pound of fine Venice turpentine, and as much of spirit of turpentine.
Put this in a glass-matrass, larger, at least by a third, than is wanted to
contain the matter. Stop this mattress with another smaller mattress, the neck of
which is to enter into that of the former, Have care to lute well both necks
together with paste and paper; and, when the luting has acquired a perfect
dryness, set the first mattress on a sand bath, then set the varnish a-boiling
for near an hour, after which take it off from the fire, and let it cool. When
cold, bottle and stop it for use.

Note. Turpentine well purified from all its greasy parts, is the best, and
fittest, to make the varnish for sashes.

XL. A curious and easy varnish to engrave with aquafortis.
Lay, on a copperplate, as smooth and equal a coat as you can of lintseed oil.
Set the plate on a chafingdish, in which there is a gentle heat of half
consumed charcoal, that the oil may congoal and dry itself gently on. When you
find it has acquired the consistence of a varnish, then you may draw with a
steel point in order to etch your copper, and put on the aquafortis afterward
(...).

XL. A varnish to prevent the rays of the sun from passing through the panes of
window-glasses.
Pound gum adragant into powder; annd put it to dissolve for twenty-four hours,
in whites of eggs well beaten. Lay a coat of this on the panes of your windows,
with a soft brush, and let it dry.

XLI. To raise a relief on varnish.
1. Dissolve one ounce and a half of gum arabic in two pounds water. Grind with
it bol Armeniac, and whitening on a porphyry stone, till all is well united and
incorporated. With this composition, fill up the vacancies between the outlines
of your design, and form, as it is proper, the various reliefs, with the
suitable proportions, and according to the sorts of things you are to imitate
or represent. Then smooth the parts, and let it dry.

2. Next have ready prepared, in shells, the different sorts of metals which
you want to use, diluted with gumwater; and, with a pencil, cover what places,
you are to cover. When this is also dry burnish it skillfully with an ivory
tooth, and lay a coat of clear varnish over the whole. A moderate heat is
required for a moment to help that varnish to dry.

XLII. To render silk stuffs transparent, after the Chinese manner; and paint
them with transparent colors likewise, in imitation of the India manufactured
silks.
Take two pounds of oil of turpentine, very clear; add to it two ounces of
mastich in grain, and the bulk of a filbert of camphire. Let this dissolve by a
gentle heat; then strain it through a cloth. Of this oil lay one coat, or two,
on both sides of your stuff. Allow, however, a sufficient time, between each
coat, for each to dry, and let the second lie two days on, before you touch the
stuff again. When that time is over, draw the outlines of your design, and
flowers, etc. cover this with a preparation of lamp-black and gum-water. Then
fill the intervals with the intended and proper colors, suitable to the
purpose, and which ought to be all transparent colors, diluted with a clear
varnish. When this is done, and dry, lay on both the right and wrong sides of
the stuff another coat of clear varnish.

XLIII. To make a transparent blue hue for the above purpose.
Take nine drachms of ammoniac salt; fix of verdigrise, distilled and
exsiccated. Put both these into powder. Dilute these powders with tortoise oil.
In this on a very thick glass, which you will stop (...) and set over hot ashes
for a week. After that time your color will be fit for use, and make your
drawings with the clear varnish, as directed in the preceding article.

XLIV. To make a transparent yellow hue for the (...) use.
Take a new-laid egg of that very day, make whole in the shell, to draw the
white out of it. Replace, by the same hole, with the yolk, two drachms of quick
silver, and as much of ammoniac salt; then stop the whole with wax. Set that
egg in hot dung, or over a lamp fire, for four or five and twenty days. When
that time is over, break the egg, and you will find a very fine transparent
yellow, fit for the use above mentioned.

XLV. To make a transparent green.
Take verdigrise, gold litharge, and quicksilver, equal parts. Grind the whole
in a mortar, with the urine of a child. Put it next into a bottle, and set it
over a gentle and slow fire, for the space of seven, or eight days. This
composition will give a very fine transparent green, for the above purpose.

Note. We have given, in the sixth Chapter, several receipts for the
composition of sundry transparent colors. We shall therefore take the liberty
thither to refer the reader, for more ample satisfaction, and the completion of
the abovementioned operation.

XLVI. To give the above mentioned painted silks, all the smell, and fragrancy,
of the India ones.
It is well known, that the silks, and other things, we receive from India, are
all tainted with a certain particular smell, and agreeable fragrancy, which,
being their peculiar, distinctive, and most obvious character, if not imitated
also, would help not a little in ruining the deception intended by the above
labor. To imitate, therefore, even this, you must observe the following
direction. -- Have a small closet, if it be for works at large; or, only a fine
basket with a top to it playing upon hinges stuffed and lined all over in the
inside, if it be for one single piece of silk. Put, in either of them, and
according to their extent, a proportionable quantity of cloves, whole-pepper,
mace, nutmeg all-spice, camphire, etc. etc. Put your works among these
ingredients, and keep either the closet, or the basket, perfectly close shut,
till you see they have received a full impression from the odor of those
ingredients.

N. B. With the various compositions of varnishes, and preparations of colors,
we have just given, these is almost no sort of works, coming from the Indies
but can be performed and imitated.

XLVII. A most beautiful Chinese varnish.
Take one ounce of the whitest karabe (amber); or instead of this, the same
quantity of the whitest gum copal; four drachms of sandarak; two of fine
mastich, in drops. Put all this, reduced into a powder, in a fine glass
mattress; then, pour over it one ounce of the finest turpentine oil. Stop the
mattress first with a cork, then with a bladder wetted. Set this to infuse, over
a slow fire, for twelve hours. After this, uncork, and let cool, the mattress;
then pour gently in it six ounces of good spirit of wine, and stop it again as
well as before. In that situation set it on ember ashes, or rather in a balneo
mariae. In the space of another twelve hours, you will find that the spirit of
wine shall have dissolved all the gums. Then while the varnish is still quite
warm, strain it through a cloth; bottle and cork it, to keep for use.

XLVIII. The true receipt of the English varnish, such as in that country is
laid on sticks and artificial-made canes.
Smoothen and polish well your sticks; then, rub them or your artificial-made
canes with a paste made of flour. Then, having diluted, in water, a
discretionable quantity of Flemish glue, and red orpine, give one coat of this
very smooth and equal to your sticks. If, after this is dry, you do not think
it sufficient, give them another and let them dry. Then, give them a third coat
of clear varnish, made with turpentine and spirit of (...). After this is done,
put a soaking, in an equal quantity of water and chamber-lye, some turnsol cut
very small. With this color you touch your sticks, or canes, here and there
with a hair brush. Then holding them perpendicular, on their small ends,
between both your hands, you roll them quick and brisk, (as when you mill
chocolate), in contrary senses. This operation gives them a negligent and
natural-like marbling, over which you are to lay another coat of varnish, and
set them to dry.

XLIX. A fine varnish for all sorts of colors.
1. Take two pounds of double-rectified spirit of wine; seed-lac, four ounces;
sandarac as much; gum copal, one. Set all a-dissolving, on hot ashes, in a
mattress, or a vessel with a long neck. When perfectly dissolved, strain it
through a jelly-bag, made of new cloth. Mix, with that which shall have
strained out of the bag, one spoonful of oil of turpentine; then bottle and
stop it well, and set it in the sun. There will happen a separation, and a
certain coarser part will show itself at the bottom, while another more clear
will appear swimming on the top. Divide carefully, by inclination, the clearest
from the thickest part.

2. This last you may use with fine lamp-black, well pleked, and free from all
sorts of hard knobs, to make a black-colour varnish. With it, you rub whatever
you want to be varnished, and lay one, two, or three coats of it, more or less,
according as you think proper, letting dry between each coat. And, when this is
done, you put, of the first separated clear part of your varnish, as much as
you find requisite to give your work a fine luster.

N. B. It is proper there should be some fire, so near to the work, as it may
receive from it some gentle heat, while all this is performing: and when the
whole is well executed, you must let dry in the shade what is varnished, and
guard it against the dust.

3. If, instead of black, you want a red color, you must, from the very
beginning of the operation, join some tacamahaca-gum with the spirit of wine of
double rectification above mentioned; and, in lieu of lamp-black, in the second
part of the operation, you put some cinnabar in powder. Then, when you have
done with laying the several coats of varnish, in which the cinnabar is, you
put in the clear varnish, which is destined to make the last coats, for
lustring, some dragon's blood in tears.

4. You may put, in the same manner, whitening in your varnish, if you want it
white; or verdigrise if you want it green; and so on any other color you want
it to be, proceeding, in respect to each of them, as before directed for the
others.

N. B. These varnishes, when dry, do all require to be polished. For that
purpose, you take a cloth, dip it in tripoly, and rub, with moderation, over
the last coat of varnish, till you find it has acquired a sufficient degree of
luster, and equality.

L. A varnish to lay on, after the isinglass.
Take spirit of wine, four pounds; white amber, fourteen ounces; mastich, one;
sandarac seven. Put all in digestion, for twenty-four hours. Then, set the
mattress on the sand, and give the fire for three hours, till all is perfectly
dissolved. Add after, four ounces of turpentine oil.

LI. A varnish to gild with, without gold.
Take half a pint of spirit of wine, in which you dissolve one dram of
saffron, and half a dram of dragon's blood, both previously well pulverised
together. Add this to a certain quantity of shell-lac varnish, and set it on
the fire with two drachms of soccotrinealoes.

LII. A varnish water proof.
1. Take lint seed-oil, the purest you can find: put it in a well-glazed
pipkin, over red-hot charcoals, in a chassing-dish. With that oil add, while a
warming, about the fourth part of its weight of rosin. Make a dissolve
together, and boil gently, left it should run over the pot. At first, the oil
will turn all into a scum; but, continuing to let it boil, that scum will
insensibly waste itself, and disappear at last. Keep up the fire till, taking a
little of that oil, with a stick, you see it draw to a thread like as varnish
does. Then, take it off from the fire. But if, trying it thus, it prove too
thin, add some more rosin to it, and continue to boil it. 2. When it is come as
it ought to be, varnish whatever you want with it, set it in the sun to dry, or
before the fire, for it cannot dry without the assistance of either of these.

N. B. This composition of varnish has this particular property, viz. that, if
you lay it on wooden wares, hot water itself cannot hurt it, nor have the least
power on it. You may, therefore, make a very extensive use of it. But you must
take care to choose the finest and the most perfect rosin; and to boil it well,
for a long time. Quaere. Would not such a varnish be extremely useful, to
preserve what is much exposed to the injuries of the weather, in gardens and
elsewhere; such as sashes, statues, frames, hot-houses? etc.

LIII. Callot's varnish, mentioned in Chap. I. p. 2.
1. Take two ounces of the finest lint-seed oil; benjamin, in drops, two
drachms; virgin-wax, the bulk of a filbert. Boil all this together, till it is
reduced to one third; and, while it is a boiling, never cease to stir with a
little stick. When done, bottle, or pot it in a large-mouthed vessel.

2. To use that varnish, warm a little the plate you intend to engrave upon;
and, taking a little of the varnish with the tip of your finger, spread it
delicately over the plate. Observe to put as little of it as you can, and to
lay it on as smooth and equal as possible. When done, smoke the plate, on the
varnished side, with a candle, passing and repassing it gently, over the flame
of it, till it is black every where. Set it again, now, on the chassing dish,
wherein there are kindled charcoals; and, when the plate has done fuming, then
the varnish is sufficiently hardeness. You may then chalk, draw, and etch,
whatever you will on it.

Such is the true receipt of the varnish, which the famous Callot made use of,
to engrave his most admired, and truly admirable subjects.

LIVE. A varnish to lay on paper.
Begin by laying on your paper one first coat of very clear and thin size. This
being dry, melt three parts of oil of spike and one of rosin together: and,
when come to the consistence of a varnish, you lay one second, and light, coat
of this over the first made with size. -- This varnish is very fine, when very
smoothly, and equally, laid on.

LV. How to cast figures in moulds.
Take one pound of Paris-plaister, and an equal quantity of bricks, pounded
into an impalpable powder; join to this one ounce of (...) plumeum, and one of
ammoniac salt. Dilute all together, gradually, in clear water, without
absorbing it, as you are to make a paste of it; and make your moulds with it.

LVI. Another varnish.
Take mastich and sandarac equal parts, of each two ounces. Pound their, into a
fine powder. H^^ three ounces of lin^seed-oil, and as much of spirit of wine,
in which, being mixed, you put your powders. Set this, in a well-stopped
mattress, in a bal^eo (...) to boil and concoct together for one hour: and this
varnish is done.

LVII. L'Abbe Mulot's varnish.
Take of spike oil, one ounce; pulverized (...) half an ounce. Put all in a
bottle, and set it (...) sun till perfectly dissolved. This composition is
particularly fit to varnish gold or silver, in shell, which has been laid on,
with a hair pencil.

LVIII. A varnish to lay over plaster-works, or figures.
Take fine white Alicante soap; rasp it fine, and put it in a well glazed
pipkin. Dissolve that soap, in the pipkin, with your finger and a little water,
added gradually, and little at a time, till it comes thick and milky. Cover
this, for fear dust should come to it; and let it rest so for seven or eight
days. Take, next, a soft and short hairy brush; dip it in this soapy
preparation, and wash the plaster figure all over with it, then set it a
drying. When dry, rub it gently with a piece of cloth, placing yourself between
it and the light, that you may perceive better the places which take the
polish; when done, thus, every where, your statue will appear as white, shiny,
and beautiful, as alabaster.

LIX. A very fine red varnish.
1. Take oil of spike, on pound; and litharge as much. Boil both together, for
one quarter of an hour, in order to clarify the oil, or, what is called,
ungreasing it. When thus clarified, or ungreased, (...) one pound of it, and
six ounces of shell-lack, which you melt together in a mattress, or a varnished
pip^^n. Then, dilute in it some cinnabar, which had previously been grinded on
a stone, with chamberlye; and the varnish is done.

2. Of this composition, lay first three or four coats on your work, and allow
time sufficient, between each coat, to dry. When the last is given, (...) on
another of pure and clear varnish without cinnabar, made with one part of
spirit of wine, and sour of oil of spike, and some shell-lac.

LX. A varnish to gild certain parts of stamped leathers, silvered in some
places with pewter-leaves, and otherwise adorned with running stalks of
flowers, of various colors, figures, and other sorts of embellishments.
1. Take lintseed-oil, three pounds: of that sort of varnish called Arabian
sandarac, and rough pitch equal quantities, one pound each; and saffron, half
an ounce. Instead of saffron, you had better, if you have that opportunity,
make use of the staminas of lillies, which are infinitely preferable. -- Put
all into a varnished pipkin, and set it over the fire. Take great care not to
have it burn; and to avoid it, keep continually stirring the matter with a
spatula. When you want to know whether it be, or not, sufficiently done, have a
hen's feather, just dip it in, and off quickly. If the feather be grizzled, it
is a prooff the matter has sufficiently boiled. Therefore, take it off from the
fire, and throw in one pound of well-chosen and picked hepatica aloes, in
powder. Mix well this with the spatula, and set it again on the fire, to
concoct well this addition with the rest. if you see that your matter boils and
swells, you must take it off, and let it rest a while: ^^ring which time, you
take some of the coals away. Set it ^ow again upon this more moderate fire,
stirring always, well, that all may be perfectly incorporated. As soon as this
seems to you done, you take it off, let it cool a little, and strain it through
a strong coarse cloth, and keep it for the following use.

2. Apply the silver, or pewter leaves, on the leather, with the white of an
egg, or gum-water. When these are properly laid on, give one coat of the above
mentioned varnish, quite warm, on such places as you want to appear gilt, and
set it in the sun. When dry, it looks like gold.

N. B. The Arabian sandarac, we have prescribed above, is known by some, under
the denomination of Gum of Juniper.

LXI. To imitate porphyry.
Take English brown red. If too red, add a little umber to it, or some soot.
Pound all into powder. Then have a plank, or marble stone, of a fine polish,
which you overlay with oil. Make a color composed of brown red, and a little
flat, or Venetian lake, previously grinded with gum adragant. Then, with a
largish brush, take of that color and asperse your oiled marble with it, by
striking the handle of the brush on your wrist, as the book-binders do to stain
the covers of their books. When your marble shall have been thus well speckled
all over with that red color, you let it dry. Then, taking your lump of brown
red and umber, you dilute it, make a thin paste of it, and lay it on your
speckled marble. When this is also dry, it admits of a very fine polish, and
looks like porphyry.

LXII. To imitate serpentine.
1. Take auripigment, which you grind well first with water, and next with a
little addition of indigo. Let this dry; and, when dry, reduce it to an
impalpable powder; then mix it with a little gum adragant, and make a paste of
it, as in the above receipt.

2. After this is done, take some lighter green, put a little more auripigment
with the indigo, till you come to obtain the true hue of the spots which are in
the serpentine. Of this color you take with a brush, and asperse with it a
marble piece in the same manner exactly as described in the preceding article;
and when this is dry, you lay your first prepared paste on it. -- For the rest,
do as above.

N. B. You may thus, with a brush, imitate, or even invent, all sorts of
marbles, according to your taste and fancy; and, when the first laid colors are
dry, lay your paste over them, let them dry likewise, and polish. -- For
example, have several different colors prepared as above; asperse, or mark with
each of them separately, and one after another, on some piece of glass, or well
polished marble. Then make a paste and lay it over them, of whatever color, you
will. If you will have it white, it is done with whitening, or white-chalk, and
a little mixture of yellow ocher. -- These sorts of works admit of being
overlaid with an exsiccative varnish.

CHAP. IV.
SECRETS relative to MASTICHS, CEMENTS, SEALINGWAX, etc. etc.
I. A subtle mastich to mend all sorts of broken vessels.
TAKE any quantity of white of eggs, and beat them well to a froth. Add to this
soft curd cheese, and quicklime, and begin beating a new all together. This
may be used in mending whatever you will, even glasses, and will stand both
fire and water.

II. Another.
Take rosin, yellow wax, sulphur, and cement. Sift this last very fine, and
melt all together; then use it.

III. A mastich to make rock-works.
Take six parts of Paris-plaister, and one of soot, well mixed together.

IV. An excellent mastich.
Take coarse turpentine, four ounces; friccasseed and pulverised bullock's
blood, one ounce; black pitch, four; wax, two; rosin, one; pounded glass, one;
cement, one; and sulpher, half a one. Boil all together, after having well
pounded and grinded each of them separately.

V. A mastich for broken wares.
Pound a stone jar into an impalpable powder, and add to it some white of eggs
and quicklime.

VI. Another mastich.
Take quicklime, cotton and oil, of each equal parts in weight.

VII. Another.
Take frankincense and mastich, of each half an ounce; bol armeniac and
quicklime, of each, two ounces.

VIII. A cement.
Take rosin, one ounce; grinded tile, half an ounce; mastich, four ounces.

IX. A glue to lay upon gold.
Boil an cel's skin, and a little quicklime together: when boiled gently, for
the space of half an hour, strain it, and add some white of eggs beaten:
bottle, and keep it for use. -- The method to use it after wards, is to warm it
and lay a coat of it on marble, del^t, Worcester, Stafford and any other
earthen wares, etc. and, when nearly dry, write, paint, or draw what you please
on it with a pencil, and gold in shell.

X. A size.
Take half a pound of fresh cod's tripes; boil it in two quarts of white wine,
reduced to one third. To take off the bad smell, add, while it boils, a little
cloves and cinnamon. Then, throw this size in whatever mould you please, to
make it in flakes.

XI. An exceeding good size, called Orleans size.
Take the whitest isinglass you can find; soak it in finely filtered
quicklime-water, during twenty-four hours. When that time is over, take it off,
bit by bit, and boil it in common water.

XII. A cement for delft, and other earthen wares.
Take what quantity you will of wax and rosin. Melt them together, and add,
while in fusion, a discretionable quautity of marble pounded into a very fine
powder.

XIII. Another, for the same purpose, which resists water.
Take quick lime, turpentine, and soft curd-cheese. Mix these well together;
and, with the point of a knife, put this on the edges of the broken pieces of
your ware, then join them together.

XIV. A cold cement for cisterns and fountains.
Take litharge and boil in powder, of each two pounds; yellow ochre and rosin;
of each, four ounces; mutton suet, five ounces; mastich and turpentine, of each
two ounces; oil of nuts, a sufficient quantity to render malleable. Work these
all together; and, then it is fit for use.

XV. A lute to join broken vessels.
Dissolve gum arabic in chamber-lye, over a chassingdish: stir with a stick,
till perfectly dissolved, then add an equal weight of flour, as you had of gum
arabic, and concoct the whole for one quarter of an hour, or more, if requisite.

XVI. A strong glue with soft cheese.
1. Take a cheese from Auvergne. Let it be the fattest and newest you can find,
and neither dry, nor moist; wash it in very warm water, so long as it should
remain clear; then set it to rot, in clean water, till it begins to stink. As
soon as you find it does so, boil it in water, with quick lime; and, when
dissolved into a glue, take it off from the fire, it is done.

2. If you dry some whites of eggs in the sun, and that, pounding them into
powder, you should add some of that powder with the cheese when you dissolve it
along with the lime, the glue will be so much the stronger.

N. B. Observe that no other cheese, besides that which comes from Auvergne,
has the quality requisite for this composition.

XVII. To make a strong mastich.
Take one pound of rosin; one quarter of a pound of shoe-maker's rosin, two
ounces of new wax, two of black pitch, and one of tallow. Boil all gently
together on a slow fire; and, when well incorporated together, add some
brick-dust, finely sifted, according to discretion.

N. B. The quantity of tallow is to be proportioned to the degree of dryness
you require in this composition; so that you may, on that principle,
discretionally increase, or diminish, the prescribed dose of that ingredient.

XVIII. To make corks for bottles.
Take wax, hog's lard, and turpentine, equal quantities, or thereabouts. Melt
all together, and stop your bottles with it.

XIX. To imitate rock works.
Take white wax and rosin equal parts; and brimstone, a quarter part of both,
the other two put together. Melt the whole at the same time, and throw it in
cold water. It will form itself like the scum of the sea. When you want to
apply it, warm only that part by which you design to stick it.

XX. To rub floors with, whether boards, bricks,etc.
Take a pail full of scarlet wash from the dyers, with this stuff rub your
floor by means of an old hair broom. Let it dry, and observe not to tread upon
it, till it is perfectly dry; then have from the plumber some black lead, which
is generally of a black or reddish hue, squeeze well all the knobs you may meet
with between your fingers, and rub your floor all over with it, with your
hands, then, with a rough dry brush, scrub well your floor, till it comes fine
and shiny.

XXI. A composition to make a relief fit to gild over, or even to raise, an
embroidery.
1. Take one pound of lintseed oil; sandarac, mastish, burgundy pitch,
assa-faetida, new wax, and tupentine, equal quantities, four ounces of each.

2. Pound all, and put it in a varnished new pipkin, to boil for two hours over
a slow fire. Then keep it in that same pot to make your paste at any time
afterward with it, and as you want it.

3. This paste is made as follows. Take ceruse and umber reduced into a subtle
powder, which you dilute with the above composition, in sufficient quantity to
make a sort of dough with it; observing never to make more of it at a time than
you think to employ directly; for, when dry, it becomes as hard as marble.

4. The method of asing it, is to draw, on whatever you will, whether cloth,
linen, silk, thread, plaster,etc. the outlines of what you want to have raised
in relief, as arms, trophies, figures, flowers,etc. according to your design,
or fancy. Then you fill up those sketches, and, raise them with the above
paste, while it is soft; and, when it begins to dry, you gild silver, or paint
it over as you like.

5. You may paint also the ground of those reliefs with whatever colors you
please, and enrich it with gold spangles, if you ch^se. The way to do it, is by
laying first a coat of varnish of isinglass and rosin melted together.

N. B. There is a work of this kind to be seen, at Vienna, on the great altar
of the Virgin Mary.

XXII. Sealing wax. Receipe 1st.
Take one pound of shell-lack, benjamin and black rosin, half an ounce each;
vermillion, eight drachins. The whole being melted, make your sticks on a
marble table, rubbed over with oil of sweet almonds; and take care to have done
before the wax is cold.

XXIII. Another sealing wax. Receipe 2d.
Take turpentine and sailor's pitch, six drachms of each; either shell-lac, or
dragon's blood, one: sulphur citrinum, two. Mix and incorporate all together
over the fire, and form your sticks.

XXIV. Another. Receipe 3d.
Take gum haederacea, shell-lack, sandarac of the ancients, otherwise printers'
rosin, and mastich, two ounces of each: rosin, four ounces; turpentine, half an
ounce. Mix all in a very warm bell-metal mortar, and make your sticks.

XXV. Another. Receipe 4th.
Take shell-lack and mastich, of each one ounce; dragons' blood, three;
cinnabar, half an ounce; turpentine, one. Mix all, and make your sticks.

XXVI. Another. Receipe 5th.
Take greek pitch, one pound; white mastich; five; frankincense, five ounces;
cinnabar, as much as you see it requisite to give the red color. -- Put the
pitch first on the fire to melt; next put the mastich and the powder of
frankincense; and, last of all, the cinnabar grinded with a little oil.
Incorporate it all well, and take it off from the fire to make your sticks.

XXVII. Another. Receipe 6th.
Take shell-lack, twelve ounces; mastich and rosin, of each, one ounce;
dragons' blood, three; minium, half an ounce. Dissolve the shell-lack in
vinegar; add, if you will, some turpentine oil and sulphur, to the quantity of
four ounces of each, and two of ammoniac salt. The whole being melted, makes as
fast as you can your sticks of the form and size you like.

XXVIII. Another. Receipe 7th. Excessively good.
1. Take shell-lack,etc.etc. pound them all into a very fine and impalpable
powder. Then have two wooden pallets present upon them, before the fire some
powder of one sort, to melt, then move it, and stir it with the said pallets.
Take again of another powder in the same manner, and mix it in the same way
before the fire with the first. Then another, and another, till they are all,
by this method, perfectly well amalgamated together.

2. Have now some cinnabar in powder, which you put in a pan with water. In
that water and cinnabarpowder, set to infuse, or only touch your incoporated
gums, to make the composition take color. When thus sufficiently colored,
take it out of the water with both your hands and the wooden pallets, and have
a person to help you. This, having wetted his hand, will draw some of the said
gum, and handling it on a table, will form the sticks. -- For two pounds of
gums, two ounces of cinnabar are wanted.

XXIX. Another. Receipe 8th.
Take gum-lack, four ounces; cinnabar, half an ounce; rosin, four and a half.
Melt the rosin with a little vinegar, and skim it. Then take it out of the
fire; then mix it with the lack and vermilion, both well pulverized; and, when
the composition begins to cool, form your sticks with it.

XXX. An excellent sealing wax, by Girardot. Receipe 9th.
1. Put four ounces of rosin, and four and a half of whitening, and melt them
together, in a non-varnished pipkin, over kindled coals. While this is in
fusion, have another pot, similar to this, in which you keep two ounces of
shell-lack, in dissolution with vinegar. Now steep ^ wooden stick in the first
pot, and another in the other pot; then, over a chafingdish, turn quickly, one
over another, the ends of your two sticks together, to mix and incorporate well
what matter they shall have brought along with them from each pipkin. And when,
after having turned them thus a reasonable time, you see both matters are well
embodied, steep them, at different times, in the following liquor, to color
them.

XXXI. A color for the above wax.
1. Grind upon a porphyry table, two ounces of cinnabar, with a sufficient
quantity of nut-oil, to make it a liquid. In this you dip your sticks, at
several times; and take care, in doing it, the composition should not grow
cold. Wherefore you must, each time you steep them in the color, carry them
again over the chasingdish, to keep them in a due state of malleability. And
when you find the matter sufficiently tinged with red, form your sticks as
usual, on a marble, or other well polished table.

CHAP V.
SECRETS relative to the ART of GLASS MANUFACTORY, and the making Compositions
to imitate PRECIOUS STONES, commonly known, in this country, by the name of
FRENCH PASTE.
I. The general composition of the paste to make spurious precious stones, such
as Emeralds, Saphires, Rubies,etc.
1. PUT three ounces of Poitiers' burnt lead in a sufficient quantity of water
to have this rise about three fingers above the other. Beat next both together
in the bottle, and then let it settle. Draw, by inclination, this water, as
soon as the lead is separated from it, in some other vessel. It will serve you
to wet the inside of the glazed earthen pot in which you are to put your
ingredients, and prevent their sticking to it.

2. Dry, now, three ounces of minium, and mix it with the aforesaid burnt-lead,
one ounce of calc^^^^ crystal, and one scruple of copper filings. All these
things being previously well pulverised, and mixed, put them in a glazed
pipkin, which you shall have hardened, and wetted after wards insidely with the
abovementioned lead-water. Cover it; then put it in the furnace of a
glass-maker, three or four days, or in a wind-furnace for one day only. At the
end of that time you shall find you have got a very fine white paste, which you
may cut as you like.

3. To make this paste yellow, you are to substitute, iron filings for the
copper ones: and to imitate rubies, substitute cinnabar.

II. To make Emeralds, and other sorts of precious stones.
1. Dissolve some alkaline salt in common water, and filter it through a hat;
then recover your salt by means of evaporation. Dissolve it again, filter and
evaporate as before, and repeat this operation three different times. Then
pulverise this salt after the third evaporation, and put it by. Dissolve one
ounce of verdigrise in vinegar, and strain it; then put it by likewise. Have
next, fine crystal, which you grind and sift very fine in an apothecary's
sieve, and after the same manner as they do the prepared crystal.

2. To that ounce of the said verdigrise, put two and a half of the crystal
powder, and two only of the pulverised alkaline salt.

3. These three powders put in a small glazed pipkin, and lute it so well that
no air can absolutely get in to the contained ingredients. Let it dry for three
days or more; then put it in a potter's kiln, for twenty-four hours. After that
time you will find in the pot a matter perfectly similar to the diamonds in
beauty, and which you may cut and work in the same manner. This composition is
susceptible of admitting of all sorts of colors, and of being made, of course,
to imitate all sorts of stones, in varying accordingly one of the drugs in the
following manner.

4. For example. If you want to make a ruby, instead of the above mentioned
verdigrise, which make an emerald, put some cinnabar. For saphires, put
lapislazuli; and for hyacinths, coral: all which are to be prepared, and used,
like the verdigrise, for which they are substituted.

5. The finest paste for making the artificial stones is to be composed with
crystals, pebbles, or Bohemian topazes. For, if you make your composition with
glass and lead only, the stones will be deficient in weight and hardness.

6. The pebbles, and the abovementioned topazes are calcined just the same way
as crystal. You have only to mix afterward with these powders what color you
please. Minium and verdigrise give the emerald color. Ceruse and saffron of
Mars, that of hyacinth. Minium and ceruse make a chrysolite. With the zaphera,
of lapis lazuli, or, again, with ammoniac salt and silver, you obtain a
sapphire. They who know how to extract the gold sulphur from that precious
metal, declare that they can by means of this solary and incombustible sulphur,
give the crystal the most beautiful color of rubies.

III. To calcine calcedony-stone and crystal, in order to compose precious
stones with them.
1. Dissolve calcined tartar in about half a pint of water, then strain it into
a basin. Now, in an iron spoon with a long handle, make red hot your crystal,
or calcedony-stone; and when red hot, throw them in the said tartar water. If
you take them out, redden and extinguish them again six or seven times in the
same manner, they will be perfectly well calcined. After having reduced them
into an impalpable powder, you may use that powder, in due proportion, in
whatever mixture you will, to give them a color according to what you want to
make. If for emeralds, for example, the composition prescribed in the above
article will do very well.

2. Observe however, that if you intend to make emeralds, the pulverisation of
your calcined crystals must be made in a brass mortar; while, if you intend to
make (...) must use an iron mortar, and have a great (...) to pound the
crystals in a brass one.

IV. To make emeralds.
With two ounces of crystal, duly prepared as before directed, join one of
borax; eight grains of tin-glass calk, and twenty of magnesia. Mix all well
together in a brass, or bell-metal mortar, and put it in a crucible: cover it
with its lid, and lute it well. When the lute is perfectly dry, place the
crucible for one or two hours, at most, in a potter's fire; then take it out,
and let the composition cool. Break the crucible, and you will find an
excessively fine composition to make emeralds.

N. B. Tin-glass calx is nothing else but a dissolution of tin-glass in
aquafortis, tempered afterward with common filtered water. -- Observe also
that you must not neglect stirring and mixing well the calx and magnesia
together, before you incorporate it with the crystal.

V. For Topazes.
Two ounces of crystal, one of borax, eight grains of tincture of Mars. Mix all
well in an iron mortar, then proceed as before directed for emeralds.

VI. For Sapphires.
Crystal, two ounces; borax, one: ultramarine, eight grains; and magnesia
twelve. Mix well, then proceed as above.

VII. For Amethysts.
With two ounces of crystal, one of borax, and twelve of magnesia, you mix
twelve grains of ultramarine; then go on as above.

VIII. For Hyacinths.
Take two ounces of crystal, one of borax, four or five grains of saffron of
Mars, and as much of magnesia, then proceed as above.

IX. For Rubies.
Dutch red jasper, fix drachins; pulverised crystal, two; minium, twenty-four
grains. Reduce the whole into a subtle powder, and keep it seven hours at most
in the potter's fire, as above directed.

X. Another way to make emeralds.
Take one pound of pebbles, calcined and prepared as before directed; salt of
tartar, ten ounces; saffron of mars, five times as much as you can hold on a
Spanish real, and the fifth part of this whole quantity of brass finely
pulverised. -- When all is well mixed together in a mortar, and put in a
crucible duly luted, etc. put it in the fire for six days: and, having taken it
out, see whether the composition is fine or not. If too deep in color, add a
little pebble and salt of tartar properly prepared: if too clear, add some
crocus or saffron of mars, and brass, to raise it in color.

XI. Another composition for Hyacinths.
To your prepared crystal, add ten pounds of salt of tartar, about one spoonful
of white wine tartar, and a little bran.

XII. Another for Rubies.
Prepare one pound of pebbles, or crystal, and add to it a quarter of an ounce
of dragon's blood, mix all well and put in a crucible.

Observe, that if you set this composition longer than two days in a fusion, it
loses its color. As soon therefore, as you see it has acquired a fine degree,
take off the crucible and let it cool.

Neither am I of opinion, that the above emerald composition should be too long
in fusion; though, after all, the crocus-martis, and the brass, are much more
able to stand the fire than the dragon's blood.

XIII. To make diamonds.
Mix with a silver spoon, six parts of fine white calcined pebbles, reduced
into an impalpable powder, with four of the whitest and best pulverised tartar,
and seven of alkaline salt.

Put this in a crucible made of the same earth as is used in glass
manufactories, and put it in their fire. The longer it remains there, the
harder and finer the composition will be. It must be there seven months at
least, before it can acquire a tolerable fine luster.

Note. That the powders we have mentioned to make the above composition with,
are all to be lifted through a very fine sieve, before they are used.

XIV. A water to harden artificial stones.
Prepare and calcine, as before directed for crystal, some small bits of
calaminary stone. Pulverise them, and then place that powder in a very damp
cellar, till reduced into water. With this water, knead some Roman, Dutch, or
Hungarian vitriol, quite crude without reddening it in the fire. When this
paste, which is to be soft, is made, put it in a retort, and distill what water
will come from it. With this other water, and some barley flour, make another
paste quite hard. In this paste put your lump of composition, or even the
stones themselves, which are come from it, ready cut and polished, when they
come out of the wheel, and make as a dumpling of the whole. Send it to the oven
to be put in, and taken out along with the bread. When your paste comes back
from the oven, open it, and you will find your stones as hard as natural ones.

Suppose they should not prove quite so hard as you wish them to be, repeat
this operation once more, and they will then, most certainly, be as hard as
true diamonds.

XV. A water, or rather a dye, to put under diamonds, both true and false, when
they are set.
Gather the smoke of a candle in a cup, and dilute it with mastich oil, so as
to make a thick mixture of it. Put some of this under your stone, whether fine
or not, when you set it.

XVI. How to make white sapphires, to imitate true diamonds.
1. Jewellers generally take a white sapphire, and put it on the fire in a
crucible, in which they bury it under steel filings.

2. Some go still farther, and rather choose gold filings; fancifully thinking,
that as this metal is far more precious than the other, it is likewise
infinitely better for the operation, and ought of course to be preferred. But,
deceived in their conjectures, as they must unavoidably be, who have no other
guide to direct their judgment, experience has since shown, that maugre the
inferiority of steel to gold, yet the former metal's filings are for the
following purpose, a great deal superior to those of the latter.

3. Bury your sapphire in a crucible, under steel filings. Set it on the fire,
and let the filings become so red hot as to be nearly melting, but you must
take care they do not melt. Let your sapphire lay thus under the filings, and
in that condition, a little while. These take them off, and pick out your
sapphire, to examine it. If its whiteness does not please you yet, set it is
the filings again, and renew this operation not only once more, but as many
times as you will find it necessary to make it acquire that beautiful degree
which you want your sapphire to have. Then you set and color them as we said
before.

XVII. A better way of doing the same.
Mix, first, together, equal quantities of white enamel, finely pulverised, and
steel filings. Have, next, a little of the same pulverised enamel, without
mixture of filings, and make a kind of paste of it, with your spittle. Put your
white sapphire in this paste, with which wrap it up well, and set it a-drying
in the oven. The this ball all round, and at one of the ends of it, with a very
fine wire. Then bury this ball in a crucible, under the first mixture of steel
filings and enamel powder, and put it on the fire, which you will push to the
degree of nearly fusing the enamel, taking care, however, it shall not
positively happen. Then with one end of the wire, pull out the sapphire from
the crucible, and see whether its whiteness please you or not. If the latter,
begin again the same way as before, and repeat this operation till you obtain
the desired point.

XVIII. A color to make Rubies.
1. Melt in a crucible one ounce of mars-regulus. Throw in it a similar
quantity of copper, and as much of gold. Let the whole be in fusion till
reduced to one ounce only. Then add another ounce of mars regulus, and one of
copper, and proceed as before. Repeat this operation seven times over.

2. Now take the lump which you find at the bottom of the crucible, and which
ought to be as red as rubies; throw it in four ounces of granulated silver in
fusion, and previously amalgamated with sixteen ounces of purified and animated
mercury. Having thus put on this mixture, the gold prepared, as we said, put
all in digestion for fifteen days, over ember ashes only, for fear the mercury
should sublimate. After that time is over, separate the mercury by
distillation, and test the rest on the coppel.

3. This composition, projected on such crystals as are in fusion in the
glass-maker's pot, will give you the most beautiful ruby-paste which you can
possibly imagine or wish for.

XIX. To whiten Amethysts.
Let a glass bottle be almost, but not quite, filled with five or six ounces of
purified nitre. In the nitre bury your amethysts. Then let this bottle itself
be entirely buried also in a great iron pot, filled with sand, so that the air
cannot possibly come at it, and give it a fire capable only to put the nitre in
fusion, but not to make it red hot, else it will be ruined. Let this ^^main in
a fusible state for five or six days. Then (...) the sand cool itself naturally
and gradually. When quite cold, take the bottle out of the sand, break it,
(...) you will find the amethysts of a fine white: and, as they are cold, you
may, without any difficulty, throw (...) in water to get the nitre away from
about them. Should any of them prove not quite so white, you may save them for
another time, to make them undergo the same operation along with some others.
Suppose your glass bottle should unluckily come to break, and the nitre should
run off, then you must absolutely take it out; for the amethy^^^, without
nitre, would certainly be hurt by the fire.

XX. To make Emeralds light and hard.
1. Calcine, six different times, rock-crystal, and plunge it as many times in
cold water. Pound it (...) stone of the same mineral, with a mullar of the
(...) kind, and pass this powder through a fine silk sieve.

2. To two ounces of this powder, join ten grains of scories of copper, well
cleansed, and three times calcined. Pound, and mix well, these two ingredients
in ^ brass mortar. Add four ounces of the best and finest borax, and previously
well pounded in powder by itself. Incorporate all together. Put this in a
crucible, covered with its lid, and well luted. Place it, after the lute is
perfectly dry, in a reverberating fire for (...) or eight hours at most, and
let the fire be very clear. At the end of that time stop the ash-hole, and all
the openings of the furnace. Let this composition become perfectly cool, for
fear it should bubble, or otherwise blow. Then break the crucible, and you will
find a beautiful emerald paste, which may be given to the lapidary to be cut.

XXI. To give crystal a perfect hardness.
Dissolve what quantity you like of urine salt in clear water. Filter and
evaporate to dryness. Then make alternate strata super strata of this salt, and
powder crystal in a very strong crucible, which you set afterward for eight
days in a glass-maker's furnace. After that time, being cooled gradually, you
may take it out, and get the composition cut, which will prove excessively hard.

XXII. A cement to render crystal like diamonds, and give the sapphires of
Alenson a hardness to cut glass with ease.
Make a strong dough with sifted barley-flour and petroly (or rock-oil). Divide
this paste in two equal parts. In one of them range your stones, so that they
should not touch one another. With the other part of your paste cover this.
Wrap up the whole with a good lute, and give it a wheel fire for four or five
hours, gradually increasing the strength of the fire between every two hours.
Then you will have a lamp of stones, which will sparkle like true diamonds.

XXIII. To make crystal throw off as much fire as diamonds.
Take lodestone and new quicklime, equal parts, two pounds of each;
sulphur-vivum, half-a-pound. Put all in powder, and stratify according to art,
in a crucible, your crystal, ready cut, with this powder. Place this crucible
in a glass-maker's furnace, and after it has remained there for three times
twenty-four hours, you will find your stones very fine, sparkling, and
perfectly like the diamonds of the ancient roch.

XXIV. Another way of making diamonds.
Grind on marble, equal quantities in weight of calcined silver, and French
lodestone. Stratify, in a crncible, your crystal stones, ready cut in
imitation of diamonds, with this powder. Cover it with another crucible, and
lute it well. Then set it in a glass-maker's furnace for one month.

XXV. To give the white Amythyst the color of a true diamond.
Wrap some amethysts in a paste of pure white enamel, prepared as directed in
Art. xvi. Place them in a crucible, which you cover with a tile, and put in a
potter's or glass-maker's farnace for twice twenty-four hours. Let it be always
red hot all that space of time. Then take it off from the fire, and let it
cool. When these amethysts shall have been new polished, they will look, like
and be judged by every one for true diamonds.

XXVI. To imitate chalcedony.
Put (...) a crucible, in a glass-maker's fire, some very fine crystal powder.
When in fusion, add a little calcined silver to it; mix it well, and set it in
fusion for twenty-four hours, then let it cool. When you take off your matter,
you will find it imitates perfectly well chalcedony, part of it being bright,
and the other a little more doll.

XXVII. To make a crysolite.
Project, on crystal, melted in a strong crucible, six times its quantity of
iron scories. Keep this thus in an ardent furnace for the space of three days.
Then let all cool. When you take that composition from the crucible, you will
find: it answer your expectation.

XXVIII. To make diamonds with jargons.
1. Put in a crucible, equal quantities, well mixed, of iron-filings, pounded
and finely sifted, and powder of white wood's coals. In this mixture, plunge
and bury your jargons and let none appear above. Give, first, a small fire to
the crucible, and increase it gradually, till the jargons become red-hot. Keep
them in that state for a certain length of time; then let the fire go off
gradually, in the same progressive manner in which you had increased it before.
When done, and all is cold, take out your jargons, which you will find have
lost their first color. To give them the true water peculiar to fine diamonds,
proceed as follows.

2. Take the powder of coals as before mentioned, and an equal quantity of
minium. Put your jargons in the center of that powder in a crucible as before,
observing to increase the heat and diminish it, just as in the preceding
operation. When all is cold, you will find your jargons as fine and beautiful
as true and natural diamonds.

XXIX. To make what they call Doublets in Rubies and Emeralds, as they do at
Milan.
1. Fix on the point of a knife a large piece of mastich. Heat it before the
fire; there will immediately run a drop as white as pearl. This is called
mastich in drops.

2. Now if you want to make an emerald, you must dye this drop of mystich with
a little verdigrise diluted in oil, and a little addition of wax, if required.
Then if it prove too thick, add a little water to it.

3. If it be for a ruby, take equal quantities of gum-arabic, alumen
saccarinum, and crude roch-alum; boil all in common water; then add to it a
little Brasil (...) out very thin and small, and let it boil again all together
for a while. You may add some alumen catinum, if you choose; which will darken
your color in proportion to the quantity of it you put in; then plunge the drop
of mastich above mentioned in that liquor, and thus give it the red dye.

4. Have now two pieces of crystal ready cut by the wheel. Let them be both of
the most perfect flat surface, and of the most exquisite fineness and precision
in dimensions of their sides, when laid one over another, with this only
exception, that the crystal intended to be the upper one, should be a little
thinner than that which is intended to be laid under. Put each of these pieces
on an iron plate over red-hot cinders, and set them thus till the crystal
becomes very hot. Then with the above red dyed drop of mastich which you hold
at the end of a stick, and have a little softened before the fire, you rub,
gently, the upper surface of the piece of crystal, intended to be the under
one, till you see it has acquired a sufficient degree of redness, according to
your liking. Then taking, with small pincers, the other piece of crystal, quite
hot, you lay it on the former, and they will both stick to each other without
occasioning the least obscurity in the luster of the rubies, which will be
equally clear and transparent on both sides.

5. In the very same manner you proceed for making the emerald. Therefore, when
either of these two operations is accomplished, your stone is ready to be set
with a red tinsel under it, if a ruby; or a green one if an emerald.

XXX. To soften crystal.
Redden it in the fire; and when full of fire, plunge it in mutt^n and lamb's
blood mixed and warmed together. Reiterate this two or three times, and it will
be soft.

XXXI. Another receipt to soften crystal, or any other colored stone, so that
you may cut it like cheese; and restore it afterward to its primary hardness.
1. Take, in the month of August, goose's and goat's blood. Let each of them
dry, till very hard. Then, when you want to soften your stones, take an equal
quantity of each blood, pulverise it and put it in a pot, then pour over a
strong lie made of pearl ashes. Leave it so for a while, stirring all wall and
often: then add about a pint of strong vinegar. In this preparation, if you set
your stones, and warm it a little over the fire, they will become so soft that
you may take, and cut or form them afterward as you will.

2. To restore them again to their former hardness, put them in cold water, and
let them there lie for about one hour and a quarter, it will be quite
sufficient.

3. But to give them their luster again, you must take antimony in powder,
spread it on a very smooth leaden table, then polish your stones on this. It
will restore them to their brightness as before.

XXXII. Another equally useful to soften crystal and steel.
Make a strong lie of quick lime and peal ashes. Run it nine or ten times more
over new lime and new pearl ashes, each time. Then put a-soaking, in this
preparation, any piece of crystal or steel, for the space of twenty-four hours
only, and you will see what a surprising degree of softness they will have
acquired by it.

XXXIII. A paste, which will procure as beautiful Emeralds as natural ones.
Calcine, six different times, rock-crystal, and plunge it, as many times, in
pure cold water. Grind it (...) powder, on a rock-crystal stone, with a-mulle^
of the same. When you have rendered the powder very fine and impalpable, to one
pound of it, add another of salt of tartar, drawn from red tartar, and mix all
well. Join to this, sixty grains of red copper, and fifteen of silver, both in
shell, but grinded separately. Now mix these two last powders with the former,
on a marble stone, and put all together in a clean and double nealed crucible.
Lute it well with its lid, and when the lute is perfectly dry, put the
crucible, for six days and a half, on a clear, but gentle fire: then increase
the fire till the crucible becomes red hot, place it immediately in the ardent
and glass-melting furnace, and keep it there, in the same degree of heat, for a
whole month, without interruption. Then let the crucible cool gradually in that
very furnace, which is done by letting the fire go out of itself, having
previously stopped all the holes and openings of the said furnace. When you
come to take off the crucible, and break it, you will find a beautiful matter,
of the finest green, which is fit to cut by the lapidary.

Note. Be careful of this composition, and set a great value on it, for it has
all the merit and advantatages of the true emerald. It vies with it in weight,
in color, in hardness. In short, the greatest connoisseurs cannot distinguish
these emeralds from the finest real ones.

XXXIV. Another way of making Emeralds.
1. Take two large transparent river pebbles, or (...) crystal pebbles. Calcine
and sift six grains of (...), and two drachms six grains of salt of tartar,
p^^verised and purified in the following manner.

2. Calcine the tartar to whiteness; throw it in water, and warm it to
ebullition. But, before it boils, it will throw a scum, which must be carefully
skimmed o^^, as it is a prejudicial unctuosity. When all the scum is well off,
evaporate the water, till what is on the fire becomes into a consistence like
honey. Now add as much cold water as there was before. Heat it again to
ebullition; and, before it boils, skim well against the new unctuosity which it
will throw out, then boil to the consistence of honey. Repeat this operation
eight or ten different times running, adding always new water each time, which
you still skim, boil, and evaporate, each time as prescribed for the first. At
the tenth time, let the water you put in be first filtered once or twice
through a paper, then vaporise the water entirely, and you will have a very
fine and pure salt of tartar. By these means you purge the tartar of all its
unctuosity, which would make the emerald scale and flaw on the lapidary's wheel
while it is cutting.

3. Take this matter, pound and grind it with a brass pestle and mortar. Sift
it in a very fine silk sieve. Pound anew what shall not have passed through
the sieve, and sift it again, and so on till you have reduced all into an
impalpable powder. Put it now in a crucible, as in the above articles, and
place it in a melting-glass furnace for twenty-four hours only, and your matter
will be done and ready for use.

XXXV. To whiten imperfect diamonds, or those which have been discolored.
Make red hot, and calcine in the fire, a loadstone, and plunge it in the
strongest vinegar; which you repeat eight or ten times. Then, with
barley-flour, pulverised verdigrise, and this vinegar, make a strong paste, in
which you wrap up your diamonds. Dry, first, this paste by a gentle fire; then
give it a pretty smart one for four hours.

XXXVI. To counterfeit diamonds.
1. Melt by means of fire, some fine transparent pebbles. Grind them next into
a very fine powder, then set this powder again a-melting on the fire. Put your
stones afterward in a paste of barley-flour, and bake under ashes; the
diamonds will be done.

2. To give them a proper water, nothing else is to be done, but put them in
aquavitae, which having set fire to, you let burn out entirely. By that
operation they acquire the right color of diamonds.

XXXVII. Various dies for precious stones.
1. Dragon's blood in drops, pounded and sifted in alcohol, then dissolved in
spirit of wine of six rectifications will give you the color for the rubies.

2. That of the topaz is made with gamboge dissolved in the same spirit of wine
as before, and put in a mattress to evaporate to consistence of honey; then it
is fit and kept for use.

3. For emeralds, fixed green verditure dissolved, and vaporised as above, will
give this dye.

4. The same mode of proceeding, in respect to imitation of other stones, will
give you the color you may want for that purpose, if you take care to choose and
draw, secundum artem, the dye from each of the colors fit for that object, and
then apply it to your paste or composition in the following manner.

5. When the dye you intend to use is ready, have a crucible, and bore a little
hole at the bottom of it. Turn it down, that is to say, its bottom upwards. Set
your cut crystal on that hole. Make a gradual wheel-fire round it. While your
crucible heats, make some small common pebbles red-hot in the fire, and throw
them in your liquor to give it a certain degree of heat, and prevent the
calcination of your crystal. And, when this is sufficiently hot, plunge it in
your dye, thus prepared, and it will take it amazingly well.

XXXVIII. A color for glasses and enamels.
Take Roman vitrol calcined to whiteness in the sun, three times wetted with
brandy, and three times dried. Now calcine it in the fire to redness, and push
the fire for three days to the highest degree. Then, at the bottom of the
retort you will find a sulphur of a dry rose color, very dark, and deprived of
all saline particles. You may use it after the method prescribed in the
preceding article, for giving any glass, or enamel, a fine color of rubies.

XXXIX. Another ruby color.
Melt in a crucible one ounce of crystal, and throw on it the same quantity in
weight of oil of mars, otherwise, oil of antimony with two grains of virgin
gold. Whatever remains fixed in the crucible is the enamel.

XL. Another of the invention of Saint Marie, the enameller.
File and put in a mattress a gold ducat, with two ounces of aquafortis, and one
of ammoniac salt to dissolve the gold. To facilitate the dissolution, place the
mattress on ember ashes. Then take two pounds of silver sand, one of salt, one
of arsenic, and six of saltpetre. Pulverise each separately, and, being
afterward mixed and put in a crucible, pour over it the dissolution of gold,
which is in the mattress. This crucible being put in a melting glass furnace for
twelve hours, will give the finest red for rubies which can be found out.

Note. The enameller Sainte-Marie used to sell it at three half-crowns a pound;
though, for the expense of one crown only, he could make two pounds of it.

XLI. A composition which is the fundamental basis of all enamels.
1. Grind on marble, and sift through a very fine sieve, equal quantities of
lead and pewter-calx. Put it in a varnished pipkin filled over with water. Boil
it some while; then pour it, by inclination, in another vessel, Put new water,
to boil again over the calx, and decant it as before, on the first water: which
process you repeat over again, till you have entirely dissolved all the calx.
If some part of the metal remain at the bottom, too gross to be entirely
carried by the waters, it must be put in a melting-glass furnace to calcine,
having care to take out, in proportion as it turns into calx, the upper part of
the matter. Then, when it is all calcined, you continue dissolving it, by means
of boiling water, as you did the first. When you have got all your waters of
dissolution vaporise them over a flow fire; and particularly toward the end of
the evaporation, have a singular care that the fire should not be too fierce,
for fear of spoiling your calx, which then remains at the bottom, very fine and
subtilized.

2. To twenty-five pounds of this calx add an equal weight of frit, made of
tarras, or white sand, well pounded and sifted through a very fine sieve, and
four ounces of white salt of tartar, pounded and sifted in the same manner. Put
these ingredients in a melting-glass furnace; melt and purge them there for ten
hours. Then, having taken the pot off from the fire, take out of it the matter,
which, after having well pulverised, keep in a close and dry place, where dust
cannot come at it. -- Such is the first and principal matter to be used in the
composition of enamels, of whatever sort of color you may want to make them.

XLII. To make an enamel as white as milk.
1. To six pounds weight of the matter just described, put forty-eight grains
of magnesia, prepared as follows.

Put in an iron spoon, to the reverberating fire the bits of magnesia, rough as
it comes from the mine. -- When it is whitened, pour good vinegar over it, then
break it small and wash it several times with warm water. Dry, pulverise, and
sift it, then preserve it in a covered pot for use.

3. This magnesia, and primary enamel matter, you put in the above prescribed
proportion, in a crucible, on a glass-melting fire, to be there melted and
purged by a very brisk and clear fire, which is very soon done. Then throw the
whole contents into clear water; dry it, melt it again, as before, and throw it
in water again, and so on. This operation you are to repeat three different
times. The matter being thus well purified, if you find it not quite white
enough, add a little more magnesia, and begin the same process as before. Then
take it off from the fire, and make it into small round cakes. Such is the
method of preparing the enamel to paint with on gold, and other metals.

XLIII. To make an enamel, turquoise color.
1. Put six pounds of the said enamel primary matter in a varnished crown-glass
pot. Melt and purge it three times as usual, and prescribed in the preceding
article. On the third time project, at four distinct and separate distances of
time, three ounces of scories of copper, prepared as directed in Art. xliv.
mixed with ninety six grains of zaffar prepared the same way exactly, and in
the same manner as the magnesia, and forty-eight of that very magnesia, in
subtle powder. Stir well the matter on the fire, at the time of each
projection, with a long-handled iron hook; and, when the color seems to be to
your liking, take it out of the fire, and make it into small round cakes as
usual. This will make a most beautiful turquoise enamel.

XLIV. How to prepare the scories of copper for the above purpose.
This preparation is very simple. Wash, first, the scories well, and set them
to calcine three days at the entrance of a reverberating furnace. Then grind
this and sift it. Calcine again as before, grind and sift the same, repeating
this operation three different times. -- When finished, it is called a Calx of
copper. Of this stuff you are to mix three ounces with forty-eight grains of
prepared magnesia, and ninety-six of zaffar also prepared, for a projection on
enamel's primary matter, to make a fine sort of turquoise color.

XLV. To make blue enamel.
Put in a varnished crown-glass pot, in a melting-glass furnace, four pounds of
common primary enamel matter; two ounces of zaffar; and forty-eight grains of
prepared scories of copper, all previously well pulverised and mixed. When this
composition is in good fusion, throw it in water, then dry it, and put it again
in the same pot. Leave it there till the matter is well incorporated, and
proceed as directed for the others.

XLVI. To make green enamel.
1. Melt and purge, by the glass-melting fire, and in a varnished crown-glass
pot, four pounds of the primary enamel matter. Leave it there twelve hours;
after which you throw it in water, dry it, and put it again in the same fire,
for the same time, to cleanse it well.

2. Grind into a very subtle powder some of the aforesaid scories of copper,
and some scories of iron. Mix these two powders together, viz. two ounces of
the former, and forty-eight grains only of the latter; which, being divided
into three different parcels, project, and three distinct distances of time, on
the enamel matter in fusion, stirring well with an iron hook at the time of
each projection, that the color may better incorporate; and in twelve hours
afterward you will find you have green enamel.

XLVII. To make a black shining enamel.
Take of our primary enamel matter in powder, four pounds: red tartar, four
ounces; and of our, prepared magnesia, in subtle powder, two. Put all this
into a varnished pipkin, so large that all these powders together shall not
come higher than the third part of the vessel, as this matter, when melted,
swells up very much. When in perfect fusion, throw it into water; take it out
to dry, then put it again in the pot, and purify it thus as before. Do so till
you find it sufficiently purified; then take the pot off the fire, and the
matter out of the pot.

XLVIII. To make an enamel purple color.
Reduce into subtle powder, and mix well together, six pounds of our primary
and general enamel matter; three ounces of prepared magnesia, and six of
scories of copper, prepared as before mentioned. Melt and purify all this in a
varnished pipkin, by placing it in a melting-glass furnace. When in good
fusion, throw this matter in water; dry it, and put it again in the same pot to
purify it anew by the same process. If you find your color to your liking, then
take the pot off from the fire, and keep your enamel for use.

XLIX. Another.
Take six ounces of our general matter, two of prepared magnesia, and
forty-eight grains of the aforesaid preparation of scories of copper.
Pulverise, and proceed as above. This composition will give you a very fine
purple enamel, fit for all sorts of works which goldsmiths will employ it in.

L. A yellow enamel.
Take, and reduce into a very fine powder, six pounds of the general matter;
three ounces of tartar, and seventy-two grains of prepared magnesia. Put all
into a pot large enough not to lose any thing of the matter when it comes to
swell at the time of its fusion. As for the rest, proceed as above.

LI. To make a crystaline matter, which serves as a basis to red-color enamels.
1. Take twenty-four pounds of salt drawn from -- by trituration, lotion,
filtration, and evaporation; and sixteen pounds of white tartar, that is to
say, of white and transparent river pebbles, calcined and reduced into an
impalpable powder. Both these ingredients being equally reduced into a subtle
powder, mix and wet them so as to make a hard paste of them, of which you will
form small thin cakes. Put these cakes in pipkins, and place them in a lime, or
potter's kiln, where they are to calcine for ten hours.

2. When these cakes are well calcined, reduce them into a subtle powder, and
add four pounds of lead and pewter calx (prepared and subtilized as before
directed p. 93. Art. xli.) and as much white tartar also calcined and purified
by lotion, etc. (as directed p. 90. Art. xxxiv. n. I.) These three last
ingredients being reduced into a subtle powder, put them in a varnished
pipkin, and place them in a melting-glass furnace, there to be melted and
purified, by throwing the composition, when in fusion, into water, then drying,
etc. three different times; after which the whole is completed.

LII. How to make a fine preparation of fusible magnesia, to be employed in the
making of red enamels.
1. Take what ever quantity of magnesia you please. Add to it an equal quantity
of nitre prepared by lotion, filtration, and evaporation. Set this matter in a
pipkin to calcine for twenty-four hours, in a furnace by a reverberating fire.
Then take it out, and wash it with warm water, to cleanse it from all the
nitre, and dry it. When this magnesia shall be dry, it will be of a very fi^e
red.

2. Now add to it its equal weight of ammoniac salt. Grind all well on a marble
stone, watering it with distilled vinegar, so that it comes into a sort of
clear paste, or color for painting.

3. Then dry this matter; and, having pulverised it, put it a-subliming in a
strong glass mattress, with a long neck and a large belly. Give it the
sublimating fire for twelve hours; break the mattress; weigh first the sublimed
part, and mix it with what remained at the bottom; add now as much new ammoniac
salt as you had weight of sublimation. Grind anew all these matters well
together, wetting them with vinegar, then dry and sublime again as before.
Renew this operation so many times as will be requisite, that the magnesia
remain at last in a state of insensibility at the bottom of the mattress.

4. This liquid is fit for staining crystal of a very fine ruby hue; and when
employed with enamels, will render them of a most beautiful red.

LIII. To make a red enamel, of a most bright and beautiful hue.
Put twenty ounces of the above fusible magnesia to every one pound of the
chrystaline matter. (Art. li.) in good fusion purify the whole well, and try
the color.

Note. According to the proportion of the quantity of the fusible magnesia you
put in this composition, you raise or lower the hue of your enamel. And, if
carried to the degree of rubies, it will prove to be a most bright and
beautiful one.

LIVE. To make an enamel, true Balais-ruby color.
Take ten pounds of our crystaline matter. Purge it in the melting glass
furnace, by fusing it, then throwing it in water, drying, pulverising, and
melting again, etc. three times. Put it now again for the fourth time in
fusion; and, when in that state, give it a purple color by means of a proper
quantity of fusible magnesia, as mentioned in the preceding article. After this
is done, project on it, and eight different and distinct distances of time, as
much calcined alum, in subtle powder, as you will find requisite to give it
that degree of red hue you desire; which to imitate the Balais ruby color, must
be fuller and deeper than that of the clear rubies.

LV. To make a bright enamel, escarbouncle color.
1. Take very fine gold, one part, Purify it again and open it in the following
manner. Dissolve it in good regal water; distill it from the gold and
recohobate it six different times. After this, take your gold powder from the
vessel, put it in a crucible, covered and luted as usual, and place it in a
furnace to the reverberating fire, where it shall be left to calcine till it
becomes a very high and deep red, which cannot happen till after several days
calcination.

2. Then, by projecting this part of well opened gold on twenty of the
beforementioned crystaline matter, previously purged according to direction,
and put in a state of good fusion, an enamel will be obtained, of the most
beautiful, transparent, escarbouncle color.

LVI. To give rock crystal the various colors of topaz, rubies, opal,
heliotrope, and others.
It is no less true than surprising, that all these different colors are the
product of the same materials, and are operated in the same vessel, and at the
same time. But as the action of these metallic minerals, which tinge crystal in
that operation, is stronger, in proportion to the quantity of similar spirits
they meet with in ascending to the top of the crucible, so the colors acquire
also more strength and vivacity.

1. To make this operation, take two ounces of orpine, of a gold or
saffron-like color; and as much crystaline arsenic; one of crude antimony, and
as much of ammoniac salt. Pulverise and mix all well. Now make a bed of this
powder in a large crucible; over it lay another of rock crystal in bits,
choosing the smallest for the first, or bottom bed; and the largest and purest
for the higher and last beds. Make thus, strata super strata, of your powder
and crystals, till you have employed all you have got of them, and take care to
end with a bed of powder. The crucible being thus filled up, cover it with
another, at the bottom of which, now become the upper part, a hole, of about
two inches in diameter, being made, in order to give room for the exhalation of
the fumes. Lute the joints, and when dry, place the crucible in a furnace, over
black charcoals, and range more of them all round it, to the half way of the
upper one. Add then some kindled coals, in order to light the others gradually.
These coals ought to be large and long, and all of oak-wood: Care must be taken
to light them very regularly, letting them go out naturally of themselves, and
guard yourself most carefully from the fumes. As soon as the fire begins to
abate, stop the hole of the upper crucible, to prevent the admittance of the
cold air, which would break your crystals and therefore spoil them.

When the crucibles are cold, unlute them, take your crystals, and get the
finest and best colored, polished by the wheel. You will find those stones to
be very little, if at all, inferior in point of beauty and hardness, to the
eastern ones. -- This Secret has gone through many experiments.

We might add here a great quantity of very curious secrets of the like nature,
concerning both artificial stones, and enamels. But the field is so extensive,
we should hardly ever have done, were a particular account given of all that is
curious on this subject.

Therefore, after having given the method of making all sorts of colors, which
counterf^it the natural precious stones we think the public will have no
objection to be apprised of the manner of stamping these artificial ones; a
secret by which the finest and most precious original camieaus and intaglios
may be copied in a manner not in the least inferior to the original, and which
makes, at this present time, the amusing occupation of most of the ladies and
gentlemen at court.

LVII. The method of counter-drawing on artificial stones, the original
camieaus, intaglios, and other gems, which are kept and preserved in the
several museums of Europe.
Choose the finest sort of tripoly which can possibly be found, Grind it on
marble, into an impalpable powder, and as subtle as possible. Add a little
water to it, so as to make a sort of paste with it, of the consistence of
colors on pallets for painting. When it is in that state, put it in a little
square tin mould, with turned-up edges. Press well your paste down in it, and
smoothen the surface. As soon as you see it begins to dry, stamp on it the seal
of which you want to obtain the impression, and taking it off skilfully from
the tripoly paste, let this dry thoroughly. When you find it is perfectly hard,
and the strokes of the seal are solids, put on the impression some powder of
crystal, or any artificial stone you please, whether red, green, blue, or any
other color. Then, with a metal pipe, blow on that powder the flame of a
candle, or a lamp, till the crystal is perfectly melted. When done, lay
something, such as a small iron pallet, of nearly the size of the seal, on the
melted paste, and press it gently to make it take the better the impression,
and all the turns of the design, and then let it cool. When you take the
crystal up, you will find it to be a perfect copy of the original. You may then
send it to the lapidary to be cut, and set for seal or ring, as you like. From
these very copies you may even get other copies, by following the same process
of operation; but it must not be denied, these will not be quite so perfect as
those obtained from the originals themselves.

Note. When you have made on the tripoly paste the impression of the original
seal, the safest and shortest way would be to bake it in a furnace, under a tin
arch, to prevent the coals from touching the impression, which might hurt and
damage the relief. Then take off your little tin mould, and having put on the
stamp, crystal powder, or other fusible matter, you may place it again under
the same arch, in the furnace, and when that powder is melted, do as before
directed.

LVII. To jasper glass globes.
Wet the inside of a glass globe with common water; then throw in some powder,
blue, or ultramarine, or else some of the finest smalt, and stir well the
globe, that these powders may stick every where. Then dilute some other colors
with nut oil, keeping each particular color by itself. With the downy end of a
quill, or a long-handled brush, put some of these colors, one after another, in
the globe, touching it every way with them. Put some flour after that in the
globe, and shake it so as to make it go all over, and then the work is finished.

LVIII. To give globes a silver color.
To four ounces of pewter, in fusion, add two of quicksilver. Stir all well
with a wooden spatula; and, when the whole is well incorporated, pour some of
this compound into your globes, which must previously have been warmed before
the fire. Turn them in all manner of directions, that the composition may fix
itself better and more equally in all their capacity. Chop some tinsel very
fine, and throw it in the globes when the pewter begins to cool, these little
laminas will stick themselves to it, and produce the finest effect imaginable.

LVIII. A good method for tinning the above mentioned glass globes.
Melt together one ounce of tin-glass, and half that quantity of pewter and of
lead. When both are thus in fusion, throw in some mercury, and the whole into a
pan full of water. Pour the water off by inclination, and dry this matter; then
pass it through a piece of linen, and roll it in a globe which is very dry in
the inside.

LIX. To make the same in colors.
You may make these globes of what color you like; then mix some mercury with a
great quantity of dry common salt, pass it through a piece of linen, beat it in
a little chamber lie and water, which will granulate the mercury. If you put
this mercury in your globes, just after you have colored them, (as directed in
Art. lvii.) that mercury will ^x itself into them, in little grains of globules
all round, and appear like diamonds incessantly sparkling.

LX. To stick these globes upon one another.
Pound into powders half an ounce of dragon's blood, as much of bol ammoniac,
and a little quick lime; which dilute all together with whites of eggs. Then
cut a swine's bladder into small bits of the form and size of a shilling; put
some of that glue on both sides of them, and put one thus glued between every
two globes, supporting them with your hands till you see the glue has got hold
of the glass. In about one hour's time, they will stick so very hard, that
there will be no danger of their parting from each other. These are to be
suspended in the air, or laid as ornaments on wainscotting, cornices, etc.

LXI. To make transparent frames.
Boil, for a quarter of an hour only, nut oil, six ounces; white wax, four;
rosin, as much; and Venice turpentine, two. When lukewarm, lay it on with asoft
brush.

LXII. Another.
Soak, for twenty-four hours, a fine white parchment skin, in whites of eggs
and honey well beaten together. Wash then your parchment, paste it on the
frame, and when dry, lay a coat of varnish on it.

LXIII. Another way, which will make the frame look as made of glass, and even
a great deal more clear.
Take one of the finest and most perfect sheets of vellum you can find. Wash
it, paste it on the frame, and let it dry. Then boil, in a glass vessel, over a
sandbath, equal quantities of nut or lintseed oil, and water, with a little
crown-glass, pounded into a very fine powder. With this you may, at any time,
give a coat to your vellum, and see the pleasing effect it will have.

LXIV. A white paint to preserve the putty which is put round the panes of
glasses against the injuries of the weather.
1. Grind white lead with water. Dry it, and grind it again with oil, then lay
a coat of it over your putty. But if you want it to be still more durable, put
two coats of it, after having added a part of foetid oil, made in the following
manner.

2. Have a leaden plate with turned-up edges to make a border. Fill it with nut
or lintseed oil. Cover it with a piece of glass, and expose it in the sun. It
will soon be foetid.

LXV. To clear glass.
Rub the glass or crystal with a piece of lead: that will make it clear and
bright.

Note. You will find in the Art of glass manufactory, (which is one of those
among that precious collection int^^^led, A Description of Arts and Trades,
made under the inspection and care of the Royal Academy of Sciences at (...),
and mostly by the members themselves of that respectable body of literature) a
great number of secrets very useful, and no less entertaining, concerning
glasses, enamels, artificial stones, and other curious productions of Art. The
reason why we content ourselves with mentioning here but the few following, is,
because they have appeared to us not the most unworthy the attention of the
curious, as their importance is vastly inhanced by the utility, profit, and
other sorts of advantages, which may be drawn from their perusal. The next,
amongst others, is one which has an undoubted right to be secured from oblivion.

LXVI. How to distinguish a true from a false stone.
Warm an iron plate; rub some oil over it; spread glass dust on the middle, and
cover that glass with kindled coals. Hold the stone you want to try over these
coals, without, however, letting it touch them. If the stone does not lose its
luster, and look dull, it is a true stone.

LXVII. Another to the same purpose.
Heat the stone, by rubbing it with a piece of cloth. Then, when hot, rub it
with a piece of lead. If there remain any mark of it on the stone, it is a
false stone.

LXVIII. To make pearls, and swell them to what size you please.
1. Take any quantity of seed of pearls. Let them be very white and not
perforated. Wash them well in warm water, and let dry. Pound them in a new
marble mortar, very clean and polished. Grind them next on a marble stone, into
a very fine, impalpable, and subtle powder. Put this powder in a glass mortar,
and dilute it in a good quantity of mercurial water. Pour this water into
another glass ve^el. Add some more mercurial water to that which remained in
the mortar, mix well, and pour this water off again. Continue so doing till
there shall not remain any of the pearl powder at all, and that both the pearls
and the water shall have reciprocally impregnated the substance one of another.

2. Things being so far conducted, by the lid on the glass vessel, in which the
liquor is (...) and set it in the sun for the space of twenty days. At the end
of which term, you may take notice of another liquor, like a greasy oil,
swimming on the top of the former. Skim it carefully with a silver or glass
spoon, and keep it separately in a phial, to use it in proper time, as shall be
directed.

3. This being done, take the vessel in which the former liquor, you have just
skimmed, is, and place it in balneo mariae over a gentle fire. When the water
of the balneum mariae boils, you will perceive another scum rising on the top
of your liquor. Skim it again, and put it carefully in another distinct phia^,
to be used also when it is proper.

4. What remains at the bottom of the vessel, after this second scum is off, is
what we all know, under the denomination of Milk of Pearls; a drug much used
among ladies who paint. -- So far your materials are all prepared; the question
is now to employ them properly; and that you shall find in the following
article.

5. Take whatever kind of pearls you please, or rather happen to meet with;
for, how brown, black, or imperfect and ugly, in every respect, they may be,
does not signify in the least, provided only they be round, if you want them
round, or oval, if you want them of this last shape. Thread them with a fine
silver wire, or swine's hair; then put them a-soaking for the space of twelve
hours, in what we called just now the milk of pearls. There, they will suck
that liquor, swell, and soften themselves. At the end of the prescribed term of
twelve hours, take them out from that milk by their wire, and suspend them in
so large a glass vessel as to have none of them touch any part of it. Cover the
vessel with its lid, and set it in the sun for twelve other hours; where, and
during which (...), they will harden. -- When they shall have been there twelve
hours; put them again a soaking, for twelve hours, in the same milk as before,
to swell again; then suspend them again in the sun for the same space of time,
and repeat this operation, till the pearls have acquired the size you want them
to have. For they will always seed and swell themselves with that cream,
whenever you put them into it. -- When, therefore, they have soaked in it for
the last time, and been dried afterward for twelve hours in the sun, then is
the time of putting them a-soaking for another twelve hours in the second stuff
which you skimmed from the milk of pearls, while it was in the balneo mariae.
Then set them again in the sun for twelve hours. -- This term being also over,
put them a-soaking in the first sort of greasy oil, which you skimmed for the
first time from the liquor, after the twenty hours of its having been exposed
in the sun. And when they shall have remained there for twelve hours, and been
again exposed after that, for twelve more out of it, in the sun, as usual, the
whole operation is then entirely at an end. You have then got very fine, and
exceedingly good pearls; well shaped, either in the round or oval form; not
sophistic, but true and natural; and you may have your own price for them.

6. Of the mercurial water mentioned, and which is the chief thing, indeed, in
this operation, we must safely aver, that it is a secret known by very few, and
to those only who are well versed in the great Art of Chemistry, and perfectly
conversant with the best authors on that subject. This secret is so important,
and of such moment, that we do not think it proper, nay we must even say
prudent, to make it so common as this volume would unavoidably do by its
publication. The manipulation formerly described will undoubtedly afford no
little pleasure and satisfaction to those who are acquainted with the process
of making mercurial water, and who do not know, perhaps, the precious quality
it is invested with, of composing or swelling pearls.

LXIX. To dye crystal ruby hue, with lake.
1. Take crimson or the reddest sort of lake you can find, half a dram. Put
it in a square glass phial, and boil it in a balneo mariae for two hours. The
lake, thus situated in the glass for two hours, not being touched by the water
at all, but only penetrated by the heat it receives from it, shrinks at last
and becomes fryable. Take it out of the phial, grind it on marble into a
subtle powder, then add three or four drops of Venice turpentine. Put it again
in the same phial as before, and boil it one hour in the same manner, and your
color is done.

2. To make use of it, you must hold, with small pincers, your crystal over a
chafing dish filled with live coals. Then, with the point of a wooden skewer,
you take the color, and lay it on the crystal, which being hot, takes it in
immediately. Let it cool, and set it, and it will look of a very fine red hue.

LXX. To make a sapphire.
1. Make some zaffar red hot in a small crucible. Keep it there in that
situation a pretty good while, then throw it in the strongest vinegar you can
find, or in lieu of it, in chamber lie. Let it there lie in the coldest part of
your house for one night. Then wipe it well, make it into a very fine powder,
by pounding it in a marble mortar, and keep it in a phial closely stopped.

2. Now to ten or twelve pounds weight of crystal, or transparent pebbles
calcined, and mixed with salt of tartar, in the proportion of three parts of
the first to two of the last, put as much as will lie on a shilling piece, of
the above prepared zaffar. Mix well all this with a silver spoon, then fill
with it a pipkin, which put to the melting-glass fire. Half an hour after it
has been in, fill it up again with the same powder, and another half hour after
the same, till it keeps full. Then cover the pipkin well, and set it in the
furnace the space of four months, at least; for the longer it is kept there,
the finer and harder the composition will be. -- Four or five days, however,
after it shall have been in the furnace, it will not be improper to take out in
a spoon some of the matter, and see whether the color be to your liking; and if
you find it too pale, add a little more zaffar to it; if too dark, some crystal.

LXXI. Another composition for the sapphire.
Take one ounce of calcined crystal; two drachms of minium; of lead and salt of
tartar, about the weight of half-a-crown each: and three grains of zaffar. Put
all into a subtle powder, and melt it in a crucible. If in this proportion you
find it of too dark a hue, add as much crystal more as will bring it to the
degree you like to have it.

LXXII. To make an amethyst.
To ten pounds of crystal, or transparent pebbles calcined and prepared as
before directed, (p. 85. Art. xxiii.) Add seven ounces of fusible magnesia,
with one of loadstone, and a little zaffar. Mix all well, and put it in the
furnace for one month.

But, if you add to the green composition a little calcined silver, you will
see something beautiful and very surprising indeed.

CHAP. VI.
SECRETS concerning COLORS and PAINTING.
1. To paint in varnish on wood. (Useful to Carriage Painters.)
I. The preparation of the wood, previous to the laying of colors, and the
general process observed in laying them on it.
1. YOU must first lay on the wood two coats of Troyes-white, diluted with
size-water. Next lay over these a third coat of ceruse. Then having mixed the
color you want with turpentine oil, add the varnish to it, and lay it on the
wood, previously prepared as follows.

2. Polish the wood, first with shavegrass or horsetail, and then with
pounce-stone. Lay afterward six or seven coats of color mixed with varnish,
allowing after each coat a sufficient time to dry, before laying on the next;
then polish over the last coat with pounce-stone grinded on marble into a
subtle powder. When this is done, lay two or three coats of pure white
varnish. As soon as this is dry, rub it over with a soft rag dipped into fine
olive oil, then rub it with tripoly reduced into subtle powder; and having
wiped it with a clean piece of linen, pass a piece of wash-leather all over it.

II. To make a black.
1. The black is made with lamp or ivory black, grinded on marble stone, with
vinegar and water, till it is reduced into the most impalpable powder. To keep
it, put it in a bladder.

2. There is a sort of black which, from its hue, may be termed a velvet black.
This is made of sheep's trotters' bones, burnt and reduced by grinding, like
the other black, into an impalpable powder. You keep it the same as the other.

III. To make a blue.
Burnt turnsol mixed with quick lime and water, then sized with leather size;
makes the blue.

IV. To make the Gridelin.
Grind cochineal with white lead and a little Venetian lake. According as you
put more or less of this last ingredient, you make it darker or clearer.

II. To paint on paper.
V. For the red.
To make a red; take flat, or Venetian lake and Brasil wood, and boil all
together, with an addition of black lead.

VI. To make a fine yellow.
To make a yellow, you must boil some kermes in a water impregnated with orpine.

VII. To make a green.
The green is made of mixture of verdigrise, sapgreen, Hungarian green, and
terverte. The whole grinded on marble with a pretty strong leather size.

VIII. To transfer a print on vellum, and then paint it.
Choose your print, and fit a sheet of transparent, or varnished paper to it,
for width and breadth. Lay it on the print, and fix it by the four corners, and
the middle part of the four edges, on that print, by means of (...) little
white wax, the bulk of a pin's head. Then, with a very fine lead pencil, sketch
out on the varnished paper, all the outlines and turns of the print which you
plainly see through. When done, rub the back of this varnished paper all over
with red chalk, and carrying it on the vellum, fix it on it, as you did on the
print. Then with a wooden, or ivory blunt point, if you pass over all the
strokes which are delineated on the varnished paper, the red chalk of the back
will set off in all those parts, and lie on the vellum, whereon you will find
the print perfectly sketched, and fit to receive what colors you like.

III. Composition for Limners.
IX. How to prepare most colors for limning.
Most colors are prepared, or grinded, with gumarabic, Ochre makes the yellow;
courant mourant, the white; verdigrise, the green; ceruse, the gray; lampblack,
the black; cinnabar, the red; and gold in shell, the gold.

X. To make what is called lamp-black.
Put a large wick of cotton in a lamp filled with nut oil, and light it. Prop
over the flame an earthen dish, and now and then visit this dish, and gather
all the black which fixed itself to it.

XI. Another way of making black.
Burn some nut shells in an iron pan, and throw them in another full of water.
Then grind them on marble with either oil or varnish.

XII. To make a blue.
Whitening grinded with verdigrise will make a very fine blue.

XIII. To make a turquin blue.
German turnsol infused for one night in chamber lie, then grinded with a
discretionable quantity of quick lime, in proportion as you want to have it
paler or darker.

XIV. A fine green for limning.
Grind some verdigrise with vinegar, and a very small quantity of tartar. Then
add a little quick lime, and sap-green, which you grind also well with the
rest, and put in shells for keeping. If it becomes hard, dilute it with a drop
of vinegar.

XV. Another for the same purpose.
Grind on a marble stone, verdigrise, and a third of tartar, with white wind
vinegar.

XVI. To make what is called the Sap-green, or blackberry green.
Express the blackberry juice, when full ripe. Add some alum to it, put all in
a bladder, and hang it in the chimney to dry.

XVII. To make lake.
Take three parts of an ounce of Brasil wood; a pint of clear water; one dram
and a half of ro^i^-alum: one dozen and a half of grains of salt of tarter; the
bulk of two filberts of mineral crystal; three quarters of a pound of the
whitest sound, or cuttle-fish bones, rasped. Put all together in a saucepan to
boil, till reduced to one third. Strain it three times through a coarse cloth.
To make a finer sort, strain it four times. Then set it in the sun under a
cover to dry. That which dries the soonest is the finest.

XVIII. To make a liquid lake.
Pound some cochineal and alum together; then boil them with a certain quantity
of lemon-peels cut very small. And when it is come to right color you want,
pass it through a cloth.

XIX. Another way.
On a quantity of alum and cochineal pounded and boiled together, pour, drop by
drop, oil of tartar, till it comes to a fine color.

XX. For the vermilion.
Vermilion becomes very fine in aquavitae, or in child's urine. But it will be
still fi^^r, if you put it in aquavitae with a little saffron. It is used with
whipped whites of eggs.

XXI. For the making of carmine.
1. Boil two quarts of spring water in a varnished pipkin, and when it boils,
throw in seven pugils of pulverised chouam. After this has thrown two or three
bubbles, take it off from the fire, and decant it in another clean pipkin. Then
put in this water five ounces of cochineal in powder, and boil it for a quarter
of an hour. Add three pugils of autour, in fine powder, and make it throw four
bubbles. Then add three pugils of of Roman alum in powder, and take it out
directly from the fire, which must be made of live coals.

2. Strain all this through a linen cloth, and divide this liquor into several
delft vessels, and so let it remain for three weeks. At the end of that term
pour off the water by inclination. You will find under a kind of mouldiness,
which you must carefully pick off, and then gather the carmine.

Note. Every five ounces of cochineal give one of carmine. It is to be grinded
on marble. -- A general opinion prevails, that this operation is best done in
the crescent of the moon. How far it is needful to observe this precept is left
to the wise to determine.

XXII. Of the choice of colors fit for expressing the various complexions.
1. For women and children; mix a little white and a little turnsol.

2. For men; a mixture of white and vermilion is proper.

3. For old folks; you may use some white and ochre.

4. For horses; you must choose bistre, ochre, and white -- The dark brown
horses require a little addition of black -- The gray want nothing but bistre
and white.

IV. To make transparent colors.
XXIII. For the green.
Put in very strong vinegar, verdigrise, rue-juice, and gum-arabic. Set this in
the sun for a fortnight, or, if you have no sun, boil it on the fire. Strain
it, bottle and stop it. -- Shake it well before using.

XXIV. For the red.
Make a lie with salt of tartar. In it, put to infuse for one night, some India
wood, with a little alum. Boil (...), and reduce to one third. Run it through a
linen cloth, and mix some gum-arabic with it -- With more or less alum, you
make it of a higher or paler hue.

XXV. For the yellow.
Bruise (...) seed, which we, in this country, call French Berries, and put it
in a lie of salt of tartar to boil on the fire, to the reduction of two thirds.
Run it, and boil it one bubble more. Then bottle and cork it, -- It must be
shaken before using -- A small addition of saffron renders it more lively.

XXVI. For the blue.
Soak in chamber-lye, for one night, a certain quantity of German Palma
Christi. Take it out and grind it with a little quick lime. -- More or less
lime quick will raise or lower it in hue. And nothing more is required to
dilute it than chamber-lye and gum-arabic.

XXVII. Another blue, very like ultramarine.
Grind some indigo on porphyry with turpentine oil. Put it afterward in a
glazed pipkin, and (...) well. Let it thus lie for the space of six weeks. The
lo^^ you leave it there, the more blue it will be.

XXVIII. A pale red to paint on enamel.
1. Take the filings of a piece of good iron. Put them in a mattress with
aquafortis, and set it on a flow fire. Let it boil gently till the filings are
all dissolved.

2. When this is done, pour a little warm water into the mattress, and let it
remain a few hours on the fire, then pour all into another vessel. When the
liquor shall be quite clear, decant it out gently, and leave the powder, which
is at the bottom, to dry.

3. Put this dried powder in a new crucible well covered and luted, and then
neal it gently on a very regular fire; and, a little while after, take it out
and ^et it cool.

4. Now one dram of that powder, and three of yellow Dutch beads well grinded
with mastich-oil, will give full satisfaction. -- This is far from being a
contemptible secret.

XXIX. Process of making the purple, for painting on enamel; a most admirable
secret.
1. Take one dram of very fine gold, forged weak. Cut it in small bits, and
neal it. Put that gold into a mattress with one ounce of ammoniac salt, and two
of good aquafortis, and set it on a gentle fire to run all into liquor.

2. Have two ounces of clear water, nearly boiling, and throw it in the
mattress. This done, pour the whole in a glass phial of more than a quart size,
to which you will add one ounce and a half of oil of tartar drop by drop. It
will occasion an ebullition, which being ceased, you fill the bottle with
water, and let it rest till the gold falls to the bottom.

3. When the water is quite clear, decant it out gently, for fear of disturbing
the gold and losing it. Then fill the bottle with new water, and do the same,
repeating this operation till the water is as clear when you decant it out, as
when you put it in, and has no more smell.

4. Take your gold out of the bottle, and put it on a fine brown paper, folded
in four or five doubles, and turned up by the edges, in form of a little case
or mould. There let it dry; and, when dry, keep it for use.

5. Grind, next, some white frost-glass; mix it with water, put it in a bottle,
and shake it, then let it settle, When this powder is fallen to the bottom,
decant off the water, and let the powder dry in the same vessel in which it is.

6. Now the proportion to make the purple color: Take three grains only of your
aforesaid gold dust to thirty of the white frost-glass, thus prepared. Mix both
these powders in a calcedony-mortar with a good deal of clear water. After the
powder has settled to the bottom of the mortar, decant out the water, and let
the powder dry in the mortar itself.

7. This done, take the powder out of the mortar; and, putting it on a white
bit of paper dry it by a flow fire, till you see it has acquired a fine purple
blue.

8. Grind, now, this powder with a little oil of spike, and put it in little
cases made with cards, of which the edges are turned up. When the card has
soaked the oil, the whole operation is accomplished. -- It is to be preserved
by putting it in small boxes, and put them in a dry place.

XXX. How to make a fine flesh color.
9. The mere addition of a little black to the above composition will make the
finest color for complexions, or flesh-colours, and may justly be deemed a
ninth article in the process which is to be observed in its fabrication.

XXXI. A good way to make carmine.
Make a little bag, tied very close, of fine Venetian lake. Put it in a little
varnished pipkin, with rainwater and cream of tartar, and boil it to a syrup.
Thus you will have a fine carmine color.

XXXII. Another way.
Grind dry, on porphyry, some cochinella ursuta, sugarcandy, roch-allum, and
gum-arabic, all nearly in equal quantities, except the gum, of which you put a
little less. Put these powders into a glass phial, and pour over a sufficient
quantity of brandy to cover them, and squeeze over the juice of a lemon. Stop
well the bottle, and set it in the sun for six weeks. Run the color into
shells, taking care that none of the ground should run out with it.

XXXIII. The whole process of making ultramarine, three times experienced by
the author.
1. Make some of the brownest lapis red-hot in a crucible, then throw it into
vinegar. Repeat this three times. When calcined, pound it in a mortar, and sift
it. Then grind it on porphyry, with a mixture of lintseed oil and spirit of
wine, in equal quantities, and previously digested together in a mattress, and
often shaken to prepare them for this use. When you shall have subtilised your
lapis powder, then incorporate it with the following cement.

2. Lintseed oil, two ounces; Venice turpentine, three; mastich, half a one;
assa faetida, two; black rosin, as much: wax, half an ounce; yellow rosin,
three. Boil all in a glazed pipkin, for a quarter of an hour; then run it
through a cloth into clear water. Take it out of that water; and, taking of
this, and of the grinded lapis, equal quantities, incorporate them in a glazed
pan, and pour some clean and clear warm water over, and let it rest for a
quarter of an hour. Stir this water with a wooden spatula; and, in less than
another quarter of an hour you will see the water all azured. Decant, gently,
that water into another glazed pan. Pour new warm water on the grounds, and
proceed as before, continuing to stir and beat it well; then decant again this
new azured water with the former. Repeat doing so, till the water is no more
tainted with any azurine particles. -- When done, set your azured waters in
evaporation, and there will remain at the bottom a very fine Azure of
Ultramarine, viz. four ounces of it for every one pound of composition. Of the
remainder, you may make what is called cender-blue.

XXXIV. Another very fine and well-experienced ultramarine.
Take the finest lapis-lazuli you can find. Break it in little bits, and make
it red hot in a crucible, between blasting coals. When red hot, throw it in
white wind vinegar; then dry it, and pound it in a marble mortar with a wooden
pestle. Should it not pound easily, calcine it again as before, and throw it
again in vinegar,etc. then try it again in the mortar, and if it does not pound
yet, repeat again the same process, till it does at last easily submit to be
pulverised. After it has been put into a fine powder, grind it on a porphyry
stone, with good aquavitae till it is impalpable. Then gather it up in little
cakes, which you set a drying on paper on states. When dry, if you pulverise
it, you have a fine ultramarine of it.

XXXV. A very good and experienced pastil to make ultramarine of. -- The doses
as for one pound.
Take nut or lintseed oil, three ounces; new wax, and fine rosin, three ounces
of each; rosin, one; Burgundy pitch, four; oliban, otherwise male frankincense,
two drachms; dragon's blood, one. Melt all these ingredients, one after
another, in the same order as they are here prescribed. That is to say, put in
a varnished pipkin, the oil first; and when a little warm, put in the rosin by
little bits. This being dissolved, put in the chalk pulverised, pouring it
gently, and by little at a time, left it should blaze. As soon as the rosin is
melted, pour the rosin in powder, and by degrees likewise. Next add the
Burgundy pitch, broken in small bits, for it does not admit of pulverisation;
you must, notwithstanding, put it in but by little at a time; and, when all
introduced and well dissolved, you add gradually the dose of dragon's blood
powder, and let it dissolve like the other drugs. -- Stir this composition with
a stick by means of which you are to judge whether or not your pastil is done.
To know it, let a drop fall from the stick into a pan of water; then, working
it between your fingers, you see whether or not it stick to them. If it stick,
the pastil is not done, and you must let it remain longer on the fire; then
repeat the trial again, till it does not stick to your fingers, as a proof of
its being arrived at its degree of perfection. -- Throw in a glazed pipkin
filled with cold water; and when it becomes a little cold, make it into a ball
with your hands, which you shall have previously greased with lintseed oil.
Then you may keep it as long as you please for use. Stay, however, three or
four days before using it the first time.

XXXVI. The way of mixing the lapis with the pastil, to make ultramarine.
1. Dilute as thick as you can, a quantity of the beforementioned impalpable
powder of lapis lazuli, with a liquor made of two parts of aquavitae, and one
of lintseed-oil.

2. Melt in another glazed pan, without the assistance of water, and over a
gentle fire, the pastil described in the preceding receipt. Observe that your
pastil be perfectly purified from any particles of water it might have carried
away with it, when you threw it in water in order to form it into a ball.

3. When the pastil is melted, throw into it the thick paste you had previously
made of lapis lazuli with brandy and lintseed-oil. Stir and mix this so well,
that the whole be most perfectly united and incorporated. Then let it remain
twenty-four hours, and cover it well for fear of any dust getting at it.

4. After the said twenty-four hours are elapsed, put in this pan a quantity of
lukewarm water, proportionable to that of the matter, and work well the whole
together with two wooden pestles, till the water becomes quite blue, which you
will immediately decant off into a china basin, and cover carefully for fear of
dust.

5. Put new lukewarm water again on the same pastil. Work it anew as before,
and proceed the same as for the first time -- Repeat this operation as many
times as you find the water coming blue, and till you perceive it begins to
turn gray or white, which is a convincing proof that there is no more any thing
good in the pastil. -- Be careful to range in order the different bowls in
which you have decanted your tinged waters; and, to avoid mistakes, number them
by first, second, third, etc.

6. Let these waters settle, and when quite clear as when you put them in,
decant them again with all the gentleness possible, each into another similar
vessel, for fear of losing any of the ultramarine which lies fixed all round
the sides and bottom of the bowls, and might be, though never so little,
carried off with the decanted waters. When these waters are duly decanted off,
cover again, carefully, the bowls, for fear of the dust, and let the
ultramarine, which lies round them, dry perfectly. When dry, brush it down
gently to the bottom, with a new and soft hair brush, and gather your powders
separately with the same numbers on each parcel, agreeable to that of the bowls
whence they come.

7. The first ultramarine is the finest; the second is not so much so as the
first; neither is the third so fine as the second. And it goes thus, decreasing
in beauty, merit, and value.

Observations on the above process.
1. Ultramarine might be drawn from the pastil, by working it with the hands
instead of pestles. But, as it fatigues a great deal more the articulations by
that sort of working, than by the other, there is room to think, that by this
mode of proceeding, each single operation might be attended with some
imperfection; which is the reason why the pestles a^^ preferable.

2. Some people make their lapis red-hot on the bare coals, then steep it in
distilled vinegar, repeating this several times till it becomes fryable.

3. But, it is much preferable to make it red hot in a crucible; because,
should the fire make it split, the bits will remain in the crucible. Now it
need not be wondered at if it does, particularly when calcinations are often
repeated.

4. The lapis, which is of a fine blue, and striped with gold or silver, is the
best to make ultramarine of.

5. The lapis is also reckoned to be of a good quality, when it preserves its
fine color, even after it has been made red-hot in blasting charcoals.

XXXVII. Another secret to compose a fine blue. fit for washing, in drawings,
instead of ultramarine, which is both too dear, and too strong, to be used for
that purpose.
1. Gather in the summer, a large quantity of blowart which grows in the fields
among the corn. Pick well their blue leaves off, and throw the remainder away.
Have lukewarm water impregnated with impalpable powder of alum. Put the above
pickled blue leaves into a marble mortar with a sufficient quantity of that
alum water, to soak them only. Then, with either a wooden or marble pestle,
pound them, till the whole is so mashed, as to give easily all the juice by
expression through a new cloth. When you strain it, you must do it over a china
or glass bowl, in which there is water impregnated with the whitest gum-arabic
you can find.

2. Observe that you must not put much alum in the first water, if you are
desirous of preserving the brightness of the color; for, by putting too much of
that ingredient, as wellas of the water impregnated with it, you darken the
tone of the color.

3. Note. By means of the same process, you may likewise draw the colors from
every flower which has any great eclat. You must not neglect to pound them with
alum water, which prevents the color from suffering any alternation; as it
sometimes happens as the very first bruise.

4. To render these colors portable, you set them a-drying in the shade, in
china or glass vessels, well covered to fence them against the dust.

XXXVIII. The true secret of making Iris-green.
1. Take a large quantity of the flowers of that name is the spring. Pick them;
that is to say, pick out the green and the yellow, which are at the bottom of
the petal of the flower. Next to this, pound them in a marble mortar, with a
little lukewarm water, impregnated with alum. When pounded, express the juice
through a new cloth, over a china bowl. Then mix some gum-arabic water with it.

2. If you want a tone of color different from the natural color of the flower,
you may change it by only adding after the flowers are pounded, a little
quicklime dust in the mortar, and give two or three strokes of a pestle mortar
to the whole; then strain it.

3. Note. If you should pound these flowers in a wooden mortar, you must be
cautioned at least to take care it should not be one of walnut-tree wood,
because it is apt to tarnish the colors, and destroy their brightness, which is
one of the chief things always required in colors.

4. In a month of March, you may, by means of the same process, obtain the
color from garden, or double violets. But this is never so fine nor so lively.

XXXIX. To make a dark green, whether for the grounds of miniature pictures, or
for washing on paper, or, in short, for draperies and terraces.
Take, toward the end of autumn, a good quantity of wallwort's stalks, with
their fruits on them, and very ripe. Let them rot for five or six days, in the
cellar; and, when you see the fruits have fomented sufficiently to give easily
their juice by expression, strain it through a new cloth in alum-water. Divide
the whole into several glass tumblers to dry it more easily. Set them in the
air, but not in the sun, and lay some paper over them, to prevent any thing
from falling into the glasses, but which should not at the same time stop the
exhalation of the liquor, and thereby cause it to become moldy. By these
means, you shall have a color fit for wash of a green hue, and dark at the same
time.

XL. To make the Bistre, for the wash.
1. Grind on marble with child's water, some chimney-soot. Mullar it thus so
long as to bring it to be as fine as possible. When done, put it in a
wide-mouthed bottle, which fill up with clear water; and, then, stir and mix
all well with a wooden spatula. Let the coarsest parts settle for about half an
hour's time, and fall to the bottom of the vessel. Decant out now the liquor
gently into another vessel. What remains in the bottom of the first bottle, is
the coarsest bistre.

2. Proceed the same with respect to the second bottle; and after having left
this to settle for three or four days, instead of half an hour, decant it into
a third. This gives you the finest bistre.

3. It is thus you are to proceed in the manipulation of all the colors which
are intended to serve in drawing for wash whenever you will not have them rise
thick above the surface of the paper, which would undoubtedly look very bad;
for, the neatness required in a draught forbids the use of any coarse color.

XLI. The secret for a fine Red for the wash.
1. Make a subtle powder with any quantity of cochineal. Put in a vessel, and
pour so much rose water over it as will exceed above it by two fingers.

2. Dilute calcined and pulverised alum, while it is yet quite warm, into
plaintain-water, and mix some of the liquor in which you have dissolved the
cochineal.

3. This process will give you a very fine red, much preferable for the wash,
to that which is made with vermillion, because this last has too much
consistence, and, besides tarnishes too soon, on account of the mercury which
enters into its composition.

XLII. A secret to make Carmine, at a small expense.
Break and bruise, in a bell-metal mortar half-apound of gold color
^ernambourg-Brasil. Put this to infuse with distilled vinegar in a glazed
pipkin, in which you boil it for the space of a quarter of an hour. Strain the
liquor through a new and strong cloth; then set it again on the fire to boil.
When it boils, pour on it white wind vinegar, impregnated with Roman alum. Stir
well with a wooden spatula, and the froth that will arise is the Carmine. S^im
it carefully in a glass vessel, and set it to dry.

V. Composition of colors, to dye skins or gloves.
XLIII. A lively Isabel.
To make a lively Isabel color, you must, to a quantity of white, add one half
of yellow, and two thirds of red and yellow.

XLIV. For the same, paler.
If to a quantity of white, you put only one half of yellow, and another half
of red, you shall have an Isabel of a paler hue than the first.

XLV. For a pale filbert color.
1. Take burnt umber; a little yellow, very little white and still less red.

2. This is made darker, only by adding to it a quantity of burnt umber as much
yellow; a little white, and as much red.

3. Its darkness is still increased, if putting no white at all to the umber
you add only some black chalk, a little yellow, and as much red.

XLVI. For an amber color.
To make an amber color; to much yellow you add very little white, and no more
red than white.

XLVII. For the gold color.
To much yellow, join a little more red; and this mixture will give you a very
fine bright gold color.

XLVIII. For the flesh color.
To imitate well the complexion, or flesh color, you mix a little white and
yellow together, then add a little more red than yellow.

XLIX. The straw color.
Much yellow; very little white; as little red, and a great deal of gum.

L. A fine brown.
1. Burnt umber; much black chalk; a little black and a little red, will make a
fine brown, when well incorporated together.

2. The same is made paler, by decreasing the quantity of black chalk, and no
black at all in the above composition.

LI. To make a fine musk color.
Take burnt umber; very little black chalk; little red and little white. These
ingredients well mixed will produce as fine a musk color as ever was.

LII. To make a Frangipane color.
1. This is made with a little umber: twice as much red, and three times as
much yellow.

2. The paler hue of it is obtained by adding only some white and making the
quantity of red equal to that of yellow.

LIII. An olive color.
To make the olive color, take umber, not burnt; a little yellow; and the
quarter part of it red and yellow.

LIVE. For the Wainscot color.
Much yellow; little white; little umber; and of red half the quantity of
yellow.

LV. How to make Skins and Gloves take these Dies.
Grind the colors you have pitched upon with perfumed oil of jessamine, or
orange flowers. Then range the grinded color on a corner of the marble stone.
Grind of gum-adragant, an equal quantity as that of the colors, soaking it all
the while with orange flower water. Then grind both the gum and the color
together, in order to incorporate them well. -- Put all into a pan, and pour a
discretionable quantity of water over it, to dilute sufficiently your paste.
Then with a brush, rub your gloves or skins over with this tinged liquor, and
hang them in the air to dry. When dry, rub them with a stick. Give them again,
with the same brush, another similar coat of the same dye, and hang them again
to dry. When dry for this second time, you may dress them, the color is
sufficiently fixed, and there is no fear of its ever coming off.

LVI. To varnish a Chimney.
Blacken it first with black and size. When this coat is dry, lay another of
white lead over it, diluted in mere sized water. This being dry also, have
verdigrise diluted and grinded with oil of nuts and a coarse varnish, and pass
another coat of this over the white.

VI. To color, or varnish, Copperplate-prints.
LVII. To varnish Copperplate-Prints.
1. Have a frame made precisely to the size of your print. Fix it with common
flour-paste, by the white margin on that frame. Let it dry, then lay the
following transparent varnish on it, which is to be made without fire.

2. Dilute in a new glazed pipkin, with a soft brush, as big as your thumb,
about a quarter of a pound of Venice turpentine, and two-penny worth of spike,
and as much turpentine, oils, and half a gill, or thereabouts, of spirit of
wine. -- This varnish being no thicker than the white of an egg, lay with your
brush, a coat of it on the wrong side of the print; and, immediately, another
on the right. Then set it to dry, not upright, but flat. And, if it should not
dry quick enough, pass a light coat of spirit of wine on the whole.

LVIII. How to color these prints, in imitation of Pictures in oil colors.
1. To paint these prints, you must work them on the back in the following
manner. Prepare, first, your colors on apallet, and then proceed thus:

2. The flesh-color is made with a little white and vermilion, which mix with
your pencil according to the degree of redness you will have it. -- For the
green of tree-leaves, you must have mountain-green, ready prepared from the
colorman; and, for the finest green, some verdigise: As for lighter shades of
these colors, you add some yellow to either of the above two, more or less,
according to the circumstances. -- To paint wood and trunks of trees, nothing
more is required than umber. -- To express sky-colors and clouds, you mix some
blue ceruse with white lead; and, with these two colors only, you alter your
blues to various degrees of shades, diminishing or augmenting one of the two,
according to the darkness or lightness of the skies which you want to express.
For the distances, a mixture of yellow and white lead;etc. and so on for the
other colors you may want.

3. you are to compose them yourself on the pallet with the pencil; and, to mix
or unite them, use a little oil of nuts, which you take up with the point of
the pallet-knife. Then with the pencil, you apply them on the wrong side of the
print.

LIX. A varnish which suits all sorts of prints, and may be applied on the
right side of it. -- It suits also pictures and painted wood. It stands water,
and makes the work appear as shining as glass.
Dilute one quarter of a pound of Venice turpentine, with a gill, or
thereabouts, or spirit of wine. If too thick, add a little more of this last;
if not enough, a little of the former, so that you bring it to have no more
thickness than the apparent one of milk. Lay one coat of this on the right side
of the print, and, when dry, it will shine like glass. If it be not to your
liking, you need only lay another coat on it.

LX. To make appear in gold, the figures of a print.
1. After having laid on both sides of the print, one coat of the varnish
described in the above Art. lvii. in order to make it transparent, let it dry a
little while. Then before it is quite so, lay some gold in leaves on the wrong
side of the print, pressing gently on it with the cotton you hold in your hand.
By these means all the parts, whereon you shall lay these gold leaves, will
appear like true massive gold on the right side.

2. Now when this is all thoroughly dry, you have only to lay on the right side
of it one coat of the varnish described in the preceding Art. lix. it will then
be as good as any crown-glass. You may also put a pasteboard behind the print,
to support it the better in its frame.

LXI. A curious secret to make a print imitate the painting on glass.
Choose a crown-glass of the size of your print; and lay on it two coats of the
following varnish.

1. Put on the fire, in a glazed pipkin, and let boil for the space of one
hour, Venice turpentine, four ounces; spirit of the same, and of wine, equal
parts, one ounce and a half of each; mastich in tears, two drachms.

2. After it has boiled the prescribed time, let it cool, and then lay the
first coat on the glass; this being dry, lay another; and, as soon as this is
nearly dry, then lay on it, as neatly as possible, the print, previously
prepared as follows.

3. Have a glazed vessel so broad at bottom as to admit of the print flat with
all ease in its full size. Let this vessel be also as wide at top as it is at
bottom, that you may get the print in and out of it on its flat, without
bending it in the least. Pour aquafortis in this pan or vessel, enough to cover
all at the bottom, then lay the engraved side of your print on that aquafortis.
-- Take it out, and wipe the aquafortis off gently with soft rags, then steep
it two or three times in three different clean fresh waters, and wipe it each
time in the same manner.

4. This being done, lay the right side on the beforementioned glass, before
the second coat of varnish be quite dry, and while it is still moist enough for
the print to stick upon it uniformly, equally and smoothly, without making any
wrinkles or bladders. When it is perfecly dried in the situation, wet your
finger in common water, and moistening the print on the back part in all the
white places, which have received no impression from the engraving of the
plate, rub it all off. By these means, there will remain nothing but fairly the
printed parts. On them you may paint in oil with a brush, and the most bright
and lively colors; and you will have pictures, on which neither dust nor any
thing else will be able to cause any damage. -- To do this, there is no need of
knowing, either how to paint or draw.

LXII. Another to the same purpose.
1. Heat before the fire, a crown-glass of the size of the print, and then rub
it over with Venice turpentine, which, on account of the heat of the glass,
will spread the more easily.

2. Boil next your intended print in spirit of wine, for about half a quarter
of an hour; and then lay it by the right side on the glass.

3. This glass being cold, wet you finger, and moistening the back of the
print, scrape, with your nail, the paper off the glass, so that there remains
nothing but the strokes of the engraving.

4. Boil, in a mattress for about a quarter of an hour, or rather more, and in
balneo mari^^, one part of turpentine with four of spirit of wine. Then lay two
coats of this composition on the back of the print, after you have snatched off
all the paper, and allowing time between each coat to dry.

5. As soon as the second coat is dry you may lay on water-colors on the print,
according to taste and judgment, and you will have a choice of beautiful
pictures, agreeable to the beauty of the prints used.

LXIII. The method of chalking, for those who are not acquainted with drawing.
They who are not acquainted with the principles of drawing, may amuse
themselves with chalking some beautiful prints, on white paper, where they
shall have nothing more to do afterward than shade, in the same manner as they
see done in the original. When they shall have practiced for a while in that
way, they will soon become able to strike out themselves some good piece of
design. And to obtain that point, the following method is recommended.

1. With a soft, and one of the best black lead pencils, rub one side of a
white sheet of paper, cut to the size of the print, so that nothing of the
paper can be seen, and only the black lead color. -- Lay this sheet, on the
clean side, upon the face of the print, that it may not soil it; and on this
sheet, the black side of which now lies uppermost toward yon, lay another
sheet of clean paper, and fix these three sheets together by the four corners,
and on the edges, with fine minikin pins so that the sheets may not vary one
from another, which would quite confuse and mar the whole design.

2. Now take a blunted needle, or ivory point, and slip it, in pressing gently,
all over the turns of the prints, going gradually and orderly for fear of
forgetting some places, which may be prevented by laying a flat ruler across
the print under your hands. When the whole is finished, unpin the papers; and,
on the under part of that which lies at top, you will find all the outlines of
the print most exactly drawn.

3. You may now, on these outlines, pass a stroke with India ink and a brush,
or with ink and a pen; after which, with a crum of stale bread, you rub off
clean all the useful marks of the pencil, and leave none but those marked with
ink. And to shade this design, you walk it with India ink, or colors, and a
brush.

LXIV. How to prepare a transparent paper to chalk with.
In order to render themselves sooner, and more easily masters of chalking
neatly, and not to go out of the fine turns, and outlines of a drawing,
beginners should first know how to prepare a transparent paper, which, as it
lets them see the minutest parts of the strokes as through a glass, gives them
of course an opportunity of acquiring, by practice, a correctness, precision,
and truth in the expression of all the turns of a piece of drawing, be it
whatever it will. This preparation then is as follows.

2. Have, one or several sheets of fine and very thin paper, and rub them over
with oil, or spirit, of turpentine, mixed in double the quantity of oil of
nuts. To cause the paper imbibe that mixture, steep a sponge or feather in it,
which pass on both sides of the paper, and then let it dry.

2. When you want to use it, lay it on a print. Then, with a brush, a pencil,
or a pen, pass over all the strokes, lines, and turns, of the design laid
under. You may even thus learn to shade with neatness, if you wash the same
design, while fixed on the original print, with India ink.

Thus practicing often, and for a certain while, you may learn to draw very
neatly, and even with boldness, provided you apply with attention, and are
blessed with some share of memory. This method will certainly prove very
agreeable, useful, and entertaining, for those who have not the patience to
learn by the common method, which seems too tedious to some, and generally
disgusts beginners.

* LXV. Another, and more speedy method of making a transparent paper, to be
used instantly.
The above receipt for making transparent paper for drawing being attended with
some difficulty, viz. the length of time which it takes to dry, we thought it
would not be unacceptable to the public to be apprised of another, more speedy,
and no way inferior to the other, by means of which, in a hurry, it may be made
and used directly, as in a case, for example, where any one, being glad of
copying a design, had not at hand varnished, or transparent paper.

With a sponge, rag, feather, or any thing, spread lintseed oil on both sides
of any common thin sheet of paper; then, as soon as done, wipe it with a
handful of the soft rags which are scraped off from leather at the tanner's.
The paper is instantly dry and fit for immediate use.

Note. Nothing else can supply the tanner's leather rags, as nothing could soak
the superfluous oil from the paper, so fast, and so thoroughly. It is that
which dries it so quick, and makes it fit for instant use.

LXVI. A varnish to render transparent the impression of a print which has been
glued on glass, and the paper scratched off as mentioned in Art. lxi. and lxii.
Take turpentine, and a very little oil of the same. Dilute all well together,
and lay one coat of it on the strokes of engraving, which are left fixed on the
glass.

VII. For painting on glass.
LXVII. How to draw on glass.
Grind lamp-black with gum-water and some common salt. With this and a pen, a
hair pencil, or any thing you please, draw your design on the glass; and
afterwords shade and paint it with any of the following compositions.

LXVIII. A color for grounds on glass.
1. Take iron filings, and Dutch yellow beads, equal parts. If you want it to
have a little red cast, add a little copper's filings. With a steel mullar,
grind all these together on a thick and strong copperplate, or on porphyry.
Then add a little gum-arabic, borax, common salt and clear water. Mix these a
little fluid, and put the composition in a phial for use.

2. When you come to make use of it, you have nothing to do but with a hair
pencil lay it quite flat on the design you shall have drawn the day before; and
having left this to dry also for another day, with the quill of a turkey, the
nib of which shall not be split, you heighten the lights in the same manner as
you do with crayons on blue paper. Whenever you put more coats of the above
composition one upon another, the shade, you must be sensible, will naturally
be stronger. And when this is finished you lay your colors for garments and
complexions, as follows.

LXIX. Preparation of lake, for glass.
Grind the lake with a water impregnated with gum and salt; and then make use
of it with a brush -- The shading is operated by laying a double, treble, or
more coats of the color, where you want it darker. And so it is of all the
following compositions of colors.

LXX. Preparation of the blue purple, for glass.
Make a compound of lake and indigo, grinded togther with gum and salt water;
and use it as directed in the preceding article.

LXXI. Preparation of the green, for glass.
Indigo mixed with a proportionable quantity of gamboge, and grinded together
as above, will answer the intended purpose.

LXXII. Preparation of the yellow for the same.
Gamboge grinded with salt water only.

LXXIII. Preparation of the white.
You have only to heighten much the white parts with a pen.

LXXIV. The proper varnish to be laid on glass after painting.
Boil, in oil of nuts, some litharge, lead filings, and white copperas
calcined. When done and cold, lay it all over the colors which you put on the
glass.

LXXV. How to paint on glass without fire.
Take gum-arabic and dissolve it in water with common salt, bottle and keep it.
With this liquor, if you grind the colors you intend to paint with, they will
fix and eat in the glass. Should you find they do not enough, increase only the
dose of salt.

VIII. Preparations of colors of all sorts for oil, water, and crayons.
LXXVI. An oil to grind colors with, when the works are much exposed to the
injuries of the weather.
Take two ounces of mastich in drops, very clear, and grind it with lintseed
oil. Then put in a well-glaized pipkin any quantity of that oil, and set it on
the fire to boil. By little and little introduce in that boiling oil the above
prepared mastich, stirring well the whole to mix and incorporate it better.
When done, take it off from the fire, and let it cool. Such is the preparation
of oil with which you are to grind your colors, when they are to be much
exposed to the injuries of the weather, for they will resist it.

LXXVII. To marble and jasper paper.
1. Grind all the colors you want to employ (such as lake, massicot, indigo,
yellow and red ochre, etc. etc.) with bullock's gall; grind each separately,
and, keep them so. Then have a large and wide pan filled with lukewarm
gum-water. Stir well that water with a stick. While it is thus in great motion,
and your colors being ready under your hand, with a large brush take of each
separately, as much as the tip of the brush will carry, and touch only the
surface of the water with it. The colors will immediately expand. Each color
requires a particular brush to itself. Therefore, with another brush, take of
another color, and do the same; and, with another, of another, and so on, till
you have put on your water all those you have destined for the purpose.

2. When the water ceases to turn, you will plainly perceive all the variety
occasioned by the different colors. Then, taking your sheet of paper, lay it
flat on the water, leave it there for about two or three minutes, and without
taking it out, give it one turn round on the water, then pull it by one of the
edges to the side of the pan, wash it, dry it, and burnish it afterward.

Note. The paper must be chosen good, and the water sized with gum-adragant.

LXXVIII. To clean pictures.
Take the picture out of its gilt frame. Lay a clean towel on it, which, for
the space of ten, fourteen, sixteen, or eighteen days, according as you find it
necessary, you keep continually wetting, till it has entirely drawn out all the
filthiness from the picture. (...), with the tip of your finger, pass some
lintseed oil which has been set a long while in the sun to purify it, and the
picture will become as fine as new.

LXXIX. Another for the same purpose.
Put into two quarters of the oldest lie one quarter of a pound of Genoa soap,
rasped very fine, with about a pint of spirit of wine, and boil all together on
the fire. Strain it through a cloth, and let it cool. Then with a brush, dipped
in that composition, rub the picture all over, and let it dry. Do the same
again once more, and let it dry too. When dry, dip a little cotton in oil of
nut, and pass it over all the picture. Let this dry again; and afterward warm
a cloth, with which rub the picture well over, and it will be as fine as just
out of the painter's hands.

LXXX. A secret to render old pictures as fine as new.
Boil in a new pipkin, for the space of a quarter of an hour, one quarter of a
pound of gray or Bril-ash, and a little Genoa soap. Let it cool, so as to be
only lukewarm, and wash your picture with it, then wipe it. Pass some olive oil
on it, and then wipe it off again. This will make it just as fine as new.

LXXXI. An oil to prevent pictures from blackening. -- It may serve also to
make cloth to carry in the pockiet, against wet weather.
Put some nut, or lintseed oil, in a phial, and set in the sun to purify it.
When it has deposited its dregs at the bottom, decant it gently into another
clean phial, and set it again in the sun as before. Continue so doing, till it
drops no more f^^ces at all. And with that oil, you will make the
above-described compositions.

LXXXII. A wash to clean pictures.
Make a lie with clear water and wood ashes^; in this dip a sponge, and rub the
picture over, and it will cleanse it perfectly. The same may be done with
chamber-lye only; or otherwise, with white wine, and it will have the same
effect.

LXXXIII. Another way.
Put filings in an handkerchief, and rub the picture with it. Then pass a coat
of gum-arabic water on the picture.

LXXXIV. Another way.
Beat the white of an egg in chamber-lye, and rub the picture with it.

LXXXV. A very curious and simple way of preventing flies from sitting o^
pictures, or any other furniture, and making their dung there.
Let a large bunch of leeks soak for five or six days in a pailful of water,
and wash your picture, or any other piece of furniture, with it. The flies will
never come near any thing so washed. This secret is very important and well
experienced.

LXXXVI. To make indigo.
Put some isatis, otherwise woad, or glastum with slacked lime, to boil
together in water. There will rise a scum, which being taken off, and mixed
with a little starch, makes the indigo.

LXXXVII. To make a yellow.
What the lutcola dies yellow, becomes green by the woad, or glastum. Whence we
may justly conclude that green is not a simple color, but a mixture of blue and
yellow: as the yellow itself is a compound of red and white.

LXXXVIII. An azure of mother-of-pearl.
Take any quantity of superfine tested silver in laminas. Put it a little while
in vinegar; then, taking it out of it, strew over the laminas some
pounce-powder to alcoholise them. Next stratify them in a crucible; and when
red hot, take them off from the fire, and you will have a fine azure.

LXXXIX. A white for painters, which may be preserved for ever.
Put into a large pan three quarts of lintseed oil, with an equal quantity of
brandy, and four of the best double distilled vinegar; three dozen of eggs, new
laid and whole; three or four pounds of mutton suet, chopped small. Cover all
with a lead plate, and lute it well. Lay this pan in the cellar for three
weeks, then take skilfully the white off, then dry it. The dose of the
composition for use is fix ounces of that white to every one of bismuth.

XC. Another white for ladies' paint.
The pomatum which ladies make use of for painting is made as follows. To four
parts of hog's lard add one of a kid. Melt them both together, then wash them.
Re-melt and wash them again. Then add four ounces of ammoniac salt, and as much
of sulphur, in subtle powder. This white will keep as long as that mentioned
in the preceding receipt.

XCI. A good azure.
Take two ounces of quicksilver; sulphur and ammoniac salt, of each one ounce.
Grind all together, and put it to digest in a mattress over a slow heat.
Increase the fire a little; and, when you see an azured fume arising, take the
mattress off from the fire. When cool, you will find in the mattress as beautiful
an azure as the very ultramarine itself.

XCII. An azure from silver, done in less than a fortnight.
Dissolve in very strong vinegar, as much gem-salt and roch-alum, as it will be
able to dissolve. Put this in a new pipkin; and, over it, hang up laminas of
the finest tested silver. Cover the pot, and lute it well. Bury it in the
cellar; and ten or fifteen days afterward take off the azure, which you will
find about the laminas. Replace things as before; and, ten days afterward, the
same again; and repeat this process as many times as you can get any azure by
it.

The silver laminas may steep in the vinegar if you think proper.

Besides gem-sal, and roch-alum, some likewise dissolve alkali in the vinegar.

XCIII. To make an azured water.
1. Gather wallwort's grains between green and ripe, and bake or stew them in a
pan. When they have boiled a considerable time, strain them through a cloth,
and keep the juice in a glass phial; its color will never change, and will keep
for ever very fine.

2. Have next dog's dung very dry. Pulverise it very fine, and sift it through
a silk sieve. Then grind it on a marble with the wallwort's juice, and a
mullar, as painters do their colors, and you will find this paste of a very
fine azure color.

3. Now, if you tinge any water with this, by putting it in a phial to soak,
you may dye whatever you will with it, such as thread, cotton, cloth, etc;.

XCIV. Another way of making azure.
Take the bulk of a filbert of ammoniac salt, which you dissolve in a common
half-pint-glass tambler of water. Then pound and sift, all together, one ounce
of vitriol, and one and a half of quick lime. Put this powder into the water in
which the ammoniac salt was dissolved. Leave this to infuse for the space of
fortyeight hours, and at the end of that term the azure will be done.

XCV. A fine azure.
Make an incorporation of three ounces of verdigrise, and of an equal quantity
of ammoniac salt which you dilute with a little tartar-water so as to make a
thick paste of it. Put this composition into a glass, and let it rest for a few
days, and you will have a fine azure.

XCVI. Another way.
Pulverise and mix well together one part of ammoniac salt, and two of
verdigrise, with a little ceruse. Then pour over it oil of tartar enough to
make a clear paste of it. Put this in a glass vessel, which take care to stop
and lute well. When done, put it in an oven along with the bread, and take it
out with it also, then the azure will be done.

XCVII. Another way.
Take sublimed mercury, four parts; ammoniac salt, two; sulphur-vivum, one.
Pulverise the whole, and put the powder in a mattress, which lute well with the
lute of sapience. Put this mattress on a mild and slow fire; and when you see a
white fume beginning to rise stop the fire. When the mattress is cold, break it,
and you will find a very fine azure at the bottom. Now take it and work it with
lukewarm water first, and then with cold.

Note. There are some who absurdly wash it with lie, or a strong lime water,
but they (...) undoubtedly spoil their azure entirely. -- What is most
advisable, and indeed the only preparation allowable, is to boil a little white
honey in the water, and skim it; and when that water becomes lukewarm, wash the
azure with it. This last may contribute to give it a fine color, but the other
will certainly hurt it.

XCVIII. To make an admirable white lead, fit for oil painting and coloring of
prints.
Grind the finest white lead in flake you can find, on the stone with vinegar.
It will immediately turn black. Wash it well in a panful of water and let it
settle. Pour off the water by inclination, and grind it again with fresh
vinegar, then wash it anew. Repeat this operation four or five times, and you
will get a most beautiful white.

XCIX. The preparation of verdigrise.
Grind the verdigrise with vinegar, and put it in a piece of brown bread dough.
Bake it as you would bread; and, when done, cut it open and take it out. You
will then have a very fine verdigrise, fit to work with, either in oil or
water, as you like.

C. A fine liquid green.
Mix well together, one pound o^ Montpelier verdigrise, and half a pound of
white tartar from the same place. Put this a-soaking for twelve hours in two
quarts of the strongest vinegar, then reduce it by boiling to one half. Let it
rest for two days, and filter it afterward in a bottle, wherein you will keep
it for use.

CI. To make the Stil-de-grain, which we call Brown pink.
Bruise and boil in three quarts of water four ounces of French berries, to the
reduction of one half. Strain all through a cloth, and put in this juice a
discretionable quantity of whitening, pounded and sifted into a subtle powder,
so as to make a (...) paste, which you put into small bags, and set to (...) on
tiles. When dry, it is used with gum. And to render it finer, you may put some
gamboge.

CII. To make a fine vermilion.
Make a mixture of cochineal powder and burnt alum. Stifle it quite hot in rose
or plantain water. It will give you the finest vermilion in the world.

CIII. A secret to draw without either ink or pencil.
Rub a sheet of paper with tripoly. Then, with any blunt point, form your
drawing on it. Whatever you trace will be visible.

CIV. To make an imitation of enamel on tin, for chimney-branches, etc.
Get a sheet of block-tin very clean, and cut it in the form, shape, and
figure, you choose to make your flowers and other things. Grind what colors you
propose to make use of, with clean water, and each separately, then let them
dry. When you want to employ them, dilute them, each apart, with liquid
varnish, and lay them on with the brush. Set the work in the open air for fear
the colors should run, and when they are a little thickened and consolidated,
finish drying them before a gentle fire.

CV. A very valuable secret to make exceeding good crayons, as hard as red
chalk. This secret is of the discovery of Prince Robert, brother to Prince
Palatine.
Grind, on the stone, some tobacco pipe clay, with common water, so as to make
a paste of it. Then take separately each color, and grind them, when dry, on
the stone, so fine as to sist them through a silk sieve. Mix of each of the
colors, with your first white paste, as much as will make it of a higher or
paler hue, and embody the whole with a little common honey and gumarabic water.

Note. You must be attentive to make crayons of various degrees of hues in each
color, for the chiaros and oscuros, or lights and shades. Then you roll each
crayon between two boards very clean, and set them to dry on a sheet of paper
for two days in the shade. To complete their drying, lay them before the fire,
or in the sun: and then you may use them with satisfaction. This is, it must be
confessed, a very valuable composition.

CVI. To render the stone-cinnabar and vermilion finer, and at the same time,
to prevent them from blackening.
1. You raise the hue of the stone-vermilion, if, in grinding it, you add
gamboge water, tinged with a little saffron. This preparation extends only to
the red.

2. With respect to the orange color you must add some minium to it.

3. For the yellow, put a discretionable quantity of orpine in cakes, prepared
as follows. -- Take the finest orpine you can find, and grind it well with
water. Make it in little cakes and set it to dry on paper, as you do with every
other sort of color. When dry pulverise and use it.

4. For the gridlin, take French sorrel and boil it by itself in water, to draw
as strong a tincture from it as you possibly can. Then have white lead, (dried
in cakes, and prepared after the method above mentioned for the orpine), and
grind it anew with this sorrel tincture, then dry it. Grind and dry it again,
and repeat this operation with the sorrel tincture, till you have obtained the
desired point of color.

CVII. The true process used in the composition of the Eastern carmine.
1. Have a glazed pipkin, quite new, holding fully two English quarts. Wash it
with boiling water, then fill it with spring or river water, very clean and
filtered. Set it on blasting coals, and when it begins to boil throw in a
dram of chouan in fine powder, which you boil very quick for near a quarter
of an hour. Then strain this water through a cloth washed in lie, and not with
any soap, and receive it in another new glazed pipkin, cleaned and washed as
the first. Put this on a fire, not quite so blasting as the first; and, when it
begins to give signs of boiling, throw in one ounce of the finest cochineal,
pulverised very fine. Stir often with a little hazel-tree stick, stripped of
its peel and let boil gently for near a quarter of an hour; then throw in
sixteen grains of autour, in subtle powder, and keep it on the same degree of
fire, boiling for half a quarter of an hour. Take it off from the fire, and
throw in sixteen grains of Roman alum in powder, then strain it immediately
through a ^lean cloth, washed with lie, and no soap, and receive it in two
different large china bowls, capable to contain more than three pints of liquor
a-piece, new and perfectly clean. Place these in a room, where they will be
perfectly free from dust, and let them rest there for a week, that the carmine
may have time to make a precipitaion.

2. At the end of this term, decant out gently your tincture into two other
China bowls, of the same size as the two former, and as perfectly clean, taking
great care in decanting, to do it so gently that the liquor may not carry the
carmine along with it. Then letting dry in a shade the carmine, which shall
have been left in the bottom of your bow's, gather it with a little brush, and
keep it very cleary.

3. Eight or ten days afterward, more or less, decant again the tincture which
is in the second bowls, into a new varnished pipkin, then dry and gather the
carmine, which is at the bottom, in the same manner as the first.

4. Then set the pipkin, in which the carmine has been decanted for this second
time, on the fire, and vaporise the liquor gently, till the ground remains in
the consistence of a pap. This pap-like ground must then be put into several
small china cups, and placed in the sun to dry, which will procure you again
another carmine darker, and much less valuable than the first. Should there
happen any moistness on your last cups, take it off immediately, but gently,
and with a great deal of care.

5. In order to take the water off from your china bowls you might make use of
another method, viz. a very fine and clean sponge, in the following manner. Dip
your sponge into very clear and pure water, and there work it well with your
hand, soaking and pressing it alternately till you have rendered it very soft.
Then press and squeeze it quite dry in a clean towel. Now, if you only approach
it to the superfice of the tinctured water, it will immediately fill itself
with it, and you may squeeze it into another empty bowl, thus repeating the
same process, till you have got it all out of the first bowls; taking care
every time you approach it to the surface of the water, lest it should touch
the carmine; for no doubt but it would carry some along with the water.

6. If you dissolve one dram of mineral crystal into this tincture, by
boiling it to that effect for five or six minutes, it will help a great deal
the precipitation of the color, from which you take out afterward the water
with a sponge, as we said before. Should the water you have thus drawn out be
still tinged, you may add some more mineral crystal to it again; boil it as
before, strain it through a cloth, and let it settle. By these means you will
have very fine crimson carmine.

CVIII. The process observed in making the lake.
1. Take one pound of Alicant kali, or Bril-ash, pulverised, which put in a
kettle with four quarts of springwater. Boil the whole for the space of a
quarter of an hour, keeping stirring all the while with a stick, then take it
off from the fire, and let it cool, so as to be able to keep your finger in it
without scalding. When it is in that state, throw it in a jelly-bag, made of
cloth, to filter it, and render it perfectly clear. Put it, next, in a new
glazed pipkin, with one ounce of finely pulverised cochineal, previously
diluted by degrees with some of the same lie. Set it a-boiling for half a
quarter of an hour, and never cease to stir with a stick all the while it is on
the fire. -- You may, if you choose, add one dram of terra merita in fine
powder, at the same time with that of the cochineal; it will render your lake
the redder. -- When the whole shall have boiled the prescribed time of half a
quarter of an hour, take it off the fire, and let the tincture cool, in order
to pass it through a cloth, or the abovementioned jelly-bag. Set a large stone
pan under the bag to receive the tincture which shall filter; and, when all is
well drained, take the bag, turn it to throw off all the dregs, and wash it
well, inside and outside, in clean water, and wring it quite dry.

2. Now hang again this same bag at two feet distance, or thereabouts, above
the pan wherein the tincture did run, and now is. Dissolve, in about two quarts
of warm spring water, six ounces of Roman alum well pounded, that it may more
readily melt. When this dissolution is no more than lukewarm, have somebody to
pour it for you in the above jelly-bag, while you stir with a stick what runs
from it into your tincture, and do so, till the whole is passed through, and
the tincture froths no more. -- Then wring well your bag again, to express all
the alum's dissolution from it into your tincture, and wash it again afterward
in clear water, as before.

3. Have another stone pan like the first, hang your bag again over it, and
pour all your tincture in it. If it run clear like water, you may then let it
go so; if not, put it again in the bag over the other, and continue so to do
till it absolutely does run clear. If, however, after having repeated this
three or four times, it should continue to run tinged, dissolve two or three
ounces more of pulverised Roman alum in about two quarts of that very tinged
water, then stir and mix it well in the whole quantity of tincture, then pour
it again in the bag where the lake is, re-pouring again and again what shall
run first from it, till it runs quite clear, and does not even stain the paper.

4. Then let well drain, the lake which is in the bag; and with a box-spoon
take it, and spread it on pieces of cloth, laid on plaistered stones, and let
it dry in the shade where there is no dust, or where, at least, you may
preserve it from any.

CXI. To make the fine columbine lake.
1. Take half a pound of the finest Brazil-wood you can find. Cut it in small
bits, and pound it in an iron mortar. Put this in a new and glazed pipkin; pour
over it two quarts of strong wine vinegar. Let this infuse without the
assistance of any heat for three whole days. Boil it next for half an hour,
then add one ounce of pulverised Roman alum, and boil it again for the space
of three quarters of an hour, that the alum may the more perfectly be
dissolved, and the stronger the color.

2. Take the pot off from the fire; and, rasping the softest part of a dozen of
sound or cuttle-fish bones, add this powder to it. Replace the pot on the fire,
and stir the contents, with a bit of cane, till you see a froth rising on the
top of the composition; when immediately taking the pot off from the fire
again, you cover it with its lid, and let it stand for a week. During that
space of time you must, however, carefully stir this matter, with the cane
abovementioned, four times a day.

3. Have next a glazed pan, which you fill with dry sand as high as three
fingers from the brim. In this sand put your pot halfway in. Place all on a
charcoal fire, till it nearly boils; then, taking the pot off from the fire,
run the liquor through a clean cloth. Put it in different retorts, and set them
halfway in your sand again, which, by this time, ought to be quite cold.
Replace all on the fire, as before, and keep it there till it begins to simmer;
then, taking it off from the fire, let it cool, and the lake is done. But it
must not be used till twelve days after, during which time let it rest.

Note. When the tincture is in the retorts, you may, if you choose, put in each
of them half a gill of lie, made with vine-branch ashes -- When you put the
powder of cuttle-fish bones in the tincture, you must take care it is warm --
The residue which is found at the bottom of the retorts ought not to be thrown
away, as it is very good to paint in water colors.

CX. A fine red water, for miniature-painting.
1. Put in a new glazed pipkin, one ounce of Fernamburg Brazil wood, finely
rasped. Pour three pints of spring water on it, with six drachms of fine white
isinglass chopped very small. Place the pot on warm ashes, and keep it there
for three days, during which you are to keep up the same degree of heat.

2. When the isinglass is melted, add two ounces of kerms in grain, one of
alum, and three drachms of borax, all of them well pounded into powder. Boil
this gently to the reduction of one ha^^^ then strain the liquor through a
cloth, bottle and stop it well, and set it in the sun for a week before using.

Note. This water may very properly be used as a wash to give an agreeable
bloom to pale faces.

CXI. The receipt of the fine Venetian lake.
1. Take one pound of good pearl ashes. Put it in a large copper; then pour
over it six gallons of spring water. Should you not have any spring water, take
river, but no pump water. Let the pearl ashes soak thus twenty-four hours,
after which, set the copper on the fire, and boil it for one quarter of an
hour. Then filter this lie through a cloth jelly-bag, and receive the
filtration in a stone pan.

2. If, at first, the lie did not run quite clear, filter it till it does: and
then, changing the pan only underneath, pour what ran thick in the first pan in
the bag again. When all is new filtered and clear, put it in the copper again,
which must have been previously well washed, and set it on the fire to boil.
When it does boil, throw in two pounds of fine scarlet flocks, which you boil
to whiteness. Then filter again this lie tinged with scarlet color, in the
beforementioned jelly-bag, and press well the flocks, that there may not
remain any color in them.

Observe, that in order your bag may serve you both for the lake and tincture
without being at the trouble of cleansing it, you must not filter through it
the second lie in which the scarlet is. For should you pour this lie from the
copper, directly into it, the scarlet flocks would undoubtedly run with the
lie, which would give you an infinite deal of trouble to get out of the bag,
after the filtering of the tincture. And the least bit of it would entirely
spoil the lake. Therefore, to avoid all these inconveniences, strain your
second lie either through a cloth suspended by its four corners, or through
another bag by itself.

3. While the tincture is filtering, get the copper well scoured, cleaned, and
wiped dry. Put the filtered tincture in it. Dossolve, over the fire, and in a
copper or glazed earthen saucepan, half-a-pound of Roman alum in one quarter of
spring water. Then strain it quickly, and, while warm, pour it in your
tincture, keeping stirring all the while, and afterward, till all the froth
has quite subsided. Boil, next, all together for the space of half a quarter of
an hour. Then throw it in the same bag that filtered your first lie, and
receive the filtration into a clean stone pan.

4. Besides this, boil again, in another quart of spring water, half a pound of
Fernamburg Brasil wood, cut and bruised in an iron mortar. Strain it through a
cloth, and pour it, along with the above dissolution of Roman alum, in the
jelley-bag, and stir it to run all together.

5. After all is run out of the bag, throw in again half a pint of quite clear
and pure spring water.

6. When nothing runs any more out of the bag, the lake is left in it. Take it
out with a box spoon, as we said in the preceding article, and spread it on
plaster flat stones, three fingers' thick, and about half a foot square,
covered with white cloth of the same size. For should there be no cloth on the
plaster, the lake would stick to it.

Note. It often happens for the first water which runs out of the bag to be
muddy, and to carry some lake along with it. But you mus^ continue filtering
till it comes bright and clear. Then, taking off the pan from underneath, and
substituting another, you put that muddy liquor into the bag again. -- Should,
by chance, the filtration continue ^o run red, as it sometimes happens, you
must still keep filtering the liquor through the bag, till it is clarified.

CXII. Directions for coloring prints.
1. All the colors which are used for coloring prints are grinded with
gum-water; the calcined green only excepted, which grinds with vinegar.

2. The chief of these colors are, fine azure, vermilion, Venetian lake, fine
verditure, white lead, calcined green, umber, Cologn, earth, indigo French
berries, juice, yellow ochre, yellow massicot, white massicot, brown ochre,
bistre, or, prepared soot, lamp-black, and brown red.

3. For complexions, you make a mixture of white and vermilion, more or less
according as you want the color more or less bloody. For the lips, it is a
mixture of lake and vermilion. And the shades are made with white and
vermilion, and a great deal of umber.

4. For fair hair, you join a good deal of white with very little umber. If a
carrotty color, take yellow ochre and brown red; the shade with bistre and lake
mixed together. If light and like silver, you only mix some black and white and
umber together.

5. Cloths are made, if linen, with white lead and a little blue; if stuffs,
with white lead alone, and the shades with a gray color, made by means of a
mixture of black and white lead together. If a white cloth, you must make a
mixture of white and umber together, and you shade it with a compound of umber
and black. If a red cloth, use vermilion in the l^ghter parts of the folds;
lake and vermilion for the clear shades; and the lake alone, laid on the
vermilion will form the dark shades.

CXIII. Directions for the mixture of colors.
1. The pale yellow, for the lights, is made with white massicot. The chiaro
oscaro, with the massicot and umber. The dark shade, with umber alone.

2. The orange color is made with black lead for the lights, which you shade
with the lake.

3. The lake is used very clear, for the lights, in draperies; and thicker, for
their shades.

4. The purple is made with blue, white, and lake, for the lights; blue and
lake only for the clear shades, and indigo and blue for the darker ones.

5. The pale blue is used for the lights, and for the clear shades a little
thicker; but, for the darker shades, mix the indigo and blue together.

6. The gold like yellow is made with yellow massicot for the lights; and the
clear shades with a mixture of black lead and massicot: the darker shade, with
lake yellow ochre, and very little black lead: and the darker of all, with
Cologn earth and lake.

7. The green is of two sorts. -- The first is made with massicot and blue, or
blue and white; and for the shades you make the blue ^^edominat^ in the
mixture. -- The other is made with calcined green, and French berries' juice,
mixed with calcined green; and you may form their shades by an addition of
indigo.

8. For trees you mix green and umber together.

9. The grounds are made in the same way; wherever there is any green, you
take calcined green, with French berries' juice.

10. For the distances, you mix green and blue together; and mountains are
always made with blue.

11. The skies are likewise made with blue, but you must add a little yellow to
them, when it comes near the mountains; and, to make the transition between
that and the blue, mix a little lake and blue together to soften it.

12. Clouds are made with purple; if they be obscure, you must mix lake and
indigo together.

13. Stones are made with white and yellow mixed together; and their shades
with black.

CXIV. Directions for painting fresco.
Begin first, by laying on the intended wall a coat of sifted river sand, mixed
with old sl^cked line pulverised and sifted also. This coat is not to be laid
on the wall, but in proportion as you paint; therefore, you are to prepare no
more at a time than you are sure to paint over in one day, while fresh and
moist. -- The body of the wall on which you lay this coat must previously be
pargetted with plaster, or with a mortar made with sand and lime. And if the
paintings are to be exposed to the injuries of the weather, the mason's work
must be made of bricks or free stones very dry.

2. Before you begin to paint, you must prepare your designs in their full
intended size on paper, and chalk them one after another, as you go on, on the
wall, in proportion as you work, and no longer than half an hour after the coat
of prepared river sand above mentioned has been laid on, and well polished with
the trowel.

3. In these sorts of paintings all the compounded and artificial-made colors,
as well as most of the minera ones, are rejected. They use hardily any other
but earths, which may preserve their hue, and defend it from being burnt by the
lime. And, that the work may for ever preserve its beauty, you must observe to
employ them quickly, while the coat underneath is still moist; and never, as
some do, touch them over after they are once dry, with colors diluted in yolks
of eggs, glue, or gum, because these colors always blacken, and never keep that
vivacity and brilliancy those have which have been laid at first when the
ground was moist. Besides, in the case of paintings exposed in the air, this
sort of touching up is never good for any thing; and, too often, scales off in
a very short time.

CXV. Directions for the choice, use, and composition, of the colors employed
for the above purpose.
The colors made use of, for the above purpose, are such as follow.

1. The white. This is made with a lime which has been slacked for a great
while, and white marble in subtle powder, mixed in about equal quantities.
Sometimes no more than a quarter part of marble dust is required; which depends
entirely on the quality of the lime, and cannot be known but when you come to
use it; for if there be too much marble, the white will turn black.

2. Ochre, or brown red, is a natural earth.

3. Yellow ochre is also a natural earth, which becomes red if you burn it.

4. The obscure yellow, or yellow ochre, which is also a natural earth, and
slimy, is to be got by the streams of iron-mines. It receives a fine color from
calcination.

5. Naples yellow, is a sort of filth which gathers round the mines of
brimstone: and, though it be used in fresco-paintings, its color nevertheless,
is not so good as that which is made of earth, or, yellow ochre and white mixed
together.

6. The purple red is a natural earth, the product of England, and it is used
instead of lake.

7. The terverte, from Verona in Lombardy, is a natural earth, which is very
hard and dark. There is also another sort of terverte.

8. The ultramarine, or, lapis lazuli, is a hard stone, and of a very difficult
preparation. This color of the manner of preparing which we shall give ( ix.
Art. cxxxiii.) a just and precise account, subs^sts and keeps itself fine much
longer than any other color. It is not to be grinded, but diluted only on the
pallet with oil. As it is very dear, you may spare using it in fresco
paintings, and supply it by smalt, which answers the same purpose, particularly
in skies.

9. Smalt is a blue color, which has very little substance. It is used in great
landscapes, and stands very well the open air.

10. Umber is an obscure earth. It requires to be calcined in an iron box, if
you want to make it finer, browner, and of a better look.

11. Cologn earth is a sort of rusty black, which is apt to discharge, and to
turn red.

12. The earthen black, is a black which comes from Germany. -- There is also
another sort of German black, which is a natural earth, and makes a bluish
black, like that of charcoal. This sort of black is that which is used for
making printers' ink. There is another still, which is made with burnt wine-lye.

Such are all the colors which are preferable to be used in fresco-painting.
Grind and dilute them with water; before beginning to work, prepare your
principal colors, and put each by themselves, in small gallipots. But it is
necessary to know, that except the purple red, the brown red, the yellow ochre,
and all the blacks, (those particularly which have passed through the fire)
turn paler as the fresco dries.

CXVI. Directions for painting in oil on a wall.
Method I.
You must, when the wall is perfectly dry, give it two or three coats of
boiling oil, or more, if necessary, so that the face of the wall may remain
greasy, and can soak in no more; then lay another coat of siccative colors,
which is done as follows: Grind some common whitening, or chalk, red ochre, and
other sorts of earth, pretty stiff, and lay a coat of it on the wall. When this
is very dry, then draw and paint on it whatever you will, observing to mix a
little varnish among your colors, that you may not be obliged to varnish them
afterward.

CXVII. Method 2.
There are some who prepare the wall another way, in order it may sooner dry,
and that the dampness should not occasion the colors to scale, as it sometimes
happens, on account of the oil which resists it, and prevents it from sweating
out through the pores of the wall. They make a cement with the lime and marble
dust, or grinded tiles; this they lay on the wall with the trowel, with which
they smoothen it, and then give it a coat of lintseed oil with a large brush.
In the next place, they prepare a composition of Greek pitch, mastich, and
coarse varnish, which they boil all together in a pipkin, and lay afterward,
first with a brush, then smoothen with a hot trowel, in order to spread it
better, and more equally. When this is done, they lay on the wall the coat of
siccative colors above mentioned, then draw their design and paint.

CXVIII. Method 3.
Others again make a cement, or mortar, with lime, brick-dust and sand. And,
when this is dry, they make another with lime, sifted brick-dust, and smiths'
embers, or iron scum, all in equal quantities. Beat and incorporate all this
together, with whites of eggs and lintseed oil, and it will make so strong a
cement as cannot be equalled by any thing else. Its nature is such, that while
you are laying it on, you must not stop and leave it till you have finished,
otherwise it will assuredly crack in every one of those places where you shall
have resumed your work. Therefore, as soon as you begin to lay it, go on
without interruption, till the whole wall is entirely covered with it, and
totally polished. -- And when dry, lay the above mentioned coat of siccative
colors, and proceed according to the other directions.

CXIX. Directions for painting in oil on wood.
Lay first, one coat of size on the wood; then another of whitening diluted
with size; then another again of boiling oil, as mentioned in the above Art.
cxvi. When this last is thoroughly dry, you draw your design, and paint as
usual.

CXX. Directions for painting in oil on canvas.
1. Choose a fine and smooth tick or cloth, which nail on a frame. Pass over it
first a coat of size, and when dry, rub it over with a pounce stone to eat off
all the knobs and knots. The size which you put first on the cloth is intended
to lay down all the threads, and fill up all the small holes, that the color
may not pass through.

2. When the cloth is dry, lay on a coat of simple color, which may not destroy
the others; for example, brown-red, which is a natural earth, full of
substance, and lasting. You may mix it, if you like, with a little white lead,
it will dry the sooner. To grind this color, they use nut or lintseed oil; and
in order to lay it as thin as it is possible, they use a large knife made on
purpose.

3. When this color is dry, you are to rub it again with the pounce stone, to
render it smoother. Then lay another coat of white lead and charcoal black, to
render the ground greyish. In this, as well as in the preceding coats, you must
take care to put as little color as you possibly can, to prevent the cloth from
cracking, and for the better preservation of the colors which are to be laid
afterward in painting. For it is proper to observe, that could there be no
ground at all laid on the canvas of a picture, previous to the painting of it,
and should one paint directly on the bare cloth, without any other preparation
at all, the colors would appear much more to their advantage, and preserve
their brightness much longer. A proof of this assertion may be found in the
practice of Paul Veronese, and Titian, who used to impregnate their canvas with
water colors only, and paint afterward in oil over that ground. This custom of
theirs has not a little contributed to render their pieces more lively and
bright, because the ground in water color draws, and soaks the oil off the
colors, which must render them much finer, since the greatest cause of their
dullness arises from nothing but the oil with which they are diluted.

4. They therefore, who wish to see their works keep bright and lively, use as
little oil as possible, and keep their colors more stiff, mixing a little oil
of spike amongst them, which indeed vaporises very soon, but assists in
rendering them more fluid and tractable in working.

5. Another cause of the colors not keeping a long while their beauty, is when
they are too much tormented on the pallet, as it often happens that painters
confuse them in working. Whenever this is the case, they must needs be hurt, as
there are many which adulterate, and other wise corrupt the others, and spoil
the vivacity of their taint. Therefore, we cannot recommend too much to be
cautious and clean in employing them, taking care to lay them as distinct and
separate as possible, each by themselves, on the pallet, without mixing them
too much with the brush or pencil. Never mingle together those colors which are
enemies to each other, as all the blacks are, particularly the lampblack; but
as much as possible, try to use them separately by themselves. Nay, when there
is an occasion of giving more strength to some parts of a picture, stay till it
is dry before you touch it up again, if those colors are obnoxious to the
others with which you are to do it. Therefore he shows his judgment in
painting, who is not precipitate in laying his colors on his pictures, but lays
them thick enough, and covers at several times the carnations, which, in terms
of art is called empater.

6. As to what concerns the first laying of grounds on canvas, in water colors,
it is a method not commonly practified, because they may scale, and cannot be
rolled without some difficulty. For this reason, the custom prevails of
grounding the canvas with oil colors. But when the canvas is good and very
fine, the less color you can lay on for that purpose, the better. Take care
only those colors and oils are good. -- The lead which some painters use the
help their colors to dry the sooner, soon destroys their brightness and beauty.

CXXI. Which colors are used for the above purpose.
1. Though all the different sorts of colors which are (...) in painting in oil
are not fit for that so called (...), yet it is true, however, that (except
lime and marble dust, which indeed cannot strictly be called ^olors) every one
of those used in fresco are good in oil. Therefore, without entering into a
repetition of those already mentioned in Art. cxiii. we shall content ourselves
with making only the following addition to them.

2. White lead; this color is made with lead which you bury. Several years
after, this lead turns into some sort of stakes, which are of a very fine
white. -- Though this white exists in painting, and is in positive use, it has
always, however, a very bad quality, which the oil corrects a little, when you
grind it on the stone.

3. Ceruse, or flake white; this is a sort of rust gathered from lead, but of a
coarser nature than the other.

4. Massicot; there are two sorts of this color. The one is yellow, and the
other is white. It is made with calcined lead.

5. Orpine, otherwise ^^ripigment. It is used calcined and non-calcined. -- To
calcine it they put it in an iron-box, or in a pot w^^^ stopped. But few either
calcine it, or even use it at all, as the fumes are mortal, and it is very
dangerous to use it.

6. Black lead. This comes from lead mines. They make very little use of it,
because it is a bad color of itself, besides that it is a great enemy to the
other.

7. Cinnabar, or vermilion. This color is drawn from the mines where they
gather quicksilver. As it is a mineral, it is the reason why it is does not
resist the impression of the air, nor the injuries of the weather.

8. Lake. This color, which is an artificial made one, is composed with
cochineal, or with scarlet flocks; or again, Brasil wood, and some other sorts
of woods. There are several sorts of lake made. It does not stand the weather.

9. Blue verditure and green verditure. It is very seldom used in any other
works but landscapes.

10. Indigo. This color is generally used for making skies, or draperies; when
properly used, it keeps its beauty a great while. You must not mix it with too
great a quantity of oil, but lay it a little thick and dark, bucause it
discharges very much. They use it with great success diluted with gum water. It
is a good color for the composition of greens.

11. Brown-pink, otherwise called stil-de-grain. This color is drawn from what
is called French berries, which they soak and boil, then mix the result with
vine-wood ashes, or calcined white chalk, to give it a proper consistence. When
this is done, it must be strained through a very fine cloth.

12. Lamp-black. This is a bad color, but handy to paint black draperies.

13. Ivory-black. This black is made indifferently with common bones, as well
as ivory, burnt. Apelles discovered this sort of black, if we believe Pliny,
Book xxxv. Chap. v.

14. Verdigrise. This is the most pernicious of all the colors, and capable to
ruin a whole picture, if there were ever so little in the color with which the
canvass is first impregnated. It is however of a very agreeable look. They
sometimes calcine it to prevent its malignant effect; but it is as dangerous to
use it that way as orpine; and it is an undoubted truth that, however well
prepared as it may be, it must be employed alone by itself, for it would spoil
all the colors with which it may be mixed. The chief reason why they use it is,
that it dries very much, and for that purpose they mix a little of it with the
blacks, which can never dry without some assistance of that kind,

N. B. You must be very careful never to use, for other colors, the pencils
with which you shall have laid any verdigrise.

15. There are again some other sorts of compound colors, which are never used
but in oil.

CXXII. Which oils are used in painting.
1. The best oils which are used in painting are those of nut and lintseed. To
render the colors more fluid, and spread more easily under the pencil, they use
also oil of spike. This oil absorbs itself in the canvass, and leaves the
colors without any gloss. They use it also for cleaning pictures; but you must
take care it should not carry the colors away with it. It is made with the
flowers of a plant called Spikenard or Lavender Spike.

2. There is another oil drawn from Mel^^ian-rosin, firs, etc. wherefore it is
called oil of turpentine. This sort of oil is also very good for touching up
pictures; but it is chiefly good for mixing with ultramarine, and the different
sorts of f^^lts, because it serves to make them spread with more facility, and
evaporates almost immediately. When you make use of this oil, the less there is
of any other oil in the color, the better, as they all serve only to make it
turn yellow.

3. There are other oils again which are denominated ficcative oils, because
they serve to dry up the others the sooner. These are many in number and
species. One sort is nothing but the oil of nut, boiled with gold litharge and
a whole onion peeled, which is taken off after boiling; this onion serving only
to exsiccate the greasy parts of the oil, and to clarify it. Another sort is
made with azure in powder, or smalt, boiled in oil of nut. When the whole is
boiled, you must let it settle, and then skim off the top. It is fittest for
dil^ting the white, and such of the other colors as you want to preserve purest
and nearest.

CXXIII. To take off instantly a copy from a print, or a picture.
Make a water of soap and alum, with which wet a cloth or a paper; lay either
on a print or picture, and pass it once under the rolling press; then going
round the other side to take it up, you will have a very fine copy of whatever
you shall have laid it upon.

CXXIV. Directions to make the Spanish carnation.
Take bastard saffron; wash, dry, and grind it well. While you grind it, put in
four ounces of pearl ashes to every one pound of saffron. Incorporate them
well, both together, and throw it into a double cloth jellybag. Then set half a
pint of Spanish lemon's juice on the fire, and, when just lukewarm, pour it on
the saffron in the bag, and lay under it what you want to dye. -- The stuff
which is to be dyed ought previously to have been boiled in alum-water, then
rinsed and wiped between two cloths, as a preparatory process to make it take
the dye the better.

CXXV. To make the Spanish ladies rouge.
This rouge, is a vermilion, which is carefully laid on a sheet of paper, from
which, by means of wetting the tip of your finger with your spittle, you may
then take it off, at will, and rub your cheeks, lips, etc. The method of making
it is as follows.

1. Take good scarlet flocks and spirit of wine, or, in their stead, lemon's
juice. Boil the whole in an earthen pot, well glazed and well stopped, till the
spirit of wine, or lemon's juice, has charged itself with all the color of the
scarlet flocks. Strain this dye through a cloth, and wring it hard to express
well all the color out. Boil it afterward with a little Arabic water, till the
color becomes very deep.

2. On half a pound of scarlet's flocks you must put four ounces of spirit of
wine, and a sufficient quantity of water, to soak well the flocks. Then, in the
color you extract from it, put the bulk of a filbert of gum arabic, and boil
the whole in a silver porringer. When this is ready, as we said before; proceed
as follows.

3. Steep some cotton in the color, and wet some sheets of paper with it: let
them dry in the shade, though in a place by no means damp at all. Repeat this
wetting and drying of the same sheets over and over again, as many times as you
please, till you find they are charged with rouge to your satisfaction.

CXXVI. A fine lake, made with shell-lac.
1. Boil and skim well, sixteen pounds of chamberlye; then put in one pound of
fine shell-lac, with five ounces of roch alum in powder. Boil all together,
till you see the chamber-lye is well charged with the color, which you may
easily know by steeping a bit of white rag in it, then take it out again to see
whether or not the color please you; and if it do not, let it boil longer,
repeating the same trial, till you are perfectly satisfied.

2. Throw, now, the liquor in a flannel bag; and, without suffering what runs
into the pan under to settle, repour it into the bag so many times, till the
liquor runs at last quite clear, and not tinged. Then, with a wooden spatula,
take off the lake, which is in form of a curd: form it into small cakes, or
balls, and dry them in a shade on new tiles; then keep them for use.

N. B. For want of chamber-lye, you may, if you choose, employ a tart lie made
of strong pearl ashes.

CXXVII. Directions to make cinnabar, or vermilion.
1. Put mercury (or quick silver) in a glazed dish. Set it on a sand-bath, and
let it be well surrounded with the sand every way. Pour some melted brimstone
over it; and, with an iron spatula, keep constantly stirring, till the whole is
converted into a black powder.

2. With this powder, till the quarter part of a retort with a short and wide
neck. (...) it first on a fire of cinders. Then increase the fire by ^^grees,
and continue it so for ten hours; after which you may make a blasting one for
twelve hours.

3. Observations. -- By the first fire, there will arise a black fume. -- By
the second, a yellow. -- And by the last a red; which signifies the perfect
accomplishment of the cinnabar. -- As soon as this is the case, let the vessel
cool, and you will find, in the receiver, and in the neck of the retort, a very
fine cinnabar.

N. B. There are many who instead of a glass retort, use earthen, or stone
ones, which all equally bear the fire. They make a slow fire for about half an
hour, then increase and continue it till they see the red fumes arising. --
Both methods are equally good, and answer perfectly the same purpose.

CXXVIII. Another, very different, method of making cinnabar.
1. Melt, in a pipkin, some brimstone over a slow fire. When melted, take it
out, and with one hand squeeze a knot of mercury between your fingers through a
cloth into the melted sulphur; and with the other, stir well till the lump is
become quite cold and black.

2. Put this into a subtle powder, with which having filled the fourth part of
a very long retort, you will lute it well, and very exactly, with a good lute.
Place it next, without a receiver, for two or three hours, on a very mild fire;
then introduce into the retort a long funnel which will reach as far as the
matter, and even to the bottom of the retort; through that funnel pass a long
spatula, which touching also the bottom of the retort, should come out of the
funnel five or six inches. In the middle of the spatula let there be a bung of
lute round it, well dried, which will stop so well the retort as to prevent it
from breathing any air. When all this is done, push on the fire to a pretty
smart degree, and keep it for five hours.

3. At the end of this term, draw out the spatula, and introduce, through the
same way that it came out, two spoonsfull, or thereabouts, of your prepared
powder of brimstone and quicksilver, with which you intend to make cinnabar,
and which you shall, for that purpose, have kept warm in a vessel by the corner
of the fire, that it may not cool the retort in going in, and thereby retard
the operation.

4. Continue so to do, adding every hour new matter, by means of the drawing
out the spatula to introduce the new powder, and replacing it quickly, till you
have increased your lump of cinnabar to the quantity of one hundred weight. --
The spatula's use in the neck of the retort is to prevent its filling itself up
by the sublimation of the matter, which would occasion two evils, that of
breaking of the retort, and of preventing the introduction of new powder to
increase the lump of cinnabar. So that, at the same time it keeps a free
passage into the retort, it nevertheless stops it too, by means of the ball of
lute which is round it. -- But, in the last place, in order there should remain
no vacancy in the middle of the cinnabar-lump, take off the spatula for the
last time, and inject fresh powder, then, without ^^-introducing the spatula,
stop the retort with a lump of lute only -- Thus, the longer you keep the fire
up, the harder and redder the lump of cinnabar becomes.

5. Observations. -- This cinnabar is the very same which empyricks use in
fumigation, along with aloes, wood, myrrh and other aromatics, to excite the
mouth, or belly, flux, which they reiterate two or three times, or till that
flux is abundant enough to procure the cure of the venereal disorder. -- It is
the same also which painters make use of; and which enters into the composition
of sealing wax.

There are alchymists who maintain, they can with the natural or fictitious
cinnabar we have just mentioned resolve irreductibly either gold or silver;
because they are of opinion, that these metals have sprung from it in the
entrails of the earth. But it is proper to tell them here, that they would not
perhaps commit so gross an error, if they attempted this process with the
cinnabar, which the philosopher endeavors to draw from quick gold and silver,
and which are known to him alone. To which reflection I shall add, that he to
whom quick gold and silver are known can do with them also every thing as with
the metals; but as the old saying is, Non-licit omnibus adire Chorintam.

CXXIX. An azure as fine as, and which looks similar to ultramarine.
Grind well together into powder three ounces of ammoniac salt, and six of
verdigrise. Then wet it, in continuing to grind it with oil of tartar, till you
have made it pretty fluid. Put this into a glass mattress, and bury it for five
days in hot dung. At the end of that term you will find your composition turned
into a fine azure.

CXXX. The same, another way, as practiced in Germany.
Here is another method of proceeding, to make azure, as they practice it in
Germany, and which is very fine and good.

1. Distill, in an alembic, one pound of vitriol, half a pound of nitre, and
three ounces of cinnabar. In this water put tinsel or copper; they will
dissolve. When the dissolution shall be perfected, add a sufficient quantity of
calcined pewter to render your liquor quite milkwhite. Let the whole rest for
three days, and then you will have a middling azure.

2. A very good observation. The liquor which stills from the vitriol,
cinnabar, and nitre, has the power to dissolve any sort of metal whatever. --
It has again this additional virtue, that if you rub the forehead of a horse
with it, the hair will instantly turn, and remain white at that place.

CXXXI. Another very fine azure.
Dissolve, in one pound of the strongest double distilled wine vinegar, two
ounces of ammoniac salt in powder, one of copper filings, and one pound of the
whitest eggs shell calx. Put this composition into a copper vessel, which you
must stop and lute so well, with its copper lid, that nothing can possibly
exhale from it. Place this for one month in hot horse-dung, and at the end of
that term you will find a very fine azure.

CXXXII. Another.
Take vitriol calcined to redness, one part; sulphur vivum, two; and
quicksilver, three. Mix well all into one powder, which you must put into a
glass retort, and bury it over in horse dung for forty days; after which term
the composition will be turned into a very fine azure.

IX. Preparation of the lapis lazuli to make ultramarine.
CXXXIII. Just. The general manipulation of the whole process; each single part
of which shall be treated of in particular, afterward.
1. Take one pound, our whatever quantity you please, of lapis-lazuli. Let your
stones be well chosen, and of that sort which are streaky with gold. Try their
quality, whether good or bad, which is done thus. Break one bit of it, set it
on red-hot coals, and blow as hard as you can for an hour, then take it off and
let it cool. If in touching it, it drop like mould or dust, it is a sign it is
not worth any thing; but if it remains hard and preserves its color, it is
good. When you have thus made yourself sure of the quality of the stone, break
it all in small knobs, put them in a crucible on a melting fire, which by
strength of bellows you push on for an hour and a quarter. When this is done
throw them into the strongest double distilled wine vinegar. When they are thus
extinguished in it, take them out to dry, and prepare the following water.

2. Boil a little raw white honey with two pints of water in a glazed pipkin.
Skim it so long as there comes any scum on it; then take it off to cool; and,
when cold, dissolve in it the bigness of a nut of the best dragon's blood
reduced into a subtle powder. Run this dissolution through a white cloth into
a glazed earthen pot. Observe to make your water (with that dragon's blood)
neither too red, nor too clear, but to keep a just medium between both, that
the azure may take a finer hue. -- With this liquor grind, for the space of an
hour and a half, your abovementioned lapis lazuli, then gather it up into a
large glazed vessel, and then let it dry in the shade, but guard off the sun,
otherwise it will undoubtedly lose its color. When it is perfectly dry, grind
it anew into a very fine powder, then pack and keep it tied very closely in
fine white linen. Then proceed to the following paste.

3. Take two ounces of the best white rosin, an equal quantity of Greek pitch,
and the same quantity again of mastich, lintseed oil, turpentine, and virgin
wax. Powder what is powderable, and cut small what is not. Put all into a new
glazed pipkin, and boil it to perfection; which you know by letting a drop fall
into cold water and taking it out with your fingers. For if it do not stick to
your fingers, it is done to perfection, and if it do, it is not. -- When,
therefore, it is done to perfection, run it quite hot through a sheer-cloth
into a pan of cold water, where in leave it till perfectly hard: then take it
out and let it dry. When you want to incorporate it with the powder, proceed as
follows.

4. Cut this paste into small bits, and put it to melt over the fire in a well
tinned sauce pan. When the contents come to make a noise, throw in two ounces
of oil of bitter almonds, and let it boil for about ten minutes. In the mean
while have your lapis-lazuli powder ready in a vessel then pour over it gently,
and little at a time, what is boiling in the pipkin, observing to stir
carefully, while you pour, in order to incorporate well this liquid with the
powder, which being done let the whole cool. Then, having rubbed your hands
with oil of olive, take this composition and work it well in order to
incorporate all perfectly: and, after having given it the form of a loaf, put
it in a glazed vessel to keep it for use.

5. When you want to draw the azure from it. (which must be less than twelve
days after this last operation, and it has laid in this glazed vessel,) begin
first by making a strong lie with vine-wood ashes, which you strain through a
flannel bag, to get it very clear. Then putting it, in a copper boiler, on the
fire, till it is so hot as not to be able to keep the hand in without scalding,
you pour some of it on what quantity of the above paste you please, to extract
the azure from, and stir it gently till it begins to come out. When, by thus
stirring your paste in this lie this last is become well charged with the
color, decant it out into another glazed vessel, of which sorts of vessels you
must have a good provision ready. Then pour again some more warm lie on your
paste, and work it the same as before, till this new lie seems sufficiently
charged with taint, and decant it out again into another well glazed vessel.
Pour new warm lie again on your paste, and proceed as before, continuing so to
do till the paste gives no more taint to the lie.

6. Observe, that when the lapis is good, you loose but four ounces of it out
of one pound, and that you extract twelve ounces of azure in the following
proportion. Five ounces of very fine ultramarine, by the first washes; four
middling, out of the second washes; and three base ones, by the last washes.
Each of these ^^ree different qualities must be kept separately, and washed in
several clear lies, by changing them from vessel to vessel several times with
new lie each time. And, when they seem to you very bright, put them a-drying in
a shade, but not in the sun, in a room perfectly free from dust.

7. When it has been thus perfectly dried, take a glass of brandy, in which you
have put a-soaking a little Brazil wood, and asperge the ultramarine with that
tinged brandy, stir it, and let it dry; renew the aspersion for two or three
days, till the azure participates a little of this taint. And, when it is well
dried, for the last time, you will find it to be of a most beautiful hue. Then
put it in small leather bags, and keep them well tied.

CXXXIV. 2d. Directions to be observed in the process of preparing the strong
cement, in which the lapis lazuli is to be incorporated, to draw afterward the
azure from it.
1. Take first, clear and neat Venetian turpentine, four ounces; fine white
rosin, six; fine Greek pitch, as much; clear and pure mastich, three; fine
shining white wax, an equal quantity; purified lintseed oil, one and a half.
Then have a well glazed pipkin, quite new; put in it first the turpentine, and
set it on a small and mild charcoal fire. Stir it with a wooden spatula, like
that of apothecaries, till it is well liquified; introduce, next, the rosin to
it, by little and little at a time, and incorporate it well; when this is done,
add the Greek pitch to it, in the same manner, then the mastich in powder, at
three or four times, then the wax cut very small, also by degrees, and stir
well till the whole is perfectly incorporated together. Above all, take care to
do this with a slow fire, otherwise these matters will undoubtedly burn, as
they are of an inflammable nature. At last, put the lintseed oil, and set the
pot on the fire, and let the composition simmer for the space of one quarter of
an hour, or more, if necessary, till the cement is quite done, which you know
by the following experiment.

2. Turn the spatula all round the pot in the composition, then, raising it
out, let a drop or two fall into a pan of cold water, which you are to have
just by. If the drop spread on the water, the composition is not done,
therefore you must let it simmer longer on the fire. If on the second trial the
drop keep in one lump, the matter is done. -- You may try it again this other
way; Steep your fingers in the water, and work the same drop between them. If
in so doing, and pulling it, it give way and does not stick to your fingers, it
is another infallible sign of the cement being done enough. -- Therefore, take
it off from the fire, and pour it quite hot into a pecked bag, which you shall
have previously steeped in warm water and w^^ng. Make this hot cement run
through the said bag into a panful of cold water. Be quick in straining the
said cement while hot, for if it grows cold, it will not strain through the
bag; therefore to hasten it, press it downwards between two sticks.

3. When the cement shall have acquired a tolerable degree of coldness in the
water, take it out of it in a lump; and with your hands imbibed with lintseed
oil, prepared and purified, as hereafter directed in Art. cxxxvi. for fear it
should stick to them; work it so well that there shall remain no more water
about it. When this is performed, the cement is perfectly completed; and, to
preserve it, you keep it perpetually in cold water. Therefore, in summer, you
must change that water every day, and with such precautions you may preserve it
eight or ten years always good for strong cement.

CXXXV. To make another cement, of a softer nature, for the said azure.
1. Take fine Venice turpentine, four ounces; fine white rosin, six; Greek
pitch, as much; fine wax, one; and lintseed oil, three parts of an ounce.
Prepare this cement after the same way as the other; and observe carefully in
the doing of it the same order and circumstances.

2. Observe, however, that this sort of cement is sooner done than the first,
as it is of a softer nature, and that it will sooner return you the azure than
the first, which is harder, will do. But neglect not to take notice also, that
if you intend to work the lapis lazuli with both these cements, you must begin
with the soft first. And yet you are not to (...) kept ig^orant, that, if your
lapis lazuli be not of the best sort, (which is the gold streaked sort), you
must guard well from giving it the two cements. In the art of preparing and
giving the cement or cements, consists (...) that of making the ultramarine
azure: in that point lies all your gain or your loss. Therefore, take great
care to do it well.

CXXXVI. Directions to prepare and purify the lintseed oil for the azure.
1. Take whatever quantity you will of fine lintseed oil, of a fine saffron or
gold color. Put it in a glass, or bullock's horn, perforated at the small end.
Pour over this oil some cold water, and stir it well with a stick, and shake it
to mix it well, then let it settle. When the oil and the water are divided,
open the little hole which is at the bottom of the horn, aad let the water out.
Put some fresh water to it again, and do the same, repeating the same process
seven or eight times running, or even more, till the water runs off as clear as
you first put it in.

2. Thus your oil shall be perfectly purified; and, in that state you may keep
it in a well-stopped glass bottle for use.

3. The oil of bitter almonds may absolutely supply the want of this; but,
besides its being dearer, it is not near so good for the purpose.

Note. That whenever we shall speak of oil, we always mean lintseed oil thus
prepared and purified.

CXXXVII. The lie to wash the ultramarine with.
1. Take eight or ten handsfull of pearl ashes, made with vine-wood ashes. Put
this into a box perforated at the bottom, and large enough to hold a couple of
pailsfull of water. Place this bucket and set it so that the water cannot run
out of it without carrying the ashes along with it. Stop the hole on the
outside, before putting the ashes into it, and press these down very hard when
you put them in, then pour, by degrees, a pailful of warm water over these
ashes. When these are settled again, unstop the hole, and put a bung, made of
an old list of white cloth, through which you will make it run drop by drop
into a pan. Repeat this distillation again by putting this same lie into
another perforated box, without any ashes, and stop it with another bung of the
same kind as the first, so that you may get your lie fine and clear; and put it
to keep in a well-glazed vessel, carefully covered, for fear of the dust.

2. Now pour another similar quantity of warm water on the same ashes as
before; proceed exactly with this second water as with the first, and keep
these two sorts of water for use.

3. Repeat again the same operation, by pouring a third pailful of water on the
same ashes; and proceeding in every respect with this third water as with the
two former, you will be possessed of three sorts of lie of three different
degrees of strength; the first, strong; the second, middling; and the third
weak and soft.

4. These various sorts of lies serve to wash the cement or paste, in order to
draw the azure out of it, after the method hereafter prescribed. And, when you
want to proceed to work, take of these three different sorts of lie, and mix
them so as to give them the due degree of strength according as you think
requisite.

CXXXVIII. Another sort of lie for the same purpose.
There is another sort of lie which can be made to cleanse the cement of its
unctuosity and grease, and which they prepare in the following manner.

1. Take whatever quantity of calcined tartar you like. Boil it for the space
of a quarter of an hour, or rather more, in clear and clean water. Then let it
settle, and decant it into a glass bottle, which stop well, and keep it for use.

2. It is fit for taking the grease off the cement when too unctuous. Likewise
to wash the ultramarine with, and thereby heighten its color.

3. This lie has also another particular quality, which it that of curing the
mange, the itch, and other ^^t^neous disorders, by washing with it. It purifies
and whitens the skin prodigiously.

CXXXIX. Directions for the choice of the vessels in which the most impure
ultramarine is to be washed, in order to be mixed afterward with the other
azure.
1. The vessel may be either an earthen, a brass, or a copper one, it does not
signify which, provided, if it be an earthen vessel, it should be well hardened
in the baking, and finely glazed in the inside, or if brass or copper, it
should be of a perfect polish all round, and at the bottom, in the inside.

2. It must be perforated by the side with three holes, to admit of three
cocks, one toward the middle part, the other lower, and the third at two
fingers' breadth from the bottom.

3. Though the azure matter which is at the bottom of the vessel appear not to
you to be such, le^ it rest eight or ten days, and you will soon be convinced
of the contrary. Therefore, at the end of that term, when you plainly perceive
somewhat of azure at the bottom of the water, decant it out as gently as
possible; take out the azure, wash it like the other with clean water, and put
it with the other, or keep it apart, which you like, you will find it as good
as the rest.

CXL. Observations proper to be made for discerning the virtue, and good or bad
qualities of the lapis lazuli, from which you intend to compose ultramarine.
1st. Trial. Wet, first, the lapis lazuli with your spittle, or even with
common water, and wrap it up in a piece of fine white cloth or serge. It will
thereby become of a fine luster, and purple color, very agreeable to the sight.

2d. Trial. If you want to know whether or not it be fine, set it on blasting
charcoals, and blow them continually for a good while. Then take it off from
the fire. If, being cold, it has not lost much of its color, it is fine: but if
it has lost none of its color, none can be finer. For it has been often
observed, that the lapis which is of a superior degree of fineness, acquires,
instead of losing, more color still, when put to this trial.

3d. Trial. For the third experiment, put the lapis a-reddening on an iron
plate over the fire; then extinguish it in the best double-distilled white wind
vinegar. If, by this trial it acquire more color, itis too fine; if it only
keep its own without any alteration, it is good and such as you can wish to
have it. -- The lapis, which on that trial, acquires more color, may be worth
between thirty and forty shillings an ounce. But that which keeps its own
natural color after trials, is really scarce. As to that which loses the color,
you can make but very middling and common ultramarine with it.

4th. Trial. You have, when you buy it ready reduced into powder, another trial
to put it to, in order to know whether or not it be pure, and without any
mixture. It is this. -- Put some of this powder into a goldsmith's crucible;
set it on a sufficiently strong fire as to make it red hot, then take off the
crucible. If it be enamel, you will find it melted, but if it be true
pulverised lapis, it will remain still a powder. If there be only a mixture of
enamel with the pulverised lapis, that enamel, in melting, will gather up all
the lapis powder, and when cold you will find it in a little cake at the bottom
of the crucible. -- This deception is very common among color-makers, from whom
you buy it.

Remarks. The three different azures, which, by means of the cements above
mentioned, you will get from the lapis, will amount all together to fifteen
ounces for each pound of lapis; that is to say, ten ounces of superfine
ultramarine, which will sell for twelve or thirteen ducats an ounce; three
ounces of medium, which will sell for between three or four half-crowns; and
two ounces of the common base sort, which will sell for one half-crown. This
last is very little regarded and is called ashy; but, however, it will pay you
for the expense of the cement, therefore, you will easily be able to judge of
the clear profit you can make out of it. -- If you employ that sort of lapis
which loses all its color with the trial of the fire and vinegar, you will
either get so fine ultramarine from it, nor so much in quantity, as you can
from the other. And if, as will be be mentioned hereafter you attempt to refine
it, it will lose a great deal of its weight. -- In a word, the best lapis is
that which is streaked with numberless veins of gold, and very shining; and
this sort is that which stands bests to its color when put to the
abovementioned trials.

CXLI. The method of calcining, and otherwise preparing, the lapis lazuli, in
order to grind it afterward.
1. Take that sort of lapis lazuli which is ^reaked with gold veins, and which
has undergone the abovementioned trials. Break it in small bits no larger than
a filbert. Wash them in warm water, then set them on the fire in a crucible
till red hot. When thus reddened, take them out one by one, and extinguish them
in double distilled white wind vinegar, which shall have been previously run
through a hat three or four times. Instead of such vinegar, the urine of a
sound child might do, after having been run in the same manner three or four
times through a hat; but the above vinegar is preferable when it can be had.
When thus extinguished take them all out again from the urine, or vinegar, and
calcine them anew, then extinguish them again as before. Repeat this operation
six or seven times over, that they may more easily submit to the pestle in the
mortar, and not stick to it.

2. As for the lapis which loses its color by the fire, you must dispense with
the calcining of it, for as it would lose it more and more, you would at last
lose both your trouble and your money.

3. Therefore, put either that which is calcined, or that which is not, in a
bronze mortar, covered over, and pound it well. Sift it through the silk sieve,
covered also with its lid, that the most subtle part of the powder should not
evaporate, as it is the best.

CXLII. Directions for making the liquor fit to grind the lapis with, in order
to make the ultramarine.
1. Take three half-pint tumblers full of rain water, after having run it
through a hat three or four times. Put this water into a new pipkin, and dilute
as much raw honey in it as a whole shell of an egg can hold. This will render
the water yellow; boil it ^ill it ceases to give any scum, which you shall take
care to take and throw away as fast as it rises. When it is quite clear and
fine, take it off from the fire, bottle it for the following use.

2. Have fine dragon's blood, grind it on a porphyry stone with the
above-prepared honey water; put this also, when well grinded, into another
bottle. Over it pour so much honey water, till it acquires a purple color.
Decant it, when settled, from the ground, and keep it by itself. Such is the
sort of water which is to be used to grind the lapis lazuli with.

3. An important observation. -- Should the lapis lazuli, from which you intend
to draw your ultramarine, show some purple color of a remarkable hue and
beauty, you must encourage it by means of the abovementioned honey-water,
which you must manage in the following manner. As the degree of purple you are
to aim at, ought not to be deep, but rather pale and drawing toward the flesh
more than the red, if therefore, the color which comes from the lapis, should
be too deep, you must diminish that of the honey-water; and if that of the
stone is too pale, then render that of the liquor deeper. By these means you
may make these three sorts of colors of what degree you like, by giving more or
less of the liquor, and coloring this at your will, according as you see either
of these proceedings requisite for your purpose.

Note. Choose the dragon's blood in tears, such as the goldsmiths use, not that
which is in powder. Some people work it with the abovementioned honey-water.
Others do it with the bdellium diluted in water.

CXLIII. The method of grinding the lapis lazuli or porphyry, and the signs
which attend it.
1. When the lapis is well pounded into powder, and that powder has been
sifted, as before directed, set it on a porphyry-stone, and grind it with the
mullar, bathing it, as you grind it, with the honey-water, by little and little
at a time. Keep your powder on the stone, in as small a compass as you can, not
suffering it to spread much over it, which would occasion a great loss of it.

To grind thus, one pound of pulverised lapis, you must divide it into three
parcels, and grind one of each, and no more, at a time; and it must take two
hours grinding at least, to make money of it. Take care to keep your stone wet
with the above-prepared honey-water all about your paste, that this should not
stick to the stone while you grind it. This wetting must take, in all, about
one tumbler full of the liquor for the whole pound of lapis powder. When you
have grinded one part of that pound, take it out, and grind the second on the
same spot on the stone, then the next, and so on, as long as you have any to
grind; and be very sure that, in grinding it, you use no other water than
honeywater.

2. To know whether or not it be sufficiently grinded, take a little of it on
the tip of your finger, and mash it between your fore-teeth. If you do not feel
it crack as the dry powder does, then it is sufficiently grinded. -- Take care
not to grind it too much, lest it should lose its color, which happens
sometimes; therefore grind it only pretty well.

3. To dry the lapis, after it is grinded, put it on a clean stone, and set it
to dry in the shade, not in the sun, for it would spoil it. When it looks as if
it were dry, touch it with the finger, and if it rubs into powder, as mould or
dirt would do, you may leave it longer. But if it resist the finger, and does
not break, then it is time to take it off. It is a sign the powder is too fat
of honey, and requires to be purged, that it may come more easily from the
cement when you shall work it.

4. Then comes the washing of that ultramarine azure, which is performed as
follows. In a great china bowl, new, without any crack or rivetting whatever,
and of the most perfect polish or glaze in the inside, put your abovementioned
dried lump of paste. Over it pour the soft lie above-described in Art. cxxxvii.
and let it surpass the lump in the bowl by your fingers' breadth. -- Then wash
it well between both your hands, and dilute all entirely into that lie. When
that is done, let it settle, and when the azure is entirely precipitated at the
bottom, and the lie swims quite clear over it, decant it out gently by
inclination, and set the azure a-drying in the shade, without moving it from
the bowl. When you find it pretty dry, take it out of it carefully, spread it
on the porphyry stone, to finish drying thoroughly. And when it is thoroughly
dry, in that manner, give it then the cement as follows.

CXLIV. The method of incorporating the grinded lapis lazuli with either of the
strong or soft cements.
1. For one pound of the lapis lazuli, prepared as directed in the preceding
article, take one of the strong cements described in Art. cxxxiv. Rub this over
with your hands, as you take it out of the water, in which you preserve it:
then cut it in small bits, and put it a-melting over warm ashes, in a glazed
and new pipkin. Take care that in melting, it should not fry. When this
happens, put a little of our above-described lintseed oil, (see Art. cxxxvi.)
and it will immediately cease to fry.

2. When the cement is perfectly well dissolved, take that same spatula which
before served you to make it with, rub it over with a little of the same oil,
and stir well the melted cement with it. Then, with the other hand, taking a
pound of prepared lapis lazuli, let it run slowly into your cement, with the
same gentleness, and as little at a time, as you would put oil on a sallad,
'till the whole pound is put into the cement, which you must never cease to
stir and mix, with the spatula, as long as you pour in the lapis. Continue
still to stir after that till you are well convinced that the lapis and the
cement are both perfectly well mixed and amalgamated together, and not a bit or
grain of the powder can be perceived out of the cement, and has well penetrated
it.

3. When this is done, take immediately the pot, and pour the contents, quite
boiling, into a vessel full of cold water, and with the spatula take out all
that is about the sides of it, and clean it well. Then, when the said cement
shall be cold enough to admit touching it with your hands, rub them all over
with our said prepared and purified lintseed oil, and take it out of the water.
If, in pulling it, you see it is well tinged and colored, it is a good omen.
Work it well then, between your hands, and with your fingers, for near two
hours, pulling it at the same time to the length and breadth, to see whet^er or
not there are not some bubbles enclosing little parcels of powder not well
divided and incorporated, and that you may spread them in the cement in
working. And take this notice, that the more the paste is thus wrought, the
better it will be afterward, as it will require less washing to get the azure
out of it.

4. When it is thus wrought, form it into a lump like a loaf of bread, and put
it into a china bowl with fresh cold water, where you shall let it soak for ten
or fifteen days, nay even longer, if you like, because the longer it soaks, the
finer and more perfect it becomes, and the more easily too you afterward get
the azure out of it. But if it be not soaked at least twelve days, it will not
do at all.

CXLV. Directions for extracting the azure out of the cement.
1. Take the lump of cement, just mentioned, out of the cold water in which you
left it to soak. Rub it softly over with your hands, and place it in a
finelyglazed china bowl, previously wet with the aforesaid lintseed oil.

2. Pour over it lukewarm common water which shall have been filtered through a
hat before warming. Observe that this water, when poured on the cement, be
rather cool than warm, as a degree less than lukewarm is preferable to lukewarm
itself; and let there be about two fingers' breadth in the bowl above the
cement. -- Then let it soak there for about one quarter of an hour.

3. Have two sticks made of box, or other fine and hard wood, susceptible of a
fine polish. These sticks must be made round by a turner, of a foot long or
thereabouts, or longer if you like, a little thicker than one's thumb, being
larger at one of the ends, and flattened in form of an almond.

4. With these two sticks move and turn gently, at first, your cement in
lukewarm water. And if, in so doing, it should stick to the bottom of the bowl,
rub your hands with oil, and detach it softly and carefully, turning and
returning it gently with your hands in the water, till at last it begins to be
tinged with azure. -- The first signs by which you know that the cement begins
to render the ultramarine, are certain lines and streaks which appear in the
water, not unlike the rays of the sun. And when this is the case, be upon your
guard, and take notice that the water soon assumes a very high hue of that
color, particularly at the first discharge of the cement, as it is always the
best azure which comes first.

5. As soon therefore as you see your water sufficiently tinged, pour it out
through a sieve into the vessel with three cocks, described before in Art.
cxxxix. supporting the cement on the two sticks, for fear it should stick to
the bottom of the bowl, when thus left dry on it. The reason why you are
advised to run this water through a sieve, is to prevent any little bit of
cement which might have broken from the lump, and be loose in the water, from
running along with it, and that so you might stop and rejoin it to the other.

6. When you have thus got this first water out of the cement, pour some more
water, of the same degree of warmth, rather under lukewarm than above, or even
such as we said before, and proceed as before with your sticks, moving,
stirring, and turning the cement in it, and so working it as to get new azure
from it, which you decant into another vessel separately from the first water.

Observe not to hurry or precipitate, particularly at first, the softening of
the cement in the water, by working it too hastily, or with too much labor on
your side. It is a work of patience, which must be done as gently as possible,
with case to yourself, and slowness in the working, because, if you force the
azure too precipitately out of the cement, you will manifestly spoil all, and
be a great sufferer in the end.

7. Repeat again the same process and operation as above, to draw the third
azure, and decant again this water into another vessel by itself.

8. There is still a fourth azure which may be obtained from the same cement,
after the other three are got out, and this is called sandy or ashy color or
gray. This requires that the water be full lukewarm, if not even a little more
than so. Then you work the cement harder too with the sticks; and if it do not
come out easily, give it a little of the lie described in Art. cxxxvii. which
you manage as follows. First you mix one part of the soft lie with two parts of
water, and see what this will do. If the cement do not render the azure yet,
give it the strong lie; if neither will do, make the following preparation. --
Boil vine-wood ashes in common and clearly filtered water, for one quarter of
an hour. Then let it clarify, and strain it through a pecked bag. It must be
strong enough to prick the tongue when you taste it. With this lie work your
cement to draw the last azure from it, after making it lukewarm. When it has
been once used, it is of no more service. Therefore, pour all these different
waters, one over the other in the same vessel, and separately from the three
former sorts, which contain the three first azures, that you may have them all
by themselves in their strict purity, for all your profit and loss depends
entirely on the art of drawing these different azures, and on your own skill in
putting that art into execution.

CXLVI. Observations on the colors of the azures at their coming out of the
cement, and the signs which attend them.
1. The most manifest sign of the first azure coming out, is its apparent
coarseness; a character which is owing to the veins of gold which appeared in
the original stone, and which give the first ultramarine that sort of look.

2. The second azure will seem finer, but its color will not be so high, nor so
fine.

3. The third will increase again in appearance of fineness, but diminish still
more in hue, which will be of a much paler blue than any of the two others. --
These observations are always on the supposition that the original stone was a
good one, and had gone fairly through all the trials.

Note. We have given above the price of the colors. See Art. cxl.

CXLVII. The washing and purifying of the azures after they are got out of the
cement.
When the different azures are all got out of the cement let them settle and
fall down, each at the bottom of their vessels. When their waters appear quite
clear and free from them on the top, pour them out gently and carefully, by
inclination; then supply them with some of the soft lie, (Art. cxxxviii.) and
wash those azures in it with your hands, and each of them dictinctly in
separate vessels by themselves. Then let them settle to the bottom, and decant
out that lie, and repeat again and again the same process, till you are sure
they are all well purged from the grease of the cement in which they were.
Rinse them afterward in the same manner in three or four different pure and
clear waters, filtered through a hat, and they will be perfectly purified and
clean.

CXLVIII. Another way of purifying the same azures with yolks of eggs.
1. Take half a dozen of yolks of eggs, from hens fed upon corn, and not
suffered to run among the grass, nor to eat any. Pierce the pellicula which
covers those yolks with the point of a needle, and pour equally those yolks on
the azure powder, as you would do oil on a sallad.

2. Do the same on all your different azures, put separately in different
dishes. Then incorporate well the azure and the yolks of eggs together with
your hands. When done, wash it afterward with the softest lie, so many times
that it shall at last come out as clear as you first put it in; then rinse it
three or four times in clear water, which has been filtered several times
through a hat.

This method of washing the azures is an excellent one. It may be deemed a true
secret to give them a fine luster and brilliancy. Never forget to let each of
your waters be well settled before you change them, otherwise you will lose a
great deal of your azures.

CXLIX. Another particular and scarce secret for purifying azures.
Here again is another secret, known by very few, if any, to give the most
admirable luster to azures. -- Take a bullock's gall, and pour it on your
separate azures, after they have been already washed and purified in waters,
lies, and yolks of eggs. Then rub and handle well those azures with your hands,
each by themselves, and one after another distinctly, for fear of mixing some
of the one with any of the others. Then wash them as above directed.

Take notice that each and every one of those various purifications are to be
performed successively upon each azure by itself, without excepting one, or
being performed antecedent to the other, contrary to the order in which they
are here prescribed.

CL. How to run the azures, after having been thus cleansed, washed and
purified.
1. The ultramarine azure, as well as all the others, ought to be run, for fear
there should have remained some grease, dirt, or bit of cement among them.
Therefore, when they come to the last water you are to give them, after they
have been purified by the above mentioned proceedings, run them through a fine
sieve, then through another more open, and through another again more so still.
Each time let the waters settle, till you see them quite clear, or take them
out by means of a sponge, as before directed in Art. cvii. but do it with such
care as not to have your azure get into the sponge with the water, which would
be very detrimental to your interest.

2. When you have well cleared all the waters away, let those azures all dry in
their own dishes or bowls, and in the shade, not in the sun, and guard well
against dust and dirt in working them.

3. When the azures are perfectly dry, gather them each separately, and put
them in small white bags made of animals skins with the smoothest side inwards.
When the little bag is tied, rub it all manner of ways, to refine the azure in
it; and the more you shall have done so, the finer color the azure will acquire
when you open it, and it comes to the air again.

4. Hardly would you believe perhaps, that after such a deal of trouble as you
have had, in conducting this process throughout, from the first purchase of the
lapis stone to the point it is now brought, when you see the fruit of your long
and tedious labors arrived at last to an happy end, and ready to indemnify you
for them by an advantageous sale; hardly, I say, could you be persuaded that
something more can be done to your azures to raise them still in beauty, merit,
(...) price, and that this something is no other than to put them new again
into the strong cement, and make them go afresh through the same trough, the very
same operation, as before directed, from that period of the manipulation, step
by step, till they are fit again for putting into the little bags mentioned in
this very article, and preceding number 3. -- However, it is true, that if you
do this, (leaving them for this time but three days only in the cement), and
give them over again all the sucessive washes, purgings, and purifyings, as
before, they will be infinitely more refined; and that the more you repeat this
manipulation from the cement throughout down to the last purging and washing,
the more precious and fine the azure will be. -- It will not be denied, and you
must certainly expect, that it will be each time attended with some loss in the
weight; but, besides that it raises in the same proportion in its price, which
for you is the same, you must know that the purchaser himself finds his own
profit and advantage in providing this superior azure, since one ounce only
will multiply so far in employing it, that it will go farther than three of the
other. -- Therefore, be prudent and patient; but above all, be careful to choose
a good stone, and skilful in composing the cements and pastes.

CLI. The method of making the green azure.
1. It is not difficult to make the green azure with the American stone, if we
are to believe Alexander Trollian, who says, that it is enough to reduce that
stone into powder on the marble or porphyry, then wash it several times in
clean water, and dry it afterward. -- But it must certainly be far preferable
to separate the color from the constituent matter of the stone, and all its
earthy particles, which must undoubtedly render it much finer and fitter for
painting, as it is more purified of its heterogeneous parts. Therefore, the
following process is most advisable.

2. Reduce the stone into a subtle powder, then put it into brandy or
distilled vinegar. Put this to digest on the hot ashes bath, or balneo mariae,
till the liquor is perfectly charged with the color of the stone. Decant it
then gently into another vessel, and pour some more brandy or vinegar on its
groudn, if you have reason to think that there remains some color still in the
stone, which has not been carried by the first infusion. When you are sure
there is no more left, throw away all the ground, as perfectly useless, and
then evaporate, on warm ashes, the vinegar of brandy impregnated with this
color; or rather distill it, as by that means you will get your liquor pure
again, and may use it another time for the same purpose, instead of washing it
away.

3. By this process, which se^ms most rational, you will git the green color
quite pure at the bottom of the vessel or mattress. Wash and clean it with pure
clear water, and, after drying, keep it for use. This is a very fine color in
painting, and has this advantage, that it never loses its brightness.

CLII. Another sort of green azure.
1. There is another sort of green azure, which is a natural production, to be
found in copper mines, and is as it were a dissolution, or subtilization of
copper, which flies and sticks on the stones it meets in its way. These sorts
of vapors have generally some marks or signs of a mixture of silver, as it may
be inferred from the color or stain of those stones which partake of both these
metals, for they are green by the copper, and mixed with azure by the silver.
And, according as either of these two metals is more or less predominant in the
mine, one of these two colors is likewise stronger in the same proportion. The
method of collecting this sort of azure, or evaporation, is as follows.

2. Grind the stone on which it is, and wash it several times over. It needs
not be put in the cement after the method observed for the ultramarine azure,
because that metallic offlorescence of the green azure, of which we are now
speaking, is very easily separated from the stony matter to which it is
affixed. For which reason it needs only be washed to render it as fine a color
as can possibly be; and, after it has been well washed, dry it in the shade,
and then keep it for use.

CLIII. A very fine method for marbling paper.
The paper must first be prepared, that it may more easily retain the colors.
This preparation is performed by wetting the paper with a sponge dipped in
roch-alum water, then letting it dry. -- When the sheets have been thus
prepared, have a pan full of water, and, with a large and long-handled
painting-brush, take of one color, and shake it in the water; take of another
and do the same, and so on till you have taken of all the colors you intend to
have on your paper, and which you (...) supposed to have there all ready by
you. Each of these colors fall to the bottom of the water; but take, with a
similar brush as the first, a mixture of bullock's gall, and of dissolution of
soap in water, then shake on the water, and all over its surface, and you will
soon see all the colors rising up again and swimming on the top of the water
each separately as you first put them. Then lay the sheet of paper on it, give
it a turn on one side or the other, as you like, and take it up again; wash and
set it to dry, then burnish it, and it is done.

CHAP. VII.
SECRETS relative to the ART of GILDING.
I. The method of guilding with size, or with oil.
THE gold leaves which are commonly used in gilding are of different sizes, as
well as of various degrees of thickness, as there are some the thousand of
which comes to no more than three pounds altogether, and others which come to
three pounds ten shillings, and four pounds, per thousand.

To gild on iron and other metals, the strongest and the purest are preferable.
That which is not so pure is commonly employed by carvers in wood, as it comes
cheaper to them.

We are indebted to the discovery which has been made a few ages since, of the
secret of painting in oil, for the means of gilding in such a manner as to
resist the injuries of the weather. -- An art the ancients were not acquainted
with, and they could not obtain from their method of applying gold, since they
used nothing else but whites of eggs for gilding marble, and such other bodies
as do not admit of being committed to the fire. As for the wood, they made a
composition which was used with size. But neither size no whites of eggs can
resist the water. Therefore they could not, with propriety, gild any other
works than such as were sheltered from the intemperance of the weather, viz.
their arches, their ceilings, which were all gilt in that manner. The
composition they used for gilding on wood was made of a slimy earth, which held
the place of the sized white we use nowadays, and with which gilders make
that first coat, called by artists, assiette, or burnish-gold size.

II. To gild with size, or what is called in burnish-gold.
1. You must first begin by preparing your size, which is made as follows. --
Take about a pound of odd bitts of parchment, or leather, such as is prepared
for gloves or breeches. Put this a-boiling in a pailful of water, till it is
reduced to one half, and your size is done as it ought to be.

2. When you want to use it for wood which is to be gilt, it must be boiling
hot, otherwise it would not penetrate sufficiently into the wood. If you find
it too strong, you may weaken it, by adding water to it. Then with a brush made
of boar's bristles, you lay the size in smoothening, if it be a plain work;
but, if a carved one, you must lay it in stumping with the brush; either of
which ways is equally termed to size.

3. When the wood is thus prepared with size only, you must make another
preparation, called an infusion of white, in the following manner. Take a
certain quantity of size boiling hot, as much as you think will be sufficient
for your work. Dilute a discretionable quantity of pulverised whitening in it,
and let it infuse some time. When it seems well dissolved, strain it through a
cloth to make it finer; then, with a brush, as above, give seven or eight
different coats of it in stumping on your work, and two more coats in
smoothening, if it be on carved work, but if on a plain one, you must give a
dozen of coats at least; for the white is the nourishment of gold, and serves
to preserve it a great while. -- You must be very careful not to give coat upon
coat, unless the last be dry; otherwise the work might scale. You must even
have a great care that each coat should be laid on as perfectly equal as
possible, both in the strength of the size, and thickness of the white, to
avoid the same inconveniency.

4. When you have given the requisite number of coats, where in stumping, or in
smoothening, you must let the work dry thoroughly before you polish it. As soon
therefore as it is perfectly dry, you must have a coarse rough cloth, quite
new, and as closely weaved as possible, with little deal sticks, cut square,
angular, or pecked, according as the nature and carving of the work require;
and, thrusting one of these sticks into the cloth, you rub and smoothen the
white. Then taking a brush made of boar's bristles, which has been already
used, because it is softer, dip it into some clean water, and wet the work in
proportion as you go on in polishing, with your little sticks wrapped up in
cloth. This precaution completes the smoothening of the work by levelling the
small bumps and imperceptible undulations, you may have made either in giving
the white, or in polishing it. For the smoother the work is made, the more easy
to be burnished the gold will be, after having been applied. The wetting and
brushing thus your work, in proportion as you polish it, with a brush a little
worn, has again that other object of cleansing it of the mud you occasion in so
doing; therefore spare not to be purge your brush of all the filth it gathers
about the point of its hair, by washing and squeezing it again as soon as you
see them grow thick in the least with that dirt.

5. When the white is once more dried, rub it with shavegrass, or rushes, in
order to level still better all the grains and inequalities which may be on it.
Do not however rub it too much with the shavegrass, because you may thereby
fall from one error into another, and make your white what is called greasy or
smeary, which would prevent it afterward from uniting with the burnish gold
size, which is to precede the laying on of the gold.

6. Now, as it is difficult that after ten or a dozen of coats of white, the
carving should not be choked up, they who are fond of finishing their work
highly, take a certain iron instrument, made on purpose, and curved by one end,
(called by the French, a fer-a-retirer); with this raffling-crook they go over
all the turns, and open all the places which want it, to restore them to their
former sharpness. Or else, you take what is called a fermoir, or a gouge, or a
cizel, and give to the ornaments the same form which the carver observed when
he first cut them, turning agreeably the sides of leaves according to nature;
then bretelling with another instrument, called the veining-crook, (in French
fermoir-anezrond), all the ornaments, you thereby render the work much neater,
and more delicate than the carver had first made it. That you may (...) the
white more neat, observe only to wet it a little with a brush.

7. When works are not of great consequence, you may easily save yourself all
that trouble; principally if the carving is pretty neatly finished, by giving
two or three coats only of white very clear. But, as it is very true the white
is the principal and only support of gold, this operation is never so perfect,
nor stands so long; and the carving seems a great deal more rough than when it
has received ten or twelve coats of white, and been afterward re-cut, carved,
veined, and repaired over again, as I said before.

8. After every thing has been performed about the white, which could be
required to completely finish that preparatory part, you must dilute some
yellow ochre, and grind it with sized water, weaker by half than that which you
used for the whitening. And, having made it a little fluid and warm, you lay
one coat of it over all the work, principally in such deep places of the
carving as you cannot come at to lay the gold leaf, that this color may supply
its want.

9. When the yellow is dry, you must lay over it (in all the raised places, but
not in the bottom grounds) three different coats of another sort of
composition, called in French assiette, and here, burnish-gold size, made and
prepared in the following manner -- Bolarmenian, about the bigness of a nut,
and grinded by itself; bloodstone, or red chalk, the bulk of a horse bean, and
black lead pulverised as big as a pea, grinded both together; and at last one
drop or two of tallow, which you grind afterward with all the other drugs and
water, taking them little at a time, to grind and incorporate them the better.
-- Put this composition in a cup, and pour over it some of your aforementioned
size, boiling hot, and strained through a cloth. Stir and mix all well, while
you pour that size, that the whole may be well diluted. The size you make use
of in this case must, to be right, be of the consistence of the jelly you eat,
and no more, when cold. -- There are those who mix again besides, with this
composition, a little soap, or olive oil, with a little of calcined lamp-black.
Others add burnt bread, bistre, antimony, tin-glass, butter, fugarcandy, etc.
every one according to his own way. All these sorts of grease serve to
facilitate the burnishing of the gold, and help to give it more brightness. Be,
however, this composition made how it will, observe to keep it warm over hot
ashes in a chafing dish, whenever and while you use it. The brush you lay it on
with ought to be soft, and the first coat you lay pretty thin; but, as for the
two others, they must be so thick that the stuff should run with difficulty
from the brush. Each coat must be well dried before giving the next. And, when
the last is perfectly dry, take a stiffer brush with which you dryrub the work
all over, to smoothen all the grains and little risings of the gold size, and
thereby facilitate the burnishing of the gold.

10. The gilding is now performed as follows. Have first a pipkin very clean,
in which you put some very clean and filtered water, and a few wetting pencils,
which ought to be made in the form of those ermine tails which hang in the
ermine skins. -- Get next a cushion, which is to be made with a light and flat
square board covered with calf leather, fixed all round with nails, and stuffed
underneath with cotton. Let this cushion be also surrounded by the back part,
and two thirds of each of the two sides, with a band of parchment of five or
six inches high, to prevent the air, which is always fluctuating about you, and
still more so if any body should happen to pass and repass in the place where
you sit, from blowing the gold leaf which is laid upon it.

11. To apply the gold, you proceed thus. Hold your cushion in your left hand
along with the gilding pencils, which are to be of different sizes. On this
cushion put what quantity of gold leaves you think proper. With the gilding
knife spread these leaves very smooth, in doing of which you will assist
yourself very much if you breathe over them while you pass the knife under.
Then cut it in as many parts and sizes as you want, or, if there be occasion
for it whole, take it with your tip, and lay it, -- A tip (in French, palette),
is an instrument made with the point of a squirrel's tail placed upon a round
stick flattened, and about half an inch wide by one end, with a slit, to set
and spread the better the squirrel's tail. -- This tip therefore you pass along
your cheek, and with it take off the gold leaf, or what part of it you have
divided, and thus lay it on the work. Previously, however, to this, you must
have passed on the place one of your pencils immediately before the laying of
the gold, otherwise the gold would be incessantly slitting and cracking. -- As
soon as the gold leaf is laid on the work, take your water pencil quite wet,
and passing it above it on the work, let the water run from it under the leaf
just applied; this will immediately make it spread and ketch. But if it should
pass over the gold leaf, it would immediately spot and spoil it; and as it is
impossible to lay gold on gold, especially when wet, you would not be able to
repair it unless you take the gold leaf entirely off, and put another in the
stead. On the contrary, by the water slipping under the gold leaf just laid,
you will find that this spreads infinitely more easy, and almost of itself; it
sticks faster on the gold size, never scratches, is more easily dusted for
burnishing, or matting with size; in short the work looks infinitely better in
every respect. -- As it is impossible with all possible care one can take, but
there may happen some little accident now and then, principally in carved
works, you must, in such a case, cut some small bits of gold, which, with a
pencil, you take and put on the defective places when you look your work over;
and this is called faulting the work, in French ramender.

12. When the work is perfectly dry, burnish it where you think proper, in
order to detach certain parts from the other, to make them set off and show to
better advantage. To that effect you use an instrument called a burnisher, made
either of a real Wolf's tooth, or rather, as they now use it, an agate, made in
the same form. and finely polished, or else a pebble called blood stone. --
Before burnishing, you must, with the crooked point of your burnisher, push
down all the parts of gold in the hollow parts which you forgot to do with the
pencil, then dust it with a large one. When the work is burnished where you
want it to be so, you matt and repass, with a very soft pencil and burnish gold
size, what has not been burnished; or, you may again put some vermilion, to
raise the gold, and make it look brighter; which is called, in term of art,
repassing.

13. There is again another repassing you must not forget, which is to lay, in
all the hollow places of a carved work, a coat of a composition of vermilion,
as I am going to prescribe, and which will give an incomparable fire to the
gold, and make it look as goldsmith's work. This composition is such. -- Grind
together, on marble, some vermilion, gamboge, and red brown, which you mix with
a little Venetian turpentine, and oil of turpentine. There are who make it
otherwise, and use only fine lake, and others, dragon's blood; but the first
receipt is the best. -- If, after having burnished, matted, and repassed your
work, you find again some defective places, you may mend them with gold in
shell, which, as you know, is diluted with a little gum arabic, and applied
with a pencil. This sort of faulting, which is no small addition to the beauty
and richness of the work, the French call buckling with gold in shell.

II. To gild without gold.
Put in a crucible one ounce of ammoniac salt, and half that quantity of common
mercury. Cover and lute well the crucible for fear the mercury should exhale.
Give this a small fire for the space of half an hour. Increase the fire
afterward till the crucible is quite red hot. Then throw the composition into
a pan of cold water. As soon as this matter is cold, it will be as hard as a
stone. Break and grind it, and dissolve it in gum water. Wherever you lay a
coat of this, it will look like gilt.

III. Another to the same purpose.
To gild frames, and other common things, pulverise and incorporate well
together the yolk of an egg with two ounces of mercury, and one of ammoniac
salt. Put this into a mattress, stop it well, and set, it for four and twenty
days, in hot horse dung.

IV. A gold without gold.
Grind some purpurine with water; then put it to soak with chamber-lye in a
pan; stir and skim it. When it has done throwing any scum, decant the
chamberlye, and supply it by gum water. Whatever you write or draw with this
composition will look as gold itself; and it admits even of being burnished
with the burnisher.

V. The preparations of the gum-water.
In half a pint of common water put two ounces of gum arabic, bruised in small
bits. When dissolved, it makes the right degree of gum-water to be used for the
above purpose.

VI. To write in gold or silver.
Draw the juice of juniper leaves. In this juice throw some gold or silver
filings, which you set there to infuse for three whole days: then make the
trial.

VII. To gild on glasses, earthen, or china wares.
Take a glass, or a china cup; wet it, and lay your gold where and how you
like, then let it dry. Dissolve some borax in water, and of this liquor lay a
coat on your gold. Set it on the fire till your glass powder in melting makes a
varnish on the gilded parts, which will then appear very beautiful.

VIII. To write, or paint, in gold color.
Pulverise some purpurine into subtle powder, then water it over, gently, and
by little at a time, with chamber-lye, turning incessantly, while you pour,
with* a stick. Let it settle, and wash it in common water, so many times till
you see the water comes out at last quite clear. Each time you change the water
take particular care to allow a sufficient time for the settling. Then mix
after the last water is poured away, some powder of saffron and gum-water with
your ground, and either write or paint, which you like. This secret is by no
means an indifferent one; and you will find it very agreeable if you try.

IX. To write, or paint, in silver, especially with a pencil.
Pound well, in a bell-metal mortar, some tin-glass; then grind, and dilute it,
on porphyry, with common water. Let it settle, and throw off the water, which
will be black and dirty. Reiterate this lotion so many times till the water
remains clear. Then dilute it in gum-water, and either write or paint with it.
It will appear very handsome, and no ways inferior to the finest virgin silver.

X. To whiten the silver copper medals.
1. Take filings from Cornwall pewter and make a bed of them at the bottom of a
pipkin. On this bed lay one of your medals, taking care however they should not
touch each other. Make another bed of filings over these medals, and one of
medals again on these filings. Continue this alternate stratification of medals
and filings, till you have laid all the medals you want to whiten.

2. When this is done, fill up your pan with water, and put on it a powder
composed of roch-alum and tartar from Montpellier, well grinded and mixed
together. Boil the whole till the whitening of the medals is complete.

N. B. They must have previously been cleansed with soft sand, or strong lie,
to purge them from any grease.

XI. A water to gild iron.
In three pounds of river-water, boil roch-alum, one ounce, Roman vitriol as
much, verdigrise half an ounce, gem salt three, and or pine one. Then add
tartar, half an ounce, and the same quantity of common salt. Boil it again with
this addition. Now heat your iron, and when warm, rub it over with this stuff
quite hot, then dry, it by the fire, and burnish.

XII. To whiten exteriorly copper statues.
Take silver-crystals, ammoniac, gem, common and alkali, salts; of each of all
these two drachms. Make all into a paste with common water. Lay your fingers
over with it, and set them on red-hot charcoals till they smoke no more.

XIII. To write in gold letters on pots, or boxes.
Dissolve isinglass in water. When reduced into a size, or glue, dilute some
red tartar with it, after having made it into a very subtle powder. With this
mixture, and a pen, or a pencil, write on your pots or boxes; then put a thick
gold leaf on it of the same sort as metal gilders use. And, when this is dry,
burnish as usual.

XIV. To gild silver in water-gilding without the assistance of mercury.
1. Take first the finest gold, forge it weakish, then cut it in bits and neal
it, on an iron plate, or in a crucible.

2. Have next a glass mattress, put your gold in, and to every dram of gold,
put half a pound of ammoniac salt, and two ounces of good aquafortis. Cover the
mattress with a sheet of paper, turned conically by one of its corners upon one
of the long sides, so as to form a sort of funnel or grenadier's cap figure,
with the smallest orifice, to give a free passage to the fumes of the
aquafortis. Set this mattress on a very slow fire, that the gold may have time
to dissolve gently and gradually, and shake often the mattress to help the
dissolution. Be very careful not to make the fire to strong; but on the
contrary, let it be very mild, for the gold would infallibly sublime and waste
itself all into vapors.

3. When the gold is entirely dissolved, pour this liquor into a glass, or
china bowl; wet some old coarse linen rags on them, which you set to drain on
small sticks on another bowl, doing the same with what drains from them till
you have used all your liquor; then dry them before a gentle fire.

4. When dry, lay them on a marble stone, and set them on fire. And as soon as
they are consumed, grind them into a fine powder, which you put afterward into
a crucible on a little fire. When this powder is lighted like sparkles of fire,
put it on the marble again, and stir it with an iron rod till you see no more
fire. Grind it then again as before, as much as you possibly can, and it is fit
for gilding any sort of silver work you please.

XV. The liquor, called the sauce, which is to be used for coloring silver
plates, gilt with the above described powder.
1. Grind well together, into a subtle powder, sulphur and pearl ashes, of
each one ounce, and two of common salt.

2. Then, when you want to color your gilt plates, have a quart of water, and
half a pint of chamber lie, in which you mix a large spoonful of the above
powder. Set this to boil in a red copper pot, very clean. When this sauce does
boil, you must tie your plate with a silver wire, by which you hold it, and
then plunge it in; there leave it for about a minute, or two at most; then take
it out again by the same wire without touching it with your hands, and plunge
it in the same manner in cold clean water. Should it then not look high colored
to your satisfaction, you have but to put it again in the sauce, as before,
till you find it sufficiently colored.

3. The next step is to give the piece thus colored to the burnisher, with a
strict charge not to use any vinegar in his burnish. The receipt is a very good
and particular secret.

XVI. A water which gilds copper and bronze. A secret very useful for watch and
pin makers.
Dissolve equal parts of green vitriol and ammoniac salt in good double
distilled vinegar; then vaporate the vinegar, and put it in the retort to
distill. If in the product of the distillation you steep your metal after being
polished and made hot, it will come out perfectly well gilt.

XVII. Another.
Take burnt copper and ammoniac salt, equal parts; alumen plumeum, four ounces;
common salt decrepitated, as much. Dissolve the whole in double distilled
vinegar. Then vaporate this vinegar. Distill from the rest an aquafortis in
which, if you extinguish, five or six times, brass, copper, iron or silver,
made hot, these metals will assume the color of gold.

XVIII. A water to gild steel or iron, after being well polished.
Take seven ounces of or pine; terra-merita, one and a half; socotrine aloes,
four and a half; gamboge three and a half. Put all into powder, and put it into
a retort, with so much of pickle water as will cover these powders by two
fingers. Stir well and mix all together; let it infuse four and twenty hours
and (...). With the liquor which shall come from the distillation, and which
you may keep by for use, rub the steel, iron, or copper, and set it to dry in
the shade.

XIX. To silver copper figures.
1. Cleanse well first the figures with a strong lie, made with either pearl or
brill ashes, or common salt or alum, no matter which. Wipe them well when done,
and rub them with a composition of tartar and ammoniac salt mixed (by means of
aquafortis) with a little dissolution of silver.

2. Now with a piece of leather, wetted in your spittle, take of these powders,
and rub the copper figures till they are sufficienlty silvered.

XX. To silver, or gild pewter.
1. Take one of the finest and most delicate goldsmith's wire-brush; rub your
pewter with it so as to mark it with the strokes of the brush. When done, lay a
double gold or silver leaf on that place of the pewter; then put over it a
piece of skin or leather, and over that skin some putty. With a burnisher rub,
for a good while, on that putty; then with a piece of pewter on the naked gold
without either skin or putty.

2. Have a care that the pewter which you are thus a gilding should be very
clean, and that your breath should not go over it. Therefore, to do that
operation, you must put your handkerchief before your mouth, and manage it so
in trying it, that there should be a passage preserved on each side of your
face which should drive your breath along your cheeks, round your head, and
quite up behind your ears.

XXI. A composition to lay on lead, tin, or any other metal, in order to hold
fast the ready gilt leaves of pewter which are applied on it; useful for
gilding on high steeples, domes, etc.
1. Melt together, on a slow fire, black pitch, two pounds; oil of turpentine,
four ounces; and a little rosin. When the whole is dissolved and mixed well
into a kind of varnish, lay a coat of it on your work.

2. Now, as upon steeples, the common method of gilding cannot, on account of
the wind, be practiced; have only the exact measures and dimensions of the
place intended to be gilt, then, at home, and at leisure, cut to them some fine
leaves of pewter, and gild them as usual. When done, you have no more to do but
to carry up these pewter leaves, rolled, in a basket; and, having burnished the
place on which they are to be applied with the above composition, lay the gilt
pewter leaves on it, and they will stand fast enough.

XXII. To clean and whiten silver.
1. Rasp four ounces of dry white soap in a dish. Pour a pint of warm water on
it. -- In another dish put a penny worth of wine lie dried in cakes, and the
same quantity of the same water. -- In a third dish put also another
pennyworth of pearl ashes, with another similar quantity of the same water.

2. Then, with a hair brush steeped first in the wine lie, then in the pearl
ash, and lastly in the soap liquors, rub your silver plate, and wash it
afterward with warm water, and wipe it with a dry cloth kept on a horse before
the fire for that purpose.

XXIII. The preparation of gold in shell.
Take ammoniac salt, and gold leaves, equal quantities. Bruise this in a
mortar, for two or three hours; and toward the end add a discretionable
quantity of honey.

XXIV. To bronze in gold color.
Rub the figure first with aquafortis, in order to cleanse and ungrease it
well. Then grind, on porphyry, into a subtle powder, and mix with lintseed
oil, equal quantities of terra merita and gold litharge. With this composition
paint the figure over.

XXV. Another to the same purpose.
Take gum elemy, twelve drachms, and melt it. Add one ounce of crude mercury,
and two of ammoniac salt. Put all in a glass phial, and set it in a pot full of
ashes; lute well the phial, and melt the contents. When perfectly dissolved,
add a discretionable quantity of or pine and brass filings; mix all well, and
with a pencil paint what you will over with it.

XXVI. How to matt burnished gold.
Grind together, boodstone and vermilion with the white of an egg. Then, with
a pencil, lay it in the bottom grounds.

XXVII. How to do the same to burnish silver.
Grind ceruse-white with plain water first, then with a very weak isinglass
water, and make the same use of this as of the other.

XXVIII. The method of applying gold, of silver, in shell, on the wood.
Black wood, or that which is dyed so, is the fittest to admit of this
operation. The method of applying it is this.

1. Take a little gum adragant, which you dilute in a good deal of water, to
make it weak. With this weak gum water dilute your gold or silver; and with a
pencil lay it on such places of your work as receive and show the light,
without touching on those which are the shades. To express these, touch the
parts with indigo diluted in a very weak gum-arabic water.

2. When this is done, lay one coat of drying varnish made of oil of spike and
sandarack. If the varnish be too thick, thin it with a little oil; and, in
mixing it, take care not to boil it so hard but you may bear some on your hand
without scalding the place.

N. B. Have attention to make your gum-waters for this sort of work always very
weak; otherwise they would tarnish and spoil all the gold or silver.

XXIX. To gild sandy gold.
Take any color, and grind it either with oil, or with gum. Lay a few coats of
it on your work, according as you think there may be need of it. When dry, lay
one coat of size, and while it is still fresh, sift some brass filings on it;
let it dry so, and varnish it afterward.

XXX. The varnish fit to be laid on gilding and silvering.
Grind verdigrease, on marble, with common water, in which you shall have
infused saffron for eight hours.

XXXI. The method of bronzing.
Take three pennyworth of spal, one of litharge, a gill of lintseed oil, and
boil the whole to the consistence of an unguent. Before you apply it, dilute
the quantity you intend to make use of with turpentine oil, and lay a coat of
vermilion on the work before bronzing.

XXXII. A water to gild iron with.
1. Put in a glass bottle, with a pint of river water, one ounce of white
copperas, and as much of white alum; two drachms of verdigrease, and the same
quantity of common salt. Boil all together to the reduction of one half. Then
stop the bottle well for fear the contents should lose their strength.

2. To gild the iron with it, make it red hot in the fire, and plunge it in
this liquor.

XXXIII. To make the fine writing-gold.
1. Take gold in shell, and sulphur, in the proportion of ten drachms of this,
well grinded on porphyry and amalgamated, to every sequin-worth of the other.
Put this mixture into a proportionable leather bag, in which you shall work it
continually for the space of two days. Then pour all into a crucible, and burn
it on a slow fire. This done, wash what remains with filtered lime water, and,
by filtration also, get your water out again from the composition. If, after
this operation, you do not find it high enough yet in hue, wash it again and
again in the same manner, till it looks fine.

2. To apply it, dilute some bol armenian with isinglass, and write what you
please, and let it dry; then apply your gold, and when dry burnish it.

XXXIV. How to get the gold, or silver, out of gilt plates.
1. Mix together one ounce of aquafortis, and one of spring water, with half an
ounce of common, and one dram of ammoniac salts. Put all on the fire, and
boil it; then put into soak the plate from which you want to get the gold or
silver out. A little while after, take your plate out and scrape it over the
liquor.

2. The gold will remain suspended in this regalwater; and to make a separation
of them, pour in it double the quantity of common water; or again, throw a
halfpenny in it, and boil it, and all the gold will fix itself to it.

XXXV. To gild paper on the edge.
1. Beat the white of an egg in three times its quantity of common water, and
beat it till it is all come into a froth. Let it settle into water again, and
lay a coat of it on the edge of your paper.

2. Next, lay another of bol armenian and ammoniac salt, grinded with soap
suds. Then put the gold, and let it dry, before burnishing it.

XXXVI. To gild on vellum.
Mix some saffron in powder with garlic juice. Put two or three coats of this
vellum, and let it dry, a little, but not quite. Then breathing on the coat;
apply the gold leaf with cotton; and, when dry, burnish it.

XXXVII. Another way.
Lay first a coat of lime and burnt ivory, grinded together with a weak
isinglass water. Apply the gold on it; and when dry, burnish it.

XXXVIII. Another way.
Grind and mix together four ounces of bol armenian, one of aloes, and two of
starch; dilute it in water and lay a coat of it on the vellum, then the gold
immediately. When all is dry, burnish it.

XXXIX. A gilt without gold.
Take the juice from saffron flowers, in the season, or dry saffron in powder,
with an equal quantity of yellow orpine, well purified from its earthly
particles. Grind all well together, and put it a-digesting in hot horse dung
for the space of three weeks. At the end of that term you may use it to gild
whatever you like.

XL. To gild without gold.
Open a hen's egg by one end, and get all out from the inside. Re-fil it again
with chalidonia's juice and mercury; then stop it well with mastich, and put it
under a hen which just begins to set. When the time of hatching is come, the
composition will be done, and fit for gilding.

XLI. To gild on calf and sheep-skin.
Wet the leather with whites of eggs. When dry, rub it with your hand, and a
little olive oil; then put the gold leaf, and apply the hot iron on it.
Whatever the hot iron shall not have touched will go off by brushing.

XLII. Gold and silver in shell.
1. Take saltpetre, gum arabic, and gold leaves, and wash them all together in
common water. The gold will sink to the bottom, whence pouring the water off
you may then put it in the shell.

2. The silver is worked in the same manner, except the saltpetre, instead of
which you put white salt.

XLIII. To gild marble.
Grind the finest bol armenian you can find with lintseed or nut oil. Of this
you lay a coat on the marble, as a kind of gold size. When this is neither too
fresh, nor too dry, apply the gold; and, when thoroughly dry, burnish it.

XLIV. To apply gold on glazed wares, crystal, glass, china, etc.
Take a pennyworth of lintseed oil, and as much of gold litharge; a halfpenny
worth of umber, and as much of ceruse. Grind all together on marble; and with a
little hair pencil, dipped in the said color, draw whatever you will on the
abovementioned wares. As soon as dry, lay your gold on it with cotton, which
you pass along your cheek before taking the gold with it. And as soon as this
is perfectly dry, burnish it.

XLV. Matt gold in oil.
Take yellow ochre, a little umber, white and black lead, which grind all
together with greasy oil, and use it when necessary.

XLVI. To dye any metal, or stone, gold color, without gold.
Grind together into a subtle powder ammoniac salt, white vitriol, saltpetre,
and verdigrise. Cover the metal, or stone you want to dye, all over with this
powder. Set it, thus covered, on the fire, and let it be there a full hour;
then, taking it out, plunge it in chamber lie.

XLVII. To whiten copper.
Take one ounce of zinc, one dram and a third part of it of sublimed mercury.
Grind all into powder, then rub with it what you want to whiten.

XLVIII. To whiten silver without the assistance of fire.
Take Mons-martirum's talo, which you calcine well in an oven till it can be
pulverised. Sift it very fine. Then dipping a piece of cloth or stuff in it,
rub the silver with it.

XLIX. To whiten iron like silver.
Mix ammoniac salt's powder, and quick lime, in cold water. Then make your iron
red-hot several times, and, each time, plunge it in that dissolution. It will
turn as white as silver.

CHAP. VIII.
SECRETS relative to the ART of DYING WOODS, BONES, etc.
I. The composition for red.
1. CHOP Brasil wood very fine, and boil it in common water, till it has
acquired an agreeable color; then strain it without a cloth.

2. Give your wood first a coat of yellow, made of saffron, diluted in water.
Then, the wood being thus previously tinged with a pale yellow, and dried, give
afterward several coats of the Brasil wood-water, till the hue pleases you.

3. When the last coat is dry, burnish it with the burnisher, and lay another
coat of drying varnish with the palm of your hand; and you will have a red
oranged very agreeable.

4. If you want a deeper red, or rather a darker, boil the Brasil wood in a
water impregnated with a dissolution of alum, or quick lime.

II. Another red.
Soak the chopped Brasil wood in oil of tartar; and, with it rub your wood,
proceeding for the rest as above directed.

III. Another way.
Pound orchanetta into powder; mix it with oil of nut; make it lukewarm, and
rub your wood with it. The rest as above.

IV. To dye wood in a purplish color.
Soak Dutch turnsol in water; add a tincture of Brasil wood made in lime water,
and you will obtain a purple with which you may dye your wood, and then burnish
and varnish as usual.

V. A blue purple.
Take that sort of German turnsol which painters use to paint with size.
Dissolve it in water, and strain it through a linen cloth. Give a coat of this
dye to the wood; and, if the hue seems to you to be too strong, give it another
coat of a paler dye, which is done by adding clear water to a part of the
other. When dry, burnish it as usual.

VI. Another.
Four ounces of Brazil, and half a pound of India woods, boiled together in two
quarts of water, with one ounce of common alum.

VII. A blue for wood.
Slack lime in water, and decant it out of the ground. In three pints of this
water dissolve four ounces of turnsol, and boil it one hour. Then give several
coats of it to your wood.

VIII. A green.
Grind Spanish verdigrise into a subtle powder with strong vinegar. Add, and
mix well with this, two ounces of green vitriol. Boil all of it a quarter of an
hour in two quarts of water, and put your wood a-soaking in it so long as you
find the color to your liking. For the rest proceed as above.

IX. A yellow.
Dissolve turnsol in two quarts of water. Then grind some indigo on marble with
that water, and set it in a vessel on the fire, with weak size to dilute it.
When done, give a coat of this dye to your wood with a brush, and when dry,
polish it with the burnisher.

X. Another yellow.
Boil in water some grinded terra merita, and soak your wood in it afterward.

XI. Another fiuer yellow.
Four ounces of French berries, boiled for about a quarter of an hour in a
quart of water, with about the bulk of a filbert of roch-alum. Then soak the
wood in it.

XII. To dye wood in a fine polished white.
Take the finest English white chalk, and grind it in subtle powder on marble,
then let it dry. Now take what quantity you please of it, and set it in a
pipkin on the fire with a weak sized water, having great care not to let it
turn brown. When it is tolerably hot, given first a coat of size to your wood,
and let it dry; then give one or two coats of the aforesaid white over it.
These being dry also, polish with the rushes, and burnish with the burnisher.

XIII. To dye in polished black.
Grind lamp-black on marble with gum water. Put in next in a pipkin, and give a
coat of this, with a brush, to your wood; then polish it when dry.

XIV. Another way.
Soak bits of old rusty iron, such as nails for example, in the best black ink.
A few days after rub your wood with it, and when you shall see it well
penetrated with this black, and dry, polish it with the burnishes.

XV. To imitate ebony.
Infuse gall-nuts in vinegar, wherein you shall have soaked rusty nails; then
rub your wood with this; let it dry, polish and burnish.

XVI. Another way.
Choose a good hard wood, and not veiny, such as pear, apple or hawthorn trees,
and blacken them. When black, rub them with a bit of cloth; then, with a reed
brush, made on purpose, dipped in melted wax, mixed in a pot with common black,
rub your wood till it shines like ebony.

N. B. Before you perform this on your wood, it is proper to rub it smooth with
the rushes, for then you succeed better in the imitation of the ebony.

XVII. Another way.
The holly is again a very fit sort of wood to take the dye of ebony. The
method of dying it is this. Form it first into the shape you intend to give it,
then put it into a hatter's copper to boil, where you leave it till it has
acquired a perfect degree of blackness, and is penetrated sufficiently deep
with it, which you know by leaving a little bit in a corner of the copper to
cut and make the trial. If the black has got in as deep as a copper halfpenny
is thick, take it out and dry it in the shade. Then take off the filth of the
dye, and polish it as you would ebony, with rushes, charcoal dust, and oil of
olive.

XVIII. Another ebony black.
1. Take India wood cut it in small bits, and a little alum; put them in water,
and boil till the water looks purple. Give several coats of this color on the
wood, till it looks purple likewise.

2. Next to this, boil verdigrise in vinegar to the diminution of a third, and
give new coats of this over the others on the wood till it looks black.

XIX. Another way.
Take mulberry-tree wood, work and shape it as it is to stay. Then soak it for
three days in alum water, exposed to the sun, or before the fire. Boil it after
this in olive water, in which you may put the bulk of a nut of Roman vitriol,
and the same quantity of brimstone. When the wood looks of a fine black, take
it out, and lay it again in alum-water. When it shall have remained there a
discretionary time, take it out, let it dry, and polish as usual.

XX. A fine black, easily made.
Take of good ink whatever quantity you like; put it in a stone (...), and well
nealed, then set it in the sun to exsicca^^ it into a cake. When dry, take and
scrape it out from the pan with a knife, and grind it into an impalpable powder
on marble. This powder, diluted with varnish, will produce a fine black.

XXI. To dye wood silver fashion.
Pound isinglass, in a mortar, and reduce it into powder. Add water to it by
degrees, with which you continue to pound it, till it comes into a liquid, like
color for painting. Put it in a clean pipkin, with as big as a nutmeg of size,
and set it on the fire to warm. Brush your wood with this liquor; and, when it
is dry, burnish it.

XXII. To dye in gold, silver, or copper.
Pound very fine, in a mortar, some rock-crystal with clear water. Set it to
warm in a new pipkin with a little size, and give a coat of it on your wood
with a brush. When dry, rub a piece of gold, silver, or copper, on the wood
thus prepared, and it will assume the color of such of these metals as you will
have rubbed it with. After this is done, burnish it as usual.

XXIII. To give a piece of nut, or pear tree, what undulations one likes.
Slack some quicklime in chamber lie. Then with a brush dipped in it form your
undulations on the wood according to your fancy. And, when dry, rub it well
with a rind of pork.

XXIV. To imitate the root of nut-tree.
Give seven or eight coats of size to your wood, till it remains shiny. Then,
before your size is quite dry, strike here and there a confused quantity of
spots with bistre grinded with common water. When dry, varnish it with the
Chinese varnish.

XXV. To give a fine color to the cherry-tree wood.
Take one ounce of orchanetta; cut it in two or three bits, and put it in to
soak for forty-eight hours in three ounces of good oil of olive. Then with this
oil anoint your cherry-tree would after it is worked and shaped as you intend
it; it will give it a fine luster.

XXVI. To marble wood.
1. Give it a coat of black diluted in varnish. Repeat it one, two, three, or
as many times as you think proper; then polish it as usual.

2. Dilute next, some white in a white varnish made with white gum, or
shell-lack, and white sandarac. Lay this white on the black ground, tracing
with it what strokes and oddities you like: when dry, give a light rub with
(...), then wipe it, and give a last coat of fine transparent white varnish, in
order to preserve the brightness of the white. Let this dry at leisure, then
polish it.

XXVII. To imitate white marble.
Have the finest white marble you can find; break and calcine it on the fire.
Grind it as fine as you possibly can, on a white marble stone, and dilute it
with size. Lay two coats of this on your wood, which, when dry, you polish as
usual, and varnish as before directed.

XXVIII. To imitate black marble.
Burn some lamp-black in a shovel, red hot, then grind it with brandy. For the
bigness of an egg of black, put the size of a pea of lead in drops, as much of
tallow, and the same quantity of soap. Grind and mix well all this together;
then dilute it, with a very weak size water. Give four coats of this; and, when
dry, polish as usual.

XXIX. To marble, and jasper.
The wood being previously whitened with two coats of whitening, diluted in
leather size, then polished as directed chap. vi. art. 1. n. 2. put on with a
pencil what other colors you like, then burnish it with the burnishing tooth,
which, in doing it, you rub now and then on a piece of white soap.

You must only take notice, that if you have employed lake, cinnabar or pine,
and some other colors, they will easily receive the burnishing; but as for the
verdigrise and azure powder, you will find more difficulty to succeed in doing
it.

As for the jasper, you (...) give two or three coats of different colors
fancifully drawn and intermixed, choosing always a green or a yellow for the
ground as the most proper. And, when with a brush of hog's bristles, you shall
have laid and variegated all your colors, let the whole dry; polish it with
rushes, and give the last coat of white varnish.

XXX. For the aventurine.
Prepare a brown ground color, with a mixture of vermilion, umber, and
lamb-black, and give a first coat of this on your wood. According as you should
want this ground darker or redder, you may add or diminish the quantity of some
of these colors. When these coats are dry, polish them, then heat them, and
give another of a fine and clear varnish, in which you have mixed the
aventurine powder sifted through a silk sieve. And after the proper time for
drying, you may polish as usual.

XXXI. A counter-faction of coral.
1. Reduce goat's horns into a subtle powder. Put it in a clear lie made of
lime and pearl ashes. Let it there rest for a fortnight. When reduced into a
palp, add cinnabar in powder, or dragon's blood in tears, pulverised very fine,
in what quantity you may judge necessary to give the quantity or matter you
have got a fine and perfect coral hue.

2. Next boil this composition till it comes very thick; then take it off from
the fire and mould it in moulds shaped in forms of coral. Or else cast it again
in what other sorts of moulds you like, to make figures of it, and other sorts
of work, which will produce a fine effect.

Observation. This secret has been worth immense sums of money to him who found
it out. The Turks, to whom these sorts of works were carried, paid them
magnificently. But this branch of trade was soon put to an end by the cheats
which were practiced with the merchants of Tunis and Algiers, who used to buy
those curiosities.

XXXII. To soften amber, otherwise karabe.
Melt fine white and pure wax in a glass vessel. When melted, put your amber in
it, and leave it there till you find it soft to your satisfaction. Then take it
out, and give it what form and shape you like. If afterward you put it in a
dry place in the shade, it will become as hard as you can wish to have it.

XXXIII. To take the impression of any seal.
1. Take half a pound of Mercury; the same quanty of crystaline vitriol; as
much verdigrise. Pulverise well these two last ingredients, and put them along
with the first in a new iron pan, with smith's forge water. Stir all well with
a wooden spatula, till the mercury is perfectly incorporated with the powders.
Then wash that paste with cold water, and change it till it remains quite clear
as when you put it in. Put the lump in the air, it will harden, and you may
keep it for use.

2. When you want to take the impression of a seal with it, take it and place
it over the fire on an iron plate. When there appears on it some drops like
pearls, then it is hot enough; take it off and knead it in your hands with your
fingers, it will become pliable like wax; smooth one side of it with the flat
side of a knife blade, and apply it on the seal, pressing it all round and in
the middle to make it take the impression. When done, list it up, and set it in
the air, where it will come again as hard as metal, and will serve you to seal
the same letter, after having opened it, with its own coat of arms or cipher,
etc. as the original seal itself, without any probability of discovering it,
should even the real one be laid on it.

XXXIV. Another way.
Heat some mercury in a crucible, and silver filings in another, in the
proportion of two parts of mercury to one of silver. As soon as the mercury
begins to move, pour it on the silver filings. Let this cool, and then put it
in a glass mortar. Pound it well with a pestle of the same, and add a little
water in which you shall have dissolved some verdigrise. Stir this, for three
days, five or six times a day. At the end of the term decant out the verdigrise
water, and replace it with good vinegar, with which you pound it again in the
same mortar, as before, a couple of hours, changing the vinegar as soon as it
blackens. Pound it againtwo other hours, with chamber lie instead of vinegar,
changing it the same, during that time, as you did the vinegar. -- Then take
that matter, lay it on a wash-leather skin, which you bring up all round it,
and tie it above with a string. Press the lump well in that skin, so as to
separate and squeeze out all the superfluous mercury which passes through the
leather. And, when none comes out any longer, open the skin, take the lump in
your hand, and knead it with your fingers, and smooth one side of it to take
the impression you like, proceeding, for the rest, as above directed. It
hardens in the air, and softens with the heat of the hand, assisted with the
working of the fingers, as you would do a piece of wax.

XXXV. To get birds with white feathers.
Make a mixture of semper-vivum-majus's juice and olive oil, and rub with it
the eggs on which the hen is setting. All the birds which shall come from those
eggs will be white feathered.

XXXVI. To soften ivory.
In three ounces of spirit of nitre, and fifteen of white wine, or even of mere
spring water, mixed together, put your ivory a soaking. And, in three or four
days, it will be so soft as to obey under the fingers.

XXXVII. To dye ivory, thus softened.
1. Dissolve, in spirit of wine, such colors as you want to dye your ivory
with. And when the spirit of wine shall be sufficiently tinged with the color
you have put in, plunge your ivory in it, and leave it there till it is
sufficiently penetrated with it, and dyed inwardly. Then give that ivory what
form you will.

2. To harden it afterward, wrap it up in a sheet of white paper, and cover it
with decripitated common salt, and the driest you can make it to be; in which
situation you shall leave it only twenty-four hours.

XXXVIII. Another way to soften ivory.
Cut a large root of mandrake into small bits, and infuse first, then boil it
in water. Put your ivory in this boiling liquor, and boil it too, till it is as
soft as wax.

XXXIX. Another way.
1. Take one pound of black alicant kaly, and three quarters of a pound of
quick lime, which you put into boiling water, and let it rest for three days.
If, after that term, the liquor is reddish, it is strong enough; if not, you
must add again of the above ingredients, till it acquires that degree.

2. Then putting a soaking in this lie any bone, or ivory, for a fortnight,
they will become as soft as wax.

3. To harden them afterward, dissolve an equal quantity of alum and scuttle
fish-bones powder, in water, which you boil to a pellicula; soak your bones or
ivory in this for about one hour only; then take them out, and put then in a
cellar for a few days.

XL. To whiten ivory, which has been spoiled.
Take roch-alum, which you dissolve in water, in a sufficient quantity, to
render the water all milky with it. Boil this liquor into a bubble, and soak
your ivory in it for about one hour, then rub it over with a little hair brush.
When done, wrap it in a wet piece of linen to dry it leisurely and gradually,
otherwise it would certainly split.

XLI. Another way.
Take a little black soap, and lay it on the piece of ivory. Present it to the
fire, and when it has bubbled a little while, wipe it off.

XLII. To whiten green ivory; and whiten again that which has turned of a brown
yellow.
1. Slack some lime into water, put your ivory in that water, after decanted
from the ground, and boil it till it looks quite white.

2. To polish it afterward, set it on the turner's wheel, and after having
worked it, take rushes and pumice-stones subtle powder with water, and rub it
till it looks all over perfectly smooth. Next to that, beat it, by turning it
against a piece of linen, or sheep'sskin leather, and, when hot, rub it over
with a little whitening diluted in oil of olive, continuing turning as before;
then with a little dry whitening alone, and finally with a piece of soft white
rag. When all this is performed as directed, the ivory will look as white as
snow.

XLIII. To whiten bones.
Put a handful of bran and quicklime together, in a new pipkin, with a
sufficient quantity of water, and boil it. In this put the bones, and boil them
also till perfectly freed from greasy particles.

XLIV. To petrify wood etc.
Take equal quantities of gem-salt, roch-alum, white vinegar, calx, and pebbles
powder. Mix all these ingredients together, there will happen an ebullition.
If, after it is over, you throw in this liquor any porous matter, and leave it
there a soaking for three, four, or five days, they will positively turn into
petrifications.

XLV. To imitate tortoise-shell with horn.
Take one ounce of gold litharge, and half an ounce of quicklime. Grind well
all together, and mix it to the consistence of pap, with a sufficient quantity
of chamber lie. Put of this on the horn; and, three or four hours afterward it
will be perfectly marked.

XLVI. A preparation for the tortoise-shell.
Make a mixture, as above, of quicklime, orpine, pearl ashes and aquafortis.
Mix well all together, and put your horn, or tortoise-shell, a soaking in it.

XLVII. To dye bones in green.
Grind well a discretionable quantity of verdigrise, which you put with vinegar
in a copper vessel, and the bones in it. Cover this, and lute it so well that
no air can come at the contents. Put it in hot horse dung, and leave it there
for a fortnight, after which time take your bones out; they will be colored of
a fine green, which will never rub off.

XLVIII. Another way.
1. Put some verdigrise, well grinded, in goat's milk, and leave it till the
milk becomes very green. Then put all together in a copper vessel along with
the bones; cover and lute it well; then place it in hot horse dung for ten
days, after which time you may take the bones out perfectly well colored.

2. If you will have them more so, boil them in oil of nut; and the longer they
boil in it, the more they will heighten in color.

3. To polish them, you must use elder's marrow; and luster them with oil of
nut.

XLIX. To dye bones, and mould them in all manner of shapes
1. Boil together twelve pounds of quicklime, and one of calcined roch-alum,
in water, to the reduction of one third water you shall have put in. Add, then
two more pounds of quick lime, and boil it again till it can carry an egg,
without its sinking to the bottom. Now let it cool and rest, then filter it.

2. Take twelve pounds of that liquor; put in half a pound of rasped Brasil
wood, and four ounces of scarlet flocks; boil all about five minutes on a slow
fire, then decant the clearest part of it, and put it by. Put on the faces of
brasil and scarlet about four pounds of the first water; boil it the same
length of time as the other, and decant likewise the clearest part of it on the
other. Repeat this operation, till the new added water draws no more color from
the faeces.

3. Now rasp any quantity of bones, and boil them, when rasped, a reasonable
time in clear limewater. Then take them out. Put them in a mattress; and, over
them, pour some of the tinged water, so as to soak them only with it. Place the
mattress on a mild sand bath, and evaporate the liquor. Add some more liquor,
and evaporate it agaiu the same, continuing to add and evaporate the tinged
liquor, till the rasped bones are all turned into a soft paste.

4. Take this paste, and mould it as you like, in tin or other moulds, to make
whatever thing or figure you want. Set it in the mould for a day or two, till
it has acquired the shape you would have it; then, to harden it, boil it in a
water of alum and saltpetre first, and afterward in oil of nut. Nothing more
surprising, and at the same time more agreeable, than these figures which look
incontestibly to be made of bones, without conceiving how they can be made
such, out of that matter, and in one solid piece.

L. To dye bones in black.
Take six ounces of litharge, and the same quantity of quicklime. Boil all in
common water, along with the bones. Keep always stirring, till the water begins
to boil. Then take it out, and never cease stirring till the water is cold
again; by that time the bones will be dyed black.

LI. To soften bones.
Take equal parts of Roman vitriol and common salt. Distill the spirits out of
this by the alembic, or rather, by the retort. If in the water you get from the
distillations, you put the bones a-soaking, they will become as soft as wax.

LII. To dye bones in green.
Pound well together, in a quart of strong vinegar, three ounces of verdigrise,
as much of brass filings, and a handful of rue. When done, put all in a glass
vessel, along with the bones you want to dye, and stop it well. Carry this into
a cold cellar, wherein leaving it for a fortnight, or even more, the bones
shall be dyed green.

LIII. A salt for hardening soft bones.
Take equal quantities of ammoniac, common decrepitated and gem salts, as well
as of plumeum, saccarinum, roch and shell alums, Pulverise, and mix all
together; then put it in a glass vessel well stopped, which bury in hot horse
dung, that the matter should melt into water. Congeal it on warm embers. Then
make it return into a deliquium again, by means of the horse dung, as before.
When thus liquified for the second time, it is fit for use. Keep it, and when
you want to harden and consolidate any thing, smear it over with it.

LIVE. To make figures, or vases, with egg-shells.
1. Put in a crucible any quantity of egg-shells, and place it in a potter's
furnace, for two days, that they may there be perfectly calcined: then grind
them dry into a subtle powder.

2. Next, with gum-arabick-water and whites of eggs beaten together, make a
liquor, with which you are to knead that powder, and make a paste or dough of
it.

3. With that dough, to which you give the consistence of potter's clay, make
and form whatever figure or vase you like, and set them in the sun to dry.

LV. To dye bones and ivory of a fine red.
1. Boil scarlet flocks in clear water, assisted with a certain quantity of
pearl ashes, to draw the color the better; then clarify it with a little
roch-alum, and strain this tincture through a piece of linen.

2. To dye, afterward, any bones of ivory in red, you must rub them first with
aquafortis, and then immediately with this tincture.

LVI. To make a paste in imitation of black marble.
Dissolve two ounces of spalt, on a gentle fire, in a glazed pipkin. When in
perfect fusion, add a third, part of karabe, which you must keep there ready
melted for it, and stir all well together. When both shall be well mixed and
united, take the pipkin off from the fire, and throw the contents, boiling hot
as they are, into a mould of fine polish in the inside. Then, when cold and
dry, take the piece off from the mould, and you will find that nothing can
^^^tate so well black marble as this deceptive composition, except black marble
itself.

LVII. A receipt to dye marble, or alabaster, in blue or purple.
1. Pound together in a marble mortar, parsnips and purple lilies, with a
sufficient quantity of white wind vinegar. Proportion the quantity of parsnips
and lilies to each other, according to the hue you wish to give the liquor. If
you cannot get one of these two juices, make use of that you can get; and to
every one pound of liquor mixed and prepared, put one ounce of alum.

2. In this dye, put now your pieces of marble, or alabaster, and hold them,
supposing that they are not too considerable to go into the vessel with the
liquor. And if they be, you must heat one part of i^ as much as you possibly
can, then dye it with the liquor quite boiling hot, and thus proceed from place
to place, till you have died it all over.

LVIII. To bronze wooden, plaster, ivory, or other figures, so that the bronze
may stand water for ever.
1. Grind English brown red as fine as possible, with nut oil. With this, paint
over all the figures intendto be bronzed, and let it dry.

2. Have next some powder of German gold in a shell; and, in another, some of
the varnish, described in the following article. Dip a pencil in the varnish,
and then in gold, and give as smooth and equal a coat of this to your figure as
you can.

3. For saving expense, you may instead of the German gold, take some fine
bronze, which is a good deal cheaper.

LIX. The varnish fit for bronzing.
Pound into subtle powder, one ounce of the finest shell-lac. Put it in a
glass mattress of three half-pints size. Pour upon it half a pint of the best
French spirit of wine. Stop it well, and place it in the cool for four days,
that the lac may have time to dissolve at leisure. During that time neglect not
to shake the mattress, as if you were washing it, four or five times a day, for
fear the lac should make a glutinous lump, and stick to the bottom of the
mattress. Should your lac, at the end of those four days, be yet undissolved,
set it on a gentle sand-bath, to help finishing it; and when dissolved to
perfection, the varnish is done.

Note. When you pour the spirit of wine on the lac in the mattress, observe to
do it gently, and little at a time, in order it may penetrate the powder the
better. Observe also to stop pouring by intervals, at different times, and take
the mattress and shake it as it were for rinsing, in order to mix all well, thus
continuing to do till you have introduced all the spirit of wine into the lac.

LX. A water to dye bones and wood.
1. Put the strongest white wind vinegar in an earthen pan, in which set to
infuse, for seven days, copper filings, Roman vitriol, roch-alum, and
verdigrise.

2. In this liquor, put a-boiling what you want to dye, and it will take the
color perfectly.

3. If you want a red dye instead of verdigrise, put some red; if yellow, put
yellow, and so forth, according to the various color you may require, with a
discretionable quantity of roch-alum for either.

LXI. To dye bones and ivory an emerald green.
Put in aquafortis as much flos aenei as it can dissolve; and in that water put
a-soaking for twelve hours only, whatever you want to dye, and they will take
the color to perfection in that space of time.

LXII. To dye bones any color.
Boil the bones first for a good while; then in a lie of quick lime mixed with
chamber lie, put either verdigrise, or red or blue chalk, or any other
ingredient fit to procure the color you want to give to the bones. Lay the
bones in this liquor, and boil them, they will be perfectly dried.

LXIII. To whiten alabaster and white marble.
Infuse, for twelve hours, some subtle pumice stone's powder in verjuice;
then, with a cloth or a sponge, wet your marble with the liquor, and it will
become perfectly white.

LXIV. To blacken bones.
Mix charcoal dust with wood-ashes and water; rub the bone with this wash, then
with ink; and, when dry, polish it.

LXV. Another way to dye woods and bones red.
Infuse for twenty-four hours your wood in red-wine vinegar. Then add to this
vinegar a sufficient quantity of Brasil wood and roch-alum, both in powder, and
boil all together, till you see the wood, or bones, have acquired the degree of
color you wish to have them.

LXVI. The same in black.
After the twenty-four hours infusion as above, add to the vinegar a sufficient
quantity of vitriol, orpine, pomgranates' rinds, and gall nuts, all in powder,
and boil as before directed.

LXVII. For the green.
Supply for the above ingredients, two parts of rochalum, and one of alumen
plumeum, with which you boil the wood or bones to the reduction of two thirds,
or thereabouts; then put them a soaking in a lie of soap and verdigrise, in a
sufficient quantity till they are perfectly green.

LXVIII. To dye wood vermilion color.
Smoothen and rub well the wood first; then give it four or five coats of
vermilion subtilely pulverised, and diluted with lime and curd cheese water. --
When dry, polish it over again with rushes and oil of spike; then for the last,
give it four or five coats of varnish, made with karabe and oil of spike, and
let it dry.

LXIX. To soften horn, so that you may cast it in a mould as melted lead.
Make a strong lie with equal quantities of pearl ashes and quick lime. Rasp
your horns, and put these raspings in that lie. They will soon turn into a pap.
Then put in this pap whatever color you like, and cast it in whatever mould you
choose. -- To dry and harden these figures afterward follow the directions
prescribed in Art, xlix, at the bottom, and in liii.

CHAP. IX.
SECRETS relative to the ART of CASTING in MOULDS.
I. To cast a figure in bronze.
1. To cast a figure, or any other piece in bronze, you must, first, make a
pattern with a proper clay. That clay ought to be mixed with sand, to prevent
its cracking, when it comes to dry.

2. When the pattern is completed and the sculptor is pleased with his work,
you mould it with plaster while it is still damp, because in drying, the parts
of the pattern shrink, and lose their fullness. To that effect you begin by the
bottom part of the figure, which you cover with several pieces, and by rows; as
for example, let us suppose the first row from the feet to the knees; the
second from the knees to the beginning of the belly; the third from the
beginning of the belly up to the pit of the stomach, from thence to the
shoulders, on which you lay the last row, which is to contain the head. --
Observe, however, that those divisions of rows admit of no particular rule, and
ought to be entirely determined by, and adapted to the size of the figure. For
when the pieces are made too considerable, the plaster works too much, and
fatigues itself, which is detrimental to its taking a true and precise
impression of all the turns and shapes of the figure. So that at any rate, it
is always preferable to make the pieces of the mould smaller than larger.

3. You must observe, that if the figure you are moulding have got any
draperies, or other sorts of ornaments about it, which require a good deal of
trouble and nicety, you cannot help making a great many small parts and
subdivisions in your mould, in order to enable you to strip them off the figure
afterward with more facility. In which circumstance, when all these small
parts are made, and garnished with little rings to assist in pulling them off
more easily, you cover them all over with larger pieces, which containing
several of the little ones, are called cases, and in French chapes.

4. When the mould is thus made and completed, you let it rest till it is
perfectly dry. Then, before using it, they who are curious, in their work, do
not content themselves with imbibing it inwardly with oil, but they even make
it drink as much wax as it can soak, by warming those separate pieces, and
putting wax in them to melt. -- The motive, in doing this, is to render the
wax-work, which is to be cast in it finer and more perfect. For if you imbibe
the mould with oil only, the wax figure cast in such a mould always comes out a
little rough and like flour, because the wax draws always the superfice of the
plaster, and in reverse, the plaster draws also the superfice of the wax,
which produces a great defect in the figure, and is a great obstacle to its
coming out from the mould with that neatness it otherwise would.

5. The mould being therefore thus imbibed with wax, if you want it for a
bronze figure, you assemble all the small parts of it each in their cases, and
with a brush give them a coat of oil. Then, with another brush, give them
another coat also of wax, prepared as follows. -- Six pounds of wax, half a
pound of hog's lard, and one pound of B^^gundy pitch. -- This preparation of
the wax, however, must be regulated according to the country and the season.
For in the heat of summer, or hot climes, such as Spain, Italy, and France; wax
may be used alone, as it keeps naturally soft, and the other drugs above
mentioned, are added to it only to render it more tractable. Of this wax,
therefore, whether prepared or natural, you lay another coat, as we said, in
the hollow of the mould, to the thickness of a sixpenny piece. Then, with wax
made in flat cakes, of the thickness of a quarter of an inch, more or less,
according to that you are willing to give your metal, you fill all the hollow
parts of the mould in pressing hard this sort of wax in them with your fingers.
When thus filled, you have an iron grate, larger by three or four inches every
way than the plinth or basis of the figure. On the middle of that grate you
erect one or more iron bars, continued agreeable to the latitude and situation
of the figure, and bored, from space to space, with holes to pass other iron
rods of the size and length necessary to support the core (in French ame or
noyau) of what you want to cast.

6. Formerly they used to make their cores with potter's clay mixed with hair
and horse-dung well beaten together. With this compost, they formed a figure
like the pattern; and, when they had well supported it with iron bars, length
and cross-ways, according to its position and attitude, they scraped it, that
is to say, they diminished, and took off from its bigness as much as they
wanted to give to their metal. When that core was dry, they took the wax with
which they had filled the hollow parts of their mould, and covered it with
them. -- This method is even practiced now by some founders especially for
great bronze figures, because earth resists better the power of that red-hot
melted metal, than plaster can; and this they reserve only for small figures,
and those which are cast in gold or silver. However, when plaster is well
beaten and mixed with brick-dust also well beaten and sifted fine, it stands
pretty well too. We shall therefore proceed on the method of casting on
plaster cores.

7. You take then the first, or bottom rows of the mould, filled by the last
wax in cakes, as mentioned before, and assemble them on the iron grate round
the principal iron bar, which is to support the core when made. When they are
joined together, you give them a tie round very hard with cords, left they
should vary from their position when you form the core.

8. To form this, as soon as the first set which completes the bottom row of
the separate pieces of the mould is fixed, you pour plaster, diluted very
clear, and mixed, as we said, with brick-dust, with which you fill up that
bottom part of the hollow. Then, on this first bottom row of the mould, you
place the second in the same manner as the first; then fill it likewise with
your prepared plaster. Thus you continue to erect your mould from row to row,
till you come to the last, and fill it as you go, with plaster, which is
called forming the core. If the figure require it, you pass across the core
some iron rods through the holes perforated for that purpose in the
perpendicular bars, in order to support the core the better, and give it more
strength and power to resist the effort of the metal when it comes in fusion
upon it.

9. When all the pieces of the mould have been thus erected one upon another,
and filled with plaster, you must stop a certain time to let it take a
consistence, then proceed to take off the cases and all the similar parts of
the mould contained in each of them, row by row, and one by one, in the same
manner as you proceed to erect them, with this difference, that in erecting
them you begin at the bottom, and that in taking them off, you begin at the
top; which when done, leaves the figure to appear all in wax, covering the
core, which is contained in the inside of it.

10. You are then to proceed to the repairing of the figure, and finish it
after the original. The sculptor, in that case, has even an opportunity of
perfecting much some of the parts, in adding or taking off according as he
thinks proper, to give more grace and expression to certain strokes, muscles,
or features only: as for the disposition of the limbs, and their attitude, he
can no longer mend or alter them.

11. The figure thus well prepared, you are to place what is called the pouring
and the vent holes. The pouring holes are wax pipes of the bigness of an inch
diameter for such figures as are of a natural size; for they are to be
proportioned not only to the size of the figure, but even to that of the parts
of that figure whereon they are placed. The vent holes are wax pipes likewise,
but of a much letter size. Those pipes are cast in plaster moulds of what
length you please, then cut to that of four or five inches, or thereabouts.
They are cast hollow, to the intent of rendering them lighter, otherwise they
might as well be cast solid. Those which serve for pouring, are placed in a
straight perpendicular line, one above another, at six inches asunder, and
sometimes nearer, when there are draperies, and much matter is used.

12. When the various pipes are placed and soldered against the figure, with
wax, so that the end which is free should be upwards, and as much perpendicular
to the figure as possible, you place another pipe of the same size quite
perpendicular, which is to be fixed against every one of the ends of the
others. All these pipes, both large and small, serve for the pouring of the
matter, and casting of the figure. You are to place three or four of them
generally round the figure, which is determined by its size, bulk, and
disposition.

13. But at the same time you are placing the pouring-holes, you must not
neglect placing also those which are to serve for the vent. These (...) are to
be placed in the same line as and with the others, at the distance of four
inches only from them, and fixed likewise by one end to the figure, and by the
other to another long and perpendicular pipe, like those for pouring. Now, as
it is necessary that all the wax, when you come to melt it, should, as we shall
mention in its place, come out entirely from the mould, you must not fail to
place those sorts of vent pipes on all the rising and distant parts from the
mean bulk of the figure, such as the arms, fingers, draperies, etc. etc. from
which the wax must be got out with facility, either by means of particular
vent-holes, so formed as to descend to the bottom of the figure, or by means of
those large ones placed perpendicularly along side of it. -- Observe, always,
to make the pouring holes which come to the face and hands the smallest of any,
that they may not affect too much the features and likeness, if any be
intended, of those parts; and that you may the more easily repair those places
with the chisel, when they are finished.

14. After these various pipes have been thus carefully fixed all about the
figure, you must so place them that two of the main perpendicular ones should
join together at five or six inches higher, and above the upper part of it, and
be terminated by a wax cup of four inches deep, and as much diameter, under,
and at the bottom part of which you solder them. This cup serves as a funnel to
receive the metal, and introduces it into the pouring holes, by means of its
communication with them, to convey it afterward into all the parts of the
figure at once, and form it. Therefore, if there be four perpendicular
ascending pipes, you make too such cups, to communicate the metal to these
pipes.

15. As for the vent-holes, you let them free above the top of the figure, and
higher than the pouring ones, because they want no cups.

16. When the wax figure is thus completely repaired and garnished, with all
its pouring and vent holes, you prepare a composition of putty, and crucibles
powder, well grinded, and sifted very fine, which you dilute clear in a pan,
like a color for painting. With a brush take this composition, and cover all
the figure, as well as the vent and pouring pipes. This operation you repeat
several times, observing carefully to fill up all the cracks and crevices which
may happen in drying. When the wax is thus perfectly covered every where, you
put with the same brush, another composition thicker than the first, and of a
stronger sort.

17. This composition is made of the same materials as the other, but with this
addition, that you mix some free earth along with it, and horse-dung, quite
clear from any straw. After having given six or seven coats of this, you give
another coat again, much thicker still, of a stuff composed of nothing but free
earth and horse-dung, and this being dry, you give half a dozen more of the
same, allowing time between each to dry. At last, you put with your hand, and
no more with the brush, two other coats of this same last composition, of free
earth and horse-dung, mixed in form of mortar, observing always that one should
be perfectly dry, before laying on the other; and that there should be no part
of the figure, whether naked or draperies, but what is equally covered with
every one of the different coats we have mentioned.

18. Next to this, you must have flat iron bars turned and bent according to
the disposition of the figure, which being fixed by means of hooks at the sides
of the grate on which it stands, rise up as high as the pipes, and joining
close to the mould, unite at top by means of a circle of iron which runs
through all the hooks, by which these bars are terminated. Then you surround
again the figure with other iron bars, made in form of hoops, to prevent the
others which go from top to bottom, and to which they are fixed by means of
wires, from giving way; and, between every one of these bars, both
perpendicular and horizontal, there must be no more than seven or eight inches
distance allowed.

19. When all these bars are well fixed together and enabled thereby to support
and contain the mould, you take a compost of free earth, horse-dung and hair
mixed together, in consistence of mortar, and with this you cover the mould and
the bars all over, without attending any more to the shape of the figure, so
that there appears no more but a shapeless lump of clay, which ought to be of
about four or five inches thick.

20. When the mould is thus completed, you are to (...) a square pit
sufficiently deep for the top of the mould to be somewhat lower than the
superfice of the ground where the pit is dug, and sufficiently wide also to
allow a room of a foot and a half, free all round the mould, when descended
into it. -- At the bottom of that pit, you construct a furnace, on the top of
which there is to be a strong iron grate supported by the arches and wall of
the furnace, which is to be made of stone or bricks, as well as the four sides
of the pit from top to bottom.

21. After the grate is placed on the furnace, you descend the mould on it by
means of engines. Then, under the pipes which are to serve for pouring, as well
as vent, you place pans to receive the wax which is to run off. This done, you
light a middling fire to heat the figure, and all the place where it stands,
with so moderate a heat, that the wax may melt without boiling, and come
entirely out from the mould, without there remaining any part of it; which
would not be the case if the heat be so great as to make it boil, for then it
would stick to the mould, and cause defects in the figure, when you come to run
the metal. -- When, therefore, you judge that all the wax is out, which you may
know by weighing that you employed, and weighing it again after it is in the
pans, you take these off, and stop the pipes, through which it came out, with
clay. Then fill all the empty parts of the pit round the figure with bricks,
which you throw in gently, but without order: and, when it is come up to the
top, made a good brisk fire in the furnace. As the flame is interrupted by
these bricks, it cannot ascend with violence, nor hurt the mould, and they only
communicate their heat in going through all those bricks, which become so hot,
that they and the mould are at a last both red-hot.

22. Twenty-four hoursafter the fire has been lighted, when you see that the
bricks and the mould are equally red hot from top to bottom, you let the fire
go out, and the mould cool, by taking all the bricks off. When there is no more
any heat at all, you throw some earth in the pit, to fill the place which had
been occupied with the bricks; and, in proportion as you throw it in you tread
it with your feet, and press it against the mould.

23. In order to melt this metal, you construct, just by the pit where the
mould is, a furnace, the lower part of which ought to be higher by two or three
inches than the top of the said pit, in order to obtain a sufficient declivity
from it to the pit for the running of the metal. Its construction must be after
the form of an oven, with good bricks and free earth, and supported by good and
strong iron hoops. There is a border raised all round, so as to make it capable
to contain all the metal which is intended to be melted in it. On the side
which looks toward the pit, there is an opening, which is stopped during the
melting of the metal, and from that opening comes an earthen funnel practiced,
which goes to a basin of good free earth placed over the mould, and the middle
of which corresponds and communicates to those cups we have mentioned before,
[No. 14.] This basin is called by the workmen escheno. And in order to prevent
the metal from running into these cups before the whole which is in the furnace
is run into the escheno, there are men on purpose who hold a long iron rod
terminated by one end in the form of these cups, and stop them.

24. When the metal is melted, you unstop the opening of the furnace in which
it is contained; this runs into the escheno, and as soon as it is arrived, the
men take off the rod with which they stopped the cups, and the mould being
instantly filled all over, the figure is formed in one moment.

25. After the mould is thus filled with the metal, you let it stay in that
situation for three or four days, then, at leisure, you take off the earth
which had been thrown all round it, which helps the mould to become entirely
cold. As soon as you are sure there is no more heat, you break the mould, and
the metal figure appears surrounded with rods of the same metal, starting out
from it, occasioned by the vent and pouring-holes, or pipes, through which the
metal was introduced, and which remained filled with it. These you must saw
off, in order to unburden the figure of so much, and get it out of the pit more
easily. Then you clean and scower with water and grinding stone in powder, and
pieces of deal or other sort of soft wood, and you search in all the hollow
places of the draperies and other parts.

26. When the figures are small, they are generally washed with aquafortis;
and, when it has operated, you may wash them again with common water. When they
are thus well cleansed, you repair, finish, and fault those which require to be
treated more highly than others; for the large ones are seldom searched so
minutely.

27. After they have been as much finished as they are intended to be, you may
give them, if you like, a color, as some do, with oil and boodstone. Or, as
some others practice it, you may make them turn green by means of vinegar. But
without all that trouble, the bronze will in time take a natural varnish of
itself, and become of a blackish hue.

II. How to gild such sorts of figures.
1. They may be gilt two different ways; either with gold in shells, or with
gold in leaves. The first method is the handsomest, and at the same time the
most lasting, it being always used for small sized works. To apply it, you make
a mixture of one part of the best gold, and seven of mercury, which founders
call silver in that sort of process. When these are incorporated together, you
then heat the figure, and rub it with the composition, which whitens it, and
heating it again over the fire the mercury exhales, and the figure remains gilt.

2. As for the other method it is only for large sized works, and them on which
one is not willing to make a great expense; you scrape the figure with small
files, and other proper tools, to make it quick and clean, then you heat and
lay on a gold leaf, repeating this four times.

III. Of the choice and composition of metals.
Any metal whatever may be used for the casting of figures, though the general
composition runs as follows.

1. For the fine bronze figures, the alloy is half brass, half copper. The
Egyptians who are said to be the inventors of that art, used to employ two
thirds of brass against one of copper.

2. Brass is made with copper and calamine. One hundred weight of calamine
renders one hundred per cent. Calamine is a stone from which a yellow dye is
drawn. It is to be found in France and at Liege.

3. Good copper ought to be beaten, not molten, when intended for statues. You
must guard also against using putty, when in alloy with lead.

4. Copper may be forged either hot or cold. But brass breaks when cold, and
suffers the hammer only when hot.

5. There is a sort of metallic stone called zinc, which comes from Egypt: it
renders the copper of a much finer yellow than the calamine; but, as it is both
(...) and scarcer, they are not so ready to use it.

6. As for the composition for making of bells, it is twenty pounds weight
pewter for each hundred of copper. And the artillery pieces take but ten pounds
only of pewter to one hundred of the other. This last composition is not good
for the casting of figures, as it is both too hard and too brittle.

CHAP. X.
SECRETS relative to the making of curious and useful sorts of INK.
I. A good shining Ink.
1. PUT four quarts of warm water in a glazed pipkin. Add eight ounces of
turpentine oil, and one pound of gal-nuts bruised in a mortar. Let the whole
infuse thus for a week, then boil it gently till, with a pen, you may draw a
stroke yellow and shiny with it. Strain it through a strong cloth. Set it on a
blasting fire, and, as soon as it boils, add seven ounces of green vitriol to
it, keep stirring it with a stick till it is perfectly dissolved. Let this rest
for two days without disturbing it. There will be a skim on the top, which must
be thrown off. Decant next the clearest part into another vessel, which you set
on a gentle fire to evaporate about two fingers of the liquor, then let it rest
four or five days, and it will be fit for use.

2. Rain water, or that in which wallnuts have been infused, are both very good
for making of ink.

3. With white wine, or old beer, you may likewise make very good shining ink.

4. A carp's gall is very proper to mix among it.

II. To write on grease, and make the ink run on it.
1. Cut a bullock's gall open into a pan, and put a handful of salt and about a
quarter of a pint of vinegar to it, which you stir and mix well. Thus you may
keep the gall, for twelve months without its corrupting.

2. When you are writing, and you find your paper or parchment greasy, put a
drop of that gall among your ink in the ink-horn, and you will find no more
difficulty to make your pen mark.

III. An ink-stone, with which ink-stands may be made, and with which you may
write without ink.
Take gum arabic, fourteen ounces; lamp-black, thirteen; and burnt willow wood
coals, three. Pound the gum into an impalpable powder, and dissolve it into a
pint of common water. This done knead your abovementioned powders with part of
this gum water, so as to make a paste or dough of them, as it were, for bread.
With this dough form ink-stands of the shape and form you like best, and in the
ink-stands, while the composition is still soft, you may stamp a few small
holes.

2. This done, dry these stands in an ardent furnace for four hours, or in the
shade a sufficient time. When dry, brush them over with your aforementioned
gum water; till they appear as black and shiny as jet, and as hard as marble.

4. When you want to use them, put a few drops of water in one of the holes,
and put a pen to soak in it at the same time. If the water be just put in, the
ink will not be quite so black, but if it had remained a little while, it will
be as black as the blackest of any inks.

IV. To write with common clear water.
Take gall-nut's powder, and vitriol calcined in the sun to whiteness, of each
four ounces, and sandarack one and a half. All being pulverised and mixed, rub
your paper with that powder; then, steeping your pen in any common water, and
writing with it, it will appear black like any ink.

V. A good ink, both for drawing and writing.
1. Bruise with a (...) one pound of gal-nuts, and put it in to infuse for a
fortnight in the sun, in two quarts of clear water, stirring it now and then.
Strain this infusion through a sieve or a cloth into a glazed pipkin.

2. In another vessel put two ounces of gum-arabic, and half of the above
infusion. In the other half which remains, dissolve two ounces and a half of
German green vitriol, and let it infuse for four and twenty hours. Join
afterward, both infusions together; and, a week afterward, or thereabouts,
the ink will be very good, and fit for use.

VI. To make very good ink without gall-nuts; which will be equally good to
wash drawings and plans, and strike very neat lines with the pen.
1. In half a pound of honey put one yolk of an egg, and beat it a good while
with a flat stick. Then asperse the matter over with three drachms of
gum-arabick in subtle powder. Let this stay about three days, during which,
beat it often with a stick of walnut-tree wood.

2. Next to this, put to it such a quantity of lampblack as will make it in
consistence of a dough, which you make in cakes, and dry in the air, to render
it portable.

3. When you want to use it, dilute it with water, or with a lie made either of
vine wood ashes, or walnuttree, or oak, or even peach stones.

VII. An invisible ink.
1. Dissolve one ounce of ammoniac salt in a glasstumbler of water, and write.
When you wish to make the writing appear, hold the paper to the fire, and it
will become black.

2. The same may be done with the juice of an onion.

VIII. Another way.
Dissolve some alum, and write with the liquor. Steep the paper in water, and
the writing will appear white.

IX. To make good India ink.
Burn some lamp-black in a crucible till the fume, which arises in doing it,
has entirely subsided: grind it next, on porphyry, or marble, with a pretty
strong water of gum tragacanth. Add an equal quantity of indigo burnt, and
grinded in the same manner. Then mix them both together on the stone, and grind
them for two hours. Gather up the composition, in a flat square, of the height
and thickness you are willing to give to your sticks. Cut these with a knife to
your intended size, and put them, if you choose, into an iron mould: and, lest
the paste should stick to them, rub the inside of the mould with lamp or ivory
black, or with peach stones dust, which you burn in a crucible stifled with a
brick to stop it well.

X. Red ink.
Dissolve half an ounce of gum-arabic in three ounces of rose water. Then, with
this water, dilute cinabar, vermilion or minium.

Ink of any color may be made in the same manner by substituting only a proper
coloring ingredient to the aforementioned cinabar, etc.

XI. A green ink.
Grind together, verdigrise, saffron, and rue juice, then dilute this paste in
the abovementioned gum rose water.

XII. To make an ink which appears, and disappears, alternately.
Write with an infusion of gall-nuts filtered through brown paper, and the
writing will not be visible. When you want to make it appear, steep a little
sponge, or bit of cotton, into an infusion of vitriol, and pass it over the
written place of the paper; the writing will immediately appear. To rub it off,
and make the paper look all white again, do the same with spirit of vitriol,
and all the writing will be gone. To make it visible again, rub the paper over
with oil of tartar; and thus continue for ever.

XIII. The invisible method of conveying secrets. 1st. Ink.
Infuse for twenty-four hours, half an ounce of gold litharge in half a pint of
distilled white wine vinegar, and shake the bottle often during the first
twelve hours of the infusion. When all is well settled, decant the clear part
into another phial, which you must stop carefully, and throw the faeces away.

If you have any secret to communicate to a friend, write it with this liquor,
and it will be no more visible than if you wrote it with clear pump water.

XIV. An ink, to write over the other. 2d. Ink.
Over the secret, written with the first invisible ink, you write any
indifferent matter with the following composition.

Burn some corks in the fire; and, when they are so thoroughly burnt as to
blaze no more, put them into a buson, and soak them with brandy; then grind
them into a paste, which when you want to use, you dilute with distilled water,
till it is fit to write with, like any other ink.

XV. Another ink which effaces the second, and makes the first appear. 3d. Ink.
Dilute rose water and sorel juice separately. Put half a pint of each together
in a bottle, with two ounces of quicklime and one of auripigment. Stir this
well, now and then, and let it infuse during twenty-four hours, as you did the
first. Decant the clear part, and throw the grounds away.

When you want to find out what was written with the first invisible ink, and
which lies concealed under the second black one, steep a sponge into this
present liquor, and passing quickly over every line; what was written in black
varnishes at one stroke, and what was invisible appears in its stead as black,
and as much ineffaceable as if written with common ink.

XVI. An ink which will go off in six days.
Write with willow-wood cinders, pulverised and diluted with common water.

XVII. Another which you may rub off when you please.
Dilute gunpowder in common water, and write with it on a piece of parchment;
then, when you want to efface it, take your handkerchief, and rub it off.

XVIII. Powder ink.
Take equal parts of black rosin, burnt peach, or appricots' stones, vitriol
and gall-nuts, and two of gumarabic. Put the whole in powder, or in cake, as
you like best.

XIX. An exceeding good writing ink.
1. Boil half a pound of India-wood's shavings in two quarts of good vinegar,
to the reduction of one half. Take off the shavings, and substitute four ounces
of gall-nuts bruised, and put all into a strong bottle, which you expose in the
sun for three or four days, shaking it during that time three or four times a
day. Then add a dissolution of two ounces and a half of gum-arabic in half a
pint of either water or vinegar. Let the whole stand again in the sun for a
week, shaking it several times every day, during that term; strain the liquor
afterward, and keep it for use.

2. If you should want to render this ink shiny, you must dissolve both the
vitriol and gum arabic in an infusion of India-wood, made as before directed,
with the addition of one handful of pomegranate rinds in the bottle wherein the
gall-nut is.

3. If instead of setting this composition in the sun, you should boil it; it
will take but a quarter of an hour a-doing. But it is never so good, and
besides always turns muddy.

XX. A gold-color ink, without gold.
Put half a dram of saffron, one of auripigment, and one she goat's, or five
or six jack galls, in a glass bottle; and set it, for a fortnight, in hot horse
dung. At the end of that term, add a gill of gum-water, and place it again for
the same length of time in horse dung. Then it is fit for use.

XXI. Another way.
Pulverise into an impalpable powder one ounce of orpine, and as much crystal.
Put this powder in five or six whites of eggs beaten, then turned into water.
Mix all well, and it will be fit either to write or to paint in gold color.

XXII. To write in silver without silver.
Mix so well one ounce of the finest pewter and two of quicksilver together,
that both become quite fluid. Then grind it on porphyry with gum-water, and
write with it. All the writing will look then as if done with silver.

XXIII. A good shining ink.
Infuse for a day in a quart of good table beer, half a pound of the blackest
and most shiny gall-nuts you can find. Add three ounces of gum-arabic and half
an ounce of brown sugar candy, with four ounces of green copperas. Then boil
the whole in a glazed pipkin for about one hour, strain it through a cloth and
put it in the cellar to keep it for use.

XXIV. A blue ink.
Dilute half a pound of indigo with some flake white and sugar in a sufficient
quantity of gum water.

The same may be done with ultramarine, and gum water.

XXV. A yellow ink.
Dilute in gum water some saffron, or French berries or gamboge; and you will
have a yellow ink. The same may be done with any other coloring ingredient, to
obtain an ink of the color one likes to have.

XXVI. A green ink, which may keep two years.
Put a pint of water on the fire in a varnished pipkin; and, when it is ready
to boil, throw in two ounces of verdigrise pounded, and boil it gently on a
slow fire for the space of half an hour, stirring it often during that time
with a wooden spatula. Then add one ounce of white tartar well pulverised, and
boil it one quarter of an hour. Strain two or three times through a cloth, then
set it before the fire to evaporate part of it, in order to make it more shiny.
But observe that the more it boils, the more it loses of its green color, and
approaches to the blue.

XXVII. A shining ink.
Put in a clean brass caldron six quarts of white wine, or beer, or rain water,
with one pound of gall-nuts, and two ounces of roch-alum in powder, which you
boil all together, to the reduction of one half. Take this liquor off from the
fire and strain it through a cloth into a glazed pipkin, and set it on the fire
again for two hours longer. Then, for the three or four following days, observe
to stir it well only with a little stick, without boiling it at all; it will be
fit for use. Whenever you use it, it will be a very pale, but in twentyfour
hours after, it will be as black as jet.

XXVIII. A way of writing which will not be visible, unless you hold the paper
to the sun, or to the light of a candle.
Take flake white, or any other whitening, and dilute it in a water impregnated
with gum-adragant. If you write with this liquor, the writing will not be
perceivable, unless you apply the paper to the sun, or the light of a candle.
The reason why it is so, is that the rays of light will not find the same
facility to pass through the letters formed with this liquor, as through the
other parts of the paper.

XXIX. A secret to revive old writings which are almost defaced.
Boil gall-nuts into wine; then, steeping a sponge into that liquor, and
passing it on the lines of the old writing, all the letters which were almost
undecypherable will appear as fresh as newly done.

XXX. To write in gold or silver letters.
Take gold or silver in shells, and dilute it with some gum-arabic water. Then
dip either a pen or a pencil in it, and write.

XXXI. An Iris on white paper.
Boil in a new iron pot any quantity of sublimate with common water, and a
handful of small nails. When the mercury begins to revivify, which happens
after two or three hours boiling, throw the whole in a pan of cold water half
filled, and place it, uncovered for one night, in a bog-house. Then the colors
will swim on the top. Observe that the pan must be perforated at the lowest
part on one side, and stopped with a cork, or any other common thing; and that
a sheet of white paper must have been placed at the bottom of it, previous to
the half filling it with the cold water in which you are directed to throw the
boiling composition. After this has been left in the bog-house the space of one
night, and the colors do swim on the top, unstop the hole, and let the pan
empty itself. Then the colors will settle, and fix themselves on the sheet of
paper; and when this begins to dry, take it quite out of the pan, to finish
drying it in the shade.

XXXII. A shining ink.
1. In a quart of rain water settled, filtered and purified, infuse, for four
or five hours, on a slow fire, one pound of gall-nuts, choosing the smallest and
blackest. Let them be previously bruised in a mortar, with some pomegranate's
rinds, and raspings of fig tree wood. Next to this make a lie of six ounces of
Roman vitriol, and boil it in the space of one hour at least, stirring it with
a stick of fig tree wood; then let it rest twelve hours, and sift it.

2. On the same ground, you may add the same quantity of water, and let it
infuse three days; then boil it, as above directed, with new copperas.

XXXIII. A common ink.
1. Bruise six ounces of gall-nuts, and as much gumarabic, and nine of green
vitriol. Put them afterward in three quarts, at least, of river, spring or
rain water. Stir the composition three or four times a day. And after seven
days infusion, strain all through a cloth, your ink is made.

2. This ground as well as that above, will admit, of fresh water being put to
it, with an addition of vitriol also.

XXXIV. How to prepare printers' ink.
1. Take one pound of common turpentine, made with the sandarac of the
ancients, which is nothing else but juniper and lintseed oil. Add to it one
ounce of rosin's black, which is the smoke, of it, and a sufficient quantity of
oil of nuts.

2. Set this composition on the fire, and boil it to a good consistence. Such
is the whole secret. Observe however that, in the summer, it must boil a little
more, and a little less in the winter. For, in the summer the ink must be
thicker, and thinner in the winter; because the heat makes it more fluid. In
which case it is therefore proper to boil it a little more, or to diminish the
quantity of oil, allowed in the proportion to that of the turpentine.

XXXV. The preparation of the ink which serves to write inscriptions, epitaphs,
etc. on stones, marbles, etc.
This ink is made with nothing else but a mixture of lintseed oil's black, and
black pitch dissolved over a small fire. They call this also stucco.

XXXVI. T^^ various ways of making an ink for writing. 1st Method.
Put three ounces of gall-nuts, bruised on a stone, in thirty ounces of warm
rainwater. Let this be exposed in the sun for two days, after which time add
two ounces of the finest green vitriol reduced into a subtle powder, and stir
the liquor with a fig-tree's stick. Let then the whole be exposed for two days
longer in the sun again. Then put one ounce of gum-arabic, or cherrytree gum,
and set it in the sun again for one day, after which boil it one bubble, and
strain it directly through a cloth. If too thick, add some water to it; if too
thin, gum-arabic.

XXXVII. Another way. 2d Method.
1. Take one pound of gall-nuts, and half a pound of gum-arabic, and as much of
ligustrum's berries. Infuse this, for a week in three quarts of common water;
then, by boiling, evaporise one quart of it or thereabouts. Then take it off
from the fire, just boiling hot as it is, and throw in one pound of vitriol;
stir well, and let it thus stand for a week or ten days. Strain it afterward,
and you will have a very fine ink.

2. You may add to this some pomegranates' rinds, either whole, or bruised, but
by no means in powder. Should it grow too thick, a little male chamber lie,
vinegar, or rose water, will thin it and give it a properfluidity.

XXXVIII. Another way. 3d Method.
Infuse pomegranate rinds in well water; boil it to the dimin^tion of one
third. Then to every pound of this infusion add two ounces of green vitriol,
and half an ounce of gum-arabic in powder. Incorporate all on the fire, then
you may strain it, and keep it for use.

XXXIX. Another way. 4th Method.
1. Some people have a very cheap way of making ink, with the liquor with which
the curriers wash their leather to blacken it. To that liquor they only add a
little vitriol and gum-arabic, and boil the whole one minute.

2. The currier's dye for leather is made with common or rain water, in which
they boil those little cups which carry the acorn on the oak tree.

XL. Another way. 5th Method.
1. Bruise on a stone, some gall-nuts, and roast them in an iron pan with a
little olive oil. Put one pound of such gall-nuts, thus prepared, in a glazed
pipkin. Pour over it white wine, so as to cover the gall-nuts over by four
finger's breadth; then add half a pound of gum arabic, and eight ounces of
vitriol, both in powder. Set the whole in the sun for some days, stirring often
the composition with a stick, after which, boil it for a few minutes on a slow
fire, then strain and keep it.

2. On the faeces you may putagain the same quantity as above of white wind,
boil and strain it: and repeat it as long as the wine gets any tincture from
the grounds.

XLI. Another way. 6th Method.
There is again another very good method of making ink, which is this. In
twenty ounces of white wind infuse three of bruised gall-nuts; and, in thirteen
other ounces of similar white wind, dissolve half a one of gum-arabic. Every
day for a whole week, never fail to give several stirrings to the infusion of
gall-nuts, then strain it, and add the dissolution of gum, and mix with all two
ounces of Roman vitriol. Now and then give a shake or two to the bottle, and
guard from setting it approach either the fire or the sun. This composition
will prove a very good ink.

XLII. Another way. 7th Method.
Take three ounces of gall-nuts new elm, or wild-ash bark, and pomegranates'
dry rinds, equal quantities. Infuse all in thirty ounces of white wine exposed
for six days in the sun, and stir it seven times a day. Then add two ounces of
gum-arabic, and one of Roman vitriol, which infuse four days before straining,
and the ink is done.

XLIII. Another way. 8th Method.
Take three ounces of gall nuts, a handful of ash-tree bark, two pounds and a
half (or three pints) of whitewine, and mix all over a slow fire. When it
begins to boil, take it off, and strain it. Replace it on the fire till it
begins to boil again; then take it off, and add two ounces of gum-arabic and as
much Roman vitriol. Stir with a stick for half an hour, then let it rest for
four days, taking great care that your liquor be well covered: then strain it
again, and keep it for use.

XLIV. Another way. 9th Method.
Put in four pounds, or two quarts, of white wind, a glass of the best vinegar,
and two ounces of bruised gall-nuts. Let this infuse thus for four days, then
boil away and evaporise one fourth part of it. Strain it, and add two ounces of
gum-arabic in powder; mix well and boil it for the space of five minutes. Take
it off from the fire, and add again three ounces of Roman vitriol, stirring it
well till all is quite cold. Put it then into a glass bottle well stopped, and
expose it for three days in the sun. Then strain the ink, when it will be fit
for use.

XLV. An ink which may be made instantly.
Take gum-arabic, and vitriol, of each one ounce; bruised gall-nuts one and a
half. Put all in ten ounces of white wind or vinegar; and, no longer than one
hour after, you may use it.

XLVI. Another way to the same purpose.
Put in about eight ounces of the best white wind, half an ounce of gall-nuts,
as much gum-arabic, and eight drachms of Roman vitriol. Warm it a little on the
fire, and the ink will instantly be done.

XLVII. A portable ink, without either gall-nut or vitriol.
1. Take one pound of honey, and two yolks of raw eggs. Dilute and mix them all
well with the honey. Add three drachms of gum-arabic in subtle powder. Stir
well the whole together during three days, and several times a day, with a
fig tree stick flattened at one of the ends. Then, to that first composition
add again as much of that sort of lamp-black which is used in printer's ink
(see art xxxiv. in this chap.) as may be required to thicken the whole into a
lump, which you let dry, and keep in that state.

2. When you want to use it, take a bit of it and dilute it in any common
water, or lie, and it will write like any other ink.

XLVIII. Another portible ink, in powder.
This is made with equal quantities of gall-nuts and vitriol; a little
gum-arabic and still less of sandarac of the ancients. You pound, or grind each
drug well, and mix the powders together, which are to be very fine. Lay some of
this compound powder on your paper, and spread it well with your fingers. Then
dipping your pen into clear water you may write on this prepared paper, and it
will appear as black as any other ink.

XLIX. Another portable powder to make ink instantly.
Take and reduce into subtle powder ten ounces of gall-nuts, three of Roman
vitriol, otherwise green copperas; with two ounces of roch alum and as much of
gum-arabic. Now when you want to make ink, put a little of this mixture into a
glass of white wind, and it will instantly blacken, and be fit for use.

L. Another sort of powder to the same purpose.
1. There is another method, by no means inferior to the others preceding, to
make a powder fit for travelers, nay, which has the quality of mending any
pale common ink, by giving it instantly a degree of consistence, blackness,
luster, and beauty, which it wanted before. To use this powder, you only
dissolve it in any liquor you like; such as water, whether soft or salt, in
wine or vinegar. Whether warm or cold, it does not signify much, though the
warm is somewhat preferable. This curious powder is made as follows.

2. Take peach-stones with their kernels in, put them in the fire till
perfectly reduced into coals. Then take them off, and when they are quite dead
and black, mix part of them with some lamp-black. Add two parts of bruised
(...)-nuts fried in oil and dried up: four parts of gu^^^^rabic, all pulverised
impalpably, and sifted through (...) sieve.

3. Obser^^ on. There is nothing which dies so fine a black. It is also good
for the human body; for, taken internally, it dissipates all obstructions, and
promotes urine.

LI. A yellow ink.
Grind, on the same stone, some dry saffron, and an equal quantity of the
finest orpine you can find, with carp's or jack's gall. Put all into a bottle,
which you must stop well and place for some days in hot horsedung. When you
take it out you will find a fine gold color ink.

Note. When the opportunity may be had, it is preferable to employ the juice
extracted from fresh saffron flowers, that is to say, from the picked staminas
of that flower.

LII. Another way.
Some take the yellow superfices of orange peels, and very pure flower of
brimstone, mixing all upon the stone, then put it in a glass bottle, which they
set in the damp for ten days. Before using this it requires to be warmed, and
the letters which are traced with it are not of a bad yellow.

LIII. Another way.
Choose the finest orpine, of a beautiful gold color, shiny, shelly, and
perfectly freed and purified of all its earthy particles. Mix it with an equal
quantity of crystal perfectly grinded, and whites of eggs in a sufficient
quantity, to make it so liquid as to admit of writing, drawing and painting
with it.

LIVE. Another sort of yellow liquor.
A certain golden distilled water may be made, with which gold letters could be
traced. The process is as follows. Put some orpine reduced into impalpable
powder in rosemary-water, drawn by distillation. Then distill it again, and the
liquor which comes from it will be fit to write in gold letters.

LV. Another way.
1. Take two ounces of pewter and melt it in a crucible. When melted add one of
quicksilver, and mix it well with the pewter. Then put all on the stone, and
grind it with one ounce of sulphur. This composition will produce a very fine
yellow powder.

2. To use it, dissolve only what quantity you want in the white of an egg; and
whatever you trace with it will appear of a very good gold color.

LVI. Another way superior to all the rest.
Of all the receipts which may be given for this purpose, none approaches the
purpurine powder. Except gold itself, nothing can imitate it nearer: therefore
this is the most esteemed. True it is, it does not stand the injuries of the
weather so well as real gold, nor lasts so long. -- This powder is made with
equal parts of pewter and quicksilver, or equal parts of ammoniac salt and
sulphur. And, to preserve it, you keep it in little leathern bags.

LVII. Of the use of sugar candy in ink.
Sugar Candy has the admirable virtue of restoring bad ink into good. It
blackens it, renders it shiny, and makes it run properly. Therefore it is most
advisable to put some powder of white sugar candy into the bottle or the
ink-horn.

LVIII. A sort of black ink fit for painting figures, and to write upon stuffs,
and linen, as well as on paper.
Bruise on the stone one ounce of gall-nuts, and put it in a pint of strong
white wine vinegar on the fire, with two ounces of iron filings. Evaporate away
about one half of the liquor in boiling it gently, strain the remainder, and
keep it for use.

It would not be improper to add a little gum-arabic, to the above composition;
however, it may as well be let alone.

LIX. To prevent ink from freezing in the winter.
If, Instead of water, you make use of brandy with the same ingredients which
enter into the composition of any ink, that ink never will freeze. You may also
put some into the ink already made otherwise, and it will assist a good deal in
preventing the frost from a^^ing upon it.

LX. How to renew old writings almost defaced.
We ordered. Art. xxix. of this chapter, to boil gall nuts in wine; but we must
add here that it is far preferable to infuse them only twenty-four hours in it,
then put all into a retort and distill. The liquor which comes from it, being
passed on the paper or parchment, will revive the defaced parts of the writings.

LXI. A green ink.
Take fine verdigrise, and dilute it with a mixture of distilled water of green
gall nuts and vinegar. Form it into drops, such as those of confectioners. Dry
them, and when you want to use them, dilute them into gumarabic water.

LXII. Another way.
Take the strongest white wind vinegar in which dissolve verdigrise, rue juice,
and a little roch alum.

LXIII. To write in gold letters, on iron or steel.
1. Pound some gold marcasites in a mortar; put it to infuse twenty-four hours
in vinegar, and boil it gently over the fire in a glazed pipkin, till the
vinegar is almost vanished away, which will take you nearly a whole day's time
to boil. Then take the composition off from the fire, and after having left it
to cool and dry a little more in the shade, put it in a retort, and distill.

2. With this liquor, write on iron or steel; the letters will appear black at
first: but if, when dry, you rub over them with a piece of linen, they will
turn gold color.

LXIV. An ink which writes like silver, without silver in it.
1. Amalgamate equal parts of pewter and quicksilver, in the same manner as
goldsmiths do; grind well that amalgamation on the stone.

2. If you dilute of this powder in gumarabic water, and write with it, your
letters will appear like silver.

LXV. To write on silver in black which will never go off.
Take burnt lead, and pulverise it. Incorporate it next with sulphur and
vinegar, to the consistence of a painting color, and write with it on any
silver plate. Let it dry, then present it to the fire so as to heat a little
the work, and all is done.

CHAP. XI.
SECRETS relative to WINE.
I. To make a wine to have the taste and flavor of French muscat.
You have only to put in the cask a little bag of elder flowers when the wine
is just done pressing, and while it boils still. Then, a fortnight after, take
out the bag.

II. To make the vin doux.
When you cask the wine put in at the bottom of the cask half a pound of
mustard seed, or a pound, if the cask be double the common size.

III. To make vin-bourru, of an excellent taste.
Take two quarts of wheat, which boil in two quarts of water till it is
perfectly bursted. Stir it well, then strain it through a fine cloth, squeezing
a little the whole to get the creamy part out. Put two quarts of this liquor in
a hogshead of white wine, while it is still a boiling or in fermentation, with
the addition of a little bag of dried elder flowers.

IV. To imitate a malvoisie.
Take of the best galangal cloves and ginger, each one dram. Bruise them
coarsely, and infuse for twentyfour hours, with brandy, in a well closed
vessel. Then take these drugs out, and having tied them in a linen bag, let
them hang in the cask by the bung hole. Three or four days after, your wine
will taste as good and as strong as natural malvoisie.

V. To change red wine into white, and white into red.
If you want to make red your white wine, throw into the cask a bag of black
vine wood ashes; and to whiten the red wine, you must put a bag of a white vine
wood ashes. Forty days after, take out the bag, shake the cask, and let it
settle again; then you will see the effect.

VI. To prevent wine from fusting, otherwise tasting of the cask, and to give
it both a taste and flavor quite agreeable.
Stick a lemon with cloves as thick as it can hold; hang it by the bung hole in
a bag over the wine in the cask for three or four days, and stop it very
carefully for fear of its turning dead, if it should get air.

VII. To make a vine produce a sweet wine.
One month before gathering the grapes, you must twist such branches as are
loaded with them, so as to interrupt the circulation of the sap: then strip the
leaves off entirely, that the sun may act with all its power on the grains,
and, by dissipating their superfluous moisture, procure a sweetness to the
liquor contained in them when they come to be pressed.

VIII. To make a sweet wine of a very agreeable flavor, and besides very
wholesome.
Gather the grapes, and expose them for three whole days in the sun. On the
fourth day at noon put them under the press, and receive the first drop which
runs of itself before pressing. When this virgin drop shall have boiled, or
fermented, put to every fifty quarts of it one ounce of Florentine orrice in
subtle powder. A few days after take it out clear from its lie, and then
bottle it.

IX. To clarify in two days new wine when muddy.
Take a discretionable quantity of fine and thin beech shavings, which put into
a bag, and hang by the bung hole, in the cask. Two days after, take out the
bag; and if from red you want to make it white, you may do it by putting in the
cask a quart of very clear whey.

X. To make the wine keep mout or unfermented for twelve months.
Take the first, or virgin wine, which runs of itself from the grapes before
pressing; cask and stop it well, then smear the cask all over with tar, so that
the water could not penetrate through any part of the wood into the wine.
Plunge these casks into pond deep enough to cover them entirely with water, and
leave them there for forty days. After which term you may take them out, and
the wine contained in them will keep new for twelve months.

XI. To make a wine turn black.
Place in the cellar, wherein the wine is a fermenting, two pewter pots, and it
will turn black.

XII. To clarify a wine which is turned.
Take clean roch alum in powder, half a pound: sugar of roses, as much; honey
whether skimmed or not eight pounds, and a quart of good wine. Mix all well,
and put it in a cask of wine, stirring all as you pour it in. Take the bung off
till the next day, then put it on again. Two or three days after this, it will
be quite clear.

XIII. To correct a bad flavor in wine.
Put in a bag a handful of garden parsley, and let it hang by the bung hole in
(...) cask, for one week at least. Then take it out.

XIV. To prevent wine from spoiling and turning.
Mix in the cask a tenth part of brandy or half an ounce of oil of sulphur.

XV. To prevent thunder and lightning from hurting wine.
Put on the bung a handful of steel filings and another of salt, tied up in a
bag.

XVI. To prevent wine from corrupting.
Put to infuse in the cask a handful of gentian root tied in a bag.

XVII. To restore a wine turned sour or sharp.
Fill a bag with leek's seed, or of leaves and twisters of vine, and put either
of them to infuse in the cask.

XVIII. To restore a wine corrupted and glairy.
Put in the wine cow's milk a little saltish; or else the rinds and shells of
almonds tied up in a bag: or again pine kernels.

XIX. To prevent wine from growing sour, and turning into vinegar.
Hang by the bung hole, in the cask, a piece of bacon, of about one pound and a
half, and replace the bung. Or else throw into the wine a little bagful of
ashes or virgin vine.

XX. To make a new wine taste as an old wine.
Take one ounce of melilot, and three of each of the following drugs, viz.
liquorish, and celtic-nard, with two of hepatic aloes; grind, and mix all well
together, put it in a bag, and hang it in the wine.

XXI. To restore a wine turned.
Draw a pail-full of it; or, take the same quantity of another good sort, which
you boil, and throw quite boiling hot over that which is spoiled and stinking;
then stop the cask quickly with its bung. A fortnight after taste it, and you
will find it as good as ever it was, or can be.

XXII. To restore a wine fusted, or tasting of the cask.
Draw that wine entirely out of its own lie, and put it in another cask over a
good lie. Then, through the bung hole, hang up a bag with four ounces of laurel
berries in powder, and a sufficient quantity of steel filings, at the bottom of
the bag, to prevent its swimming on the top of the wine. And, in proportion as
you draw a certain quantity of liquor, let down the bag.

XXIII. To prevent wine from pricking.
Put in the cask half a pound of spirit of tartar. Or, else, when the wine is
still new and mout, throw in two ounces of common alum for every hogshead.

XXIV. To make wine keep.
Extract the salt from the best vine-branches; and of this put three ounces in
every hogshead at Martinmas when the casks are bunged up.

XXV. To clarify wine easily.
Put in the cask two quarts of boiling milk after having well skimmed it.

XXVI. To prevent wine from turning.
Put in the cask one pound of hare's-shot.

XXVII. To correct a musty taste in wine.
Knead a dough of the best wheat flour, and make it in the form of a rolling
pin, or a short thick stick. Half bake it in the oven, and stick it all over
with cloves. Replace it in the oven to finish baking it quite. Suspend it in
the cask over the wine without touching it, and let it remain there: Or else
let it plunge in the wine for a few days, and take it quite out afterward. It
will correct any bad flavor the wine might have acquired.

XXVIII. Another method.
Take very ripe medlars, and open them in four quarters, without parting them
asunder. Then tie them with a thread, and fix them to the bung, so that by
putting it in again they may hang and soak in the wine. One month afterward
take them out, and they will carry off all the bad taste of the wine.

XXIX. To correct a sour, or bitter taste in wine.
Boil a quartern of barley in four quarts of water to the reduction of two.
Strain what remains through a cloth, and pour it in the cask stirring all
together with a stick without touching the lie.

XXX. To restore a spoiled wine.
Change the wine from its own lie, upon that of good wine. Pulverise three or
four nutmegs, and as many dry orange peels, and throw them in. Stop well the
bung, and let it ferment one fortnight. After that term is over you will find
it better than ever. This method has gone through many experiments.

XXXI. To sweeten a tart wine.
Put in a hogshead of such a wine, a quarter of a pint of good wine vinegar
saturated with litherage; and it will soon lose its tartness.

XXXII. Another way.
Boil a quantity of honey in order to get all the waxy part out of it, and
strain it through a double cloth. Of such a honey thus prepared put two quarts
to half a hogshead of tart wine, and it will render it perfectly agreeable. If
in the summer, and there be any danger of its turning, throw in a stone of
quicklime.

XXXIII. To prevent tartness in wine.
Take, in the month of March, two basonsful of river sand; and, after having
dried it in the sun, or in the oven, throw it in the cask.

XXXIV. To heighten a wine in liquor, and give it an agreeable flavor.
Take two dozen or thereabouts of myrtle berries, very ripe. Bruise them
coarsely, after having dried them perfectly, and put them in a lag, which
suspend in the middle of the cask. Then stop this well with its bung. A
fortnight afterward take off the bag, and you will have a very agreeable wine.

XXXV. To give wine a most agreeable flavor.
Take a pailful of mout, which boil and evaporate to the consistence of honey.
Then mix with it one ounce of Florentine orrice, cut in small bits, and one
dram of costus. Put all into a bag, and let it down in the cask by the bung
hole, after having previously drawn (...) sufficient quantity of wine to
prevent the bag from coming at it. This bag being thus suspended by a string
which will hang out of the bung hole, stop it well, and there will drop from
the bag into the wine a liquor which will give it a most agreeable taste.

XXXVI. How to find out whether or not there be water mixed in a cask of wine.
Throw in the cask one wild pear or apple. If either of these two fruits swim,
it is a proof there is no water in the wine; for, if there be any, it will sink.

XXXVII. To separate the water from wine.
Put into the cask a wick of cotton, which should soak in the wine by one end,
and come out of the cask at the bung hole by the other; and every drop of water
which may happen to be mixed with the wine, will still out by that wick or
filter.

You may again put some of this wine into a cup made of ivy-wood; and, then the
water will perspire through the pores of the cup, and the wine remain.

XXXVIII. To ungrease wine in less than twenty-four hours.
Take common salt, gum-arabic, and vine-brush ashes, of each half an ounce. Tie
all in a bag, and fix it to a hazel-tree stick; then by the bung-hole, stir
well the wine for one quarter of an hour, after which take it out, and stop the
cask: The next day the wine will be as sound as ever.

XXXIX. To restore a wine.
Put in the cask one pound of Paris plaster. Then make a piece of steel
red-hot in the fire; and by means of a wire fixed to one of its ends, introduce
it by the bung-hole into the wine. Repeat this operation for five or six days
running, as many times each day. Then, finally, throw into the wine a stick of
brimstone tied in a bag, which you take off two days after; and the wine will
be perfectly well restored.

XL. To correct a bad taste and sourness in wine.
Put in a bag a root of wild horse radish, cut in bits. Let it down in the
wine, and leave it there two days: take this out, and put another, repeating
the same till the wine is perfectly restored.

XLI. Another way.
Fill a bag with wheat, and let it down in the wine; it will have the same
effect.

XLII. Another way.
Put a-drying in the oven, as soon as it is heated, one dozen of old walnuts;
and having taken them out along with the bread, thread them with a string, and
hang them in the wine, till it is restored to its good taste; then take them
out again.

XLIII. To cure those who are too much addicted to drink wine.
Put in a sufficient quantity of wine, three or four large eels, which leave
there till quite dead. Give that wine to the person you want to reform, and he
or she will be so much disgusted of wine, that though they formerly made use of
it, they will now have quite an aversion to it.

XLIV. Another method, no less certain.
Cut, in the spring, a branch of vine, in the time when the sap ascends most
strongly: and receive in a cup the liquor which runs from that branch. If you
mix some of this liquor with wine, and give it to a man already drunk, he will
never relish wine afterward.

XLV. To prevent one from getting intoxicated with drinking.
Take white cabbage's, and four pomegranate's juices, two ounces of each, with
one of vinegar. Boil all together for some time to the consistence of a syrup.
Take one ounce of this before you are going to drink, and drink afterward as
much, and as long as you please.

XLVI. Another way.
Eat five or six bitter almonds fasting: this will have the same effect.

XLVII. Another way.
It is affirmed, that if you eat mutton or goat's lung's roasted; cabbage, or
any seed; or wormwood, it will absolutely prevent the bad effects which result
from the excess of drinking.

XLVIII. Another way.
You may undoubtedly prevent the accidents resulting from hard drinking, if
before dinner you eat, in salled, four or five tops of raw cabbages.

XLIX. Another method.
Take some swallows' beaks and burn them in a crucible. When perfectly calcined
grind them on a stone, and put some of that powder in a glass of wine, and
drink it. Whatever wine you may drink to excess afterward, it will have no
effect upon you.

The whole body of the swallow, prepared in the same manner, will have the same
effect.

L. Another way.
Pound in a mortar the leaves of a peach-tree, and squeeze the juice of them in
a basin. Then, fasting, drink a full glass of that liquor, and take whatever
excess of wine you will on that day, you will not be intoxicated.

LI. A method of making people drunk, without endangering their health.
Infuse some aloe-wood, which comes from India, in a glass of wine, and give it
to drink. The person who drinks it will soon give signs of his intoxication.

LII. Another way.
Boil in water some mandrake's bark, to a perfect redness of the water in which
it is a-boiling. Of that liquor, if you put in the wine, whoever drinks it will
soon be drunk.

LIII. To recover a person from intoxication.
Make such a person drink a glass of vinegar, or some cabbage-juice, otherwise
give him some honey. You may likewise meet with success by giving the patient a
glass of wine quite warm to drink, or a dish of strong coffee, without milk or
sugar, adding to it a large teaspoonful of salt.

LIVE. To prevent the breath from smelling of wine.
Chew a root of iris troglotida, and no one can discover by your breath,
whether you have been drinking wine or not.

LV. To preserve wine good to the last.
Take a pint of the best spirit of wine, and put it in the bulk of your two
fists of the second peel of the eldertree, which is green. After it has infused
three days, or thereabouts, strain the liquor through a cloth, and pour it into
a hogshead of wine. That wine will keep good for ten years, if you want it.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the composition of VINEGARS.
I. To make good wine vinegar in a short time.
THROW some Taxus wood, or yew-tree, in any wine, and it will not be long
before it turns into vinegar.

II. To change wine into strong vinegar.
Take tartar, ginger, and long pepper, of each equal doses. Infuse all for one
week in good strong vinegar, then take it out, and let it dry. And whenever you
want to make vinegar, put a bag full of these drugs in wine; it will soon turn
into vinegar.

III. To make very good and stong vinegar with the worst of wines.
Grind into subtle powder five pounds of crude tartar. Pour on it one pound of
oil of vitriol. Wrap up the whole in a bag, tie it, and hang it, by the
bung-hole, in a cask of bad and totally spoiled wine. Move and stir now and
then that bag in the wine, and it will turn into very good vinegar.

IV. To turn wine into vinegar in less than three hours.
Put in the wine a red beet, and it will be quite sour, and true vinegar, in
less than three hours.

V. To restore such a wine to its first taste.
Take off the red beet, and in its stead put a cabbage root into that wine, and
it will return to its primary taste, in the same space of time.

VI. An excellent preparation of vinegar.
1. Take white cinnamon, long pepper, and cyperus, of each one ounce: round
pepper, half an ounce and two nutmegs. Pulverise each drug separately, and put
them in so many distinct bags. Put them in six different and separate quarts of
the best vinegar, and boil them two or three minutes.

2. Then boil separately six quarts of good wine.

3. Season a cask, which is done by pouring a quart of the best vinegar into
it, with which you rinse it. Then pour in your boiled wine and vinegars, and
fill half way the cask, with the worst and most spoiled wine. Stop the cask,
and keep it till the vinegar is done. You may then draw from it, and refill the
cask with the same quantity of bad wine, as you take off of vinegar.

VII. To render vinegar alkali.
Saturate any quantity of vinegar with salt of tartar.

VIII. To make in one hour, good rose vinegar.
Put a dram of hare's marrow in a pint of wine, and you will see the
consequence.

IX. Another method to make such vinegar in an instant.
1. Take common roses, and unripe black-berries which grow in hedges, of each
four ounces, and of barberry fruits, one. Dry them all in the shade, and reduce
them into subtle powder.

2. Mix two drachms only of this powder into a glass of white or red wine, then
let it settle to the bottom, and strain it through a cloth. It will be a very
fine vinegar.

X. To operate the same in one hour's time on a larger quantity of wine.
1. Take the best rye-flour, which dilute in the strongest vinegar, and make a
thin round cake with it. Bake it quite dry in the oven; then pound it into a
fine powder, with which and vinegar you make again another cake as before, and
bake it also like the first. Reiterate this operation three or four times.

2. If you hang the last made cake in a cask of wine quite hot, you will turn
the whole into vinegar in less than one hour.

XI. The receipt of the vinegar called the Grand Constable's Vinegar.
Take one pound of damask raisins, and cure them of their stones. Put these
raisins in a glazed jar, with two quarts of good rose vinegar. Let all infuse
for one night over hot ashes; then boil it the next morning four or five
minutes only. Take it off the fire, and let it cool. Strain it through a cloth,
and bottle it to keep for use, afterward cork the bottle.

XII. A secret to increase the strength and sharpness of the vinegar.
Boil two quarts of good vinegar to the evaporation of one; then put it in a
vessel, and set it in the sun for a week. Now if you mix this vinegar among six
times as large a quantity of bad vinegar in a small cask, it will not only mend
it, but make it both very strong and very agreeab.

XIII. Another way to do the same.
The root of rubus idaeus; the leaves of wild pear tree; acorns roasted in the
fire; the liquor in which vetches (peace) have been boiling; horse chesnut's
powder put in a bag, etc. etc. add greatly to the sharpness of vinegar.

XIV. The secret for making good vinegar, given by a vinegar-man at Paris.
1. Pound coarsely, or rather bruise only, one ounce of long pepper, as much
ginger, and the same quantity of pyrethra. Put these in a pan over the fire
with six quarts of wine. Heat this only to whiteness, then put it in a small
cask, and set it in the sun, or over a baker's oven, or any other warm place.

2. Now and then add new wine in your cask after having previously heated it as
before, and let that quantity be no more than two or three quarts at a time,
till the cask is quite full. -- If you add a few quarts of real vinegar it will
be the stronger. -- Before casking the wine, you must let it rest in the pan in
which it has boiled for two or three days. -- A glazed earthen pan is therefore
preferable to a copper one for boiling the wine in; for during the three days
infusion, the copper might communicate a dangerous quality of verdigrise to the
vinegar. -- When you put some vinegar, as before mentioned, to meliorate this
composition, instead of wine, you must take care to heat it likewise over the
fire, but not so much as the wine. -- Let the cask be well rinsed and perfectly
clean, before putting the vinegar in.

3. The wild black-berries which grow among hedges are also very good to make
vinegar, but they must be used while red, before they are ripe; then put them
in the wine and heat this to whiteness, and proceed in the same manner as you
do with pyrethra, ginger, and long pepper. -- The dose of black-berries is not
determined; you may take any discretionable quantity of them, and the vinegar
which results from these is very good.

XV. To make vinegar with water.
Put thirty or forty pounds of wild pears in a large tub, where you leave them
three days to ferment. Then pour some water over them, and repeat this every
day for a month: at the end of which it will make very good vinegar.

XVI. To make good vinegar with spoiled wine.
Put a large kettle-full of spoiled wine on the fire; boil and skim it. When
wasted of a third, put it in a cask wherein there is already some very good
vinegar. Add a few handsful of chervil over it in the cask, and stop the vessel
perfectly close. You will have very good vinegar in a very short time.

XVII. A dry portable vinegar, or the vinaigreen poudre.
Wash well half a pound of white tartar with warm water, then dry it, and
pulverise as fine as possible. Soak that powder with good sharp vinegar, and
dry it before the fire, or in the sun. Resoak it again as before with vinegar,
and dry as above, repeating this operation a dozen of times. By these means you
shall have a very good and sharp powder, which turns water itself instantly
into vinegar. It is very convenient to carry in the pocket, especially when
traveling.

CHAP XIII.
SECRETS relative to LIQUORS and ESSENTIAL OILS.
I. To make as good wine as Spanish wine.
1. TAKE one hundred pounds weight of dry raisins, from which pick off the
stems, and open the fruit with a knife. Put these in a large wooden tub, very
clean. Boil fifteen gallons of rainwater, purified by straining through the
filtering paper. Pour it over the raisins, and cover it, to preserve the heat
of the water. Twenty-four hours after take off the raisins which will be
swelled, and pound them in a large marble mortar, then put them again in the
tub. Heat fifteen gallons more of water, which pour over the other with the
raisins, and throw in twenty-five pounds of coarse sugar. Stir all well, and
cover the tub over with two blankets. Three days after, by a cock placed at the
bottom of the tub, draw out all the liquor, and cask it, adding six quarts of
brandy to it. Press the ground with an apothecary's press, and put the juice in
the cask with two pounds of white tartar pounded into a subtle powder, in
order to promote the fermentation, and five or six ounces of polychrest salt,
and a knot of garden eress-seed, of about sixteen or eighteen ounces weight,
and another knot of seven pugils of elder flowers. These knots are to be
suspended by a thread in the cask.

2. If the wine looks too yellow, you must strain it through a jelly-bag, in
which you shall put one pound of sweet almonds pounded with milk. The older the
wine, so much the better it is.

3. To make it red, dissolve some cochineal pounded in a certain quantity of
brandy, along with a little alum powder, in order to draw the better the dye of
the cochineal, which put to digest on a sand-bath. Till the brandy has assumed
a proper degree of color, give it to your wine in a sufficient degree.

4. It is preferable to clarify the sugar well, and put it in the cask instead
of the tub.

II. Another way to imitate Spanish wine.
Take six quarts of white wine; Narbonne honey, one pound; Spanish raisins as
much; coriander bruised, one dram; coarse sugar, one pound. Put all in a
kettle on a slow fire, and leave it there, well covered, for three hours.
Strain this through a jelly-bag, then bottle and stop it well. Eight or ten
days after it is sit for drinking.

III. To make the Rossolis.
1. Boil first some water, and let it cool till it is no more than lukewarm.
Take next all the sorts of fragrant flowers the season can afford, and well
picked, keeping none but the petals of each flower. Infuse these, each
saparately, in some of that lukewarm water, to extract their odorous smell, or
fragrancy. Then take them off and drain them. -- Pour all these different
waters in one pitcher; and to every three quarts of this mixture put a quart or
three pints of spirit of wine, three pounds of clarified sugar, one quarter of
a pint of essential oil of anise-seed, and an equal quantity of essential oil
of cinnamon.

2. Should your Rossolis prove too sweet and slimy in the mouth, add half a
pint, or more of spirit of wine.

3. If you think the essential oil of anise-seed should whiten too much the
Rossolis, mix it with the spirit of wine, before putting it in the mixed waters.

4. If you want to increase the fragrancy, add a few spoonsful of essential
oils of different flowers, with one pugil or two of musk, prepared amber, and
lump sugar pulverised. Then strain the Rossolis through a jelly-bag to clarify
it, bottle and stop it well. Thus it may keep for ten years, and upwards.

IV. To make a Rossolis which may serve as a foundation to other liquors.
Put three quarts of brandy, and one of water, in a glazed earthen pot. Place
this pot on a charcoal fire, adding a crust of bread and one ounce of
anise-seed, and cover it till it boils. Then uncover it, and let it boil five
minutes, and put in one pound of sugar, or more if you choose. Now beat the
white of an egg with a little of your liquor, take the pot off from the fire,
and throw in the white of an egg. Let this rest thus for three days.

V. To make Ambrosy.
In the above prescribed Rossolis water add three or four grains of paradise;
as much cochineal pulverised; one clove; a little cinnamon and mace; six grains
of coriander, and the quarter part of a lemon.

VI. For the nectar.
Add to the above Rossolis one quarter of an orange pounded; some orange
flowers, and the upper pellicula of an orange pounded in a mortar with lump
sugar in powder, and diluted with the fundamental Rossolis water above
described.

VII. A common Rossolis.
Instead of one pound of sugar, put only half-a-pound, and as much of honey. --
To musk it, put about fifteen grains of musk, and as much of ambergrise in
powder, and pounded with sugar, and mix it in the liquor.

VIII. Another Rossolis.
1. Take one pound and a half of the finest white bread, quite hot at coming
out of the oven, and put it in a retort, with half an ounce of cloves bruised;
green anise-seed and coriander, one ounce of each; a quart of good red wine, as
much cow-milk; then lute well the receiver, and all the joints, with starched
paper. Let it dry for twenty-four hours, then distill the liquor by the heat of
a balneum mariae, and keep it.

2. Make next a syrup, with brandy of spirit of wine, which burn over lump
sugar pulverised in an earthen dish or pan, stirring always with a spoon, till
the flame has subsided. Then mix one dram of ambergrise with an equal
quantity of sugar; and, having pulverised the whole, put it in a small mattress;
pour over it one ounce of spirit of wine, and put all to digest for twentyfour
hours in a balneum mariae. There will then result a dissolution which will
congeal again in the cold.

3. To form your Rossolis, mix with your first composition, the abovementioned
syrup of brandy, and the essence of amber, -- If you want the Rossolis to be
stronger, add some spirit of wine to it, till it is as you desire to have it.

IX. Another way.
Boil your syrup to consistence after the common method. When done, add as much
spirit of wine as you think proper, as well as of the abovementioned essence
of amber, or any other sort you please to prefer; and you will have as good
Rossolis as that which comes from Turin.

X. To make Eau de Franchipane.
Put half a pound of sugar in one quart of water; add a quarter of a pound of
Jessamine flowers, which infuse for some time. When you find the liquor has
acquired a sufficient degree of fragrancy, strain it through a jelly bag, and
add a few drops of essential oil of ambergrise.

XI. Orange-flower water made instantly.
Put one handful of orange flowers in a quart of water, with a quarter of a
pound of sugar. Then beat the liquor by pouring it from one vessel into
another, till the water has acquired what degree of fragrancy you want it to
have.

XII. Muscadine rose water.
Put two handsful of muscadine roses in one quart of water, with one quarter of
a pound of sugar. For the rest proceed as above.

XIII. To make raspberry, strawberry, cherry, or other such waters.
1. Take the ripest raspberries, strain them through a linen cloth to express
all the juice out of them. Put this in a glass bottle uncorked, and set it in
the sun, in a stove, or before the fire, till cleared down. Then decant it
gently into another bottle, without disturbing the faeces which are at the
bottom.

2. To half a pint of this juice, put a quart of common water, and a quarter of
a pound of sugar. Beat all together, by pouring backwards and forwards from one
vessel into another, strain it through a linen cloth, and set it to cool in a
pail of ice. It is a fine cooling draught in the summer.

3. Strawberries, cherries, etc. are done in the same manner.

XIV. Lemonade water at a cheap rate.
Dissolve half a pound of sugar in a quart of water; rasp over it the yellow
part of one, two, or three lemons, as you like, and mix a few drops of
essential oil of sulphur in the liquor. Then cut three or four slices of
lemons, in the bowl, when you put the liquor in it.

XV. Apricot water.
Take a dozen of apricots very ripe. Peel and stone them. Boil a quart of
water, then take it off from the fire and throw in your apricots. Half an hour
after put in a quarter of a pound of lump sugar, which being dissolved, strain
all through a cloth, and put it to cool in ice as the others.

XVI. To make exceeding good lemonade.
On a quart of water put the juice of three lemons, or two only if they be very
juicy. Add seven or eight zests of them besides with one quarter of a pound of
sugar. When the sugar is dissolved, strain the liquor, and cool it in ice as
before mentioned.

XVII. To make orangeade the same way.
You proceed with your oranges as with the lemons. If these be good, but little
juicy, you must squeeze three or four oranges, with the addition of eight or
ten zests. If you love odor, you may add some musk and prepared amber.

XVIII. To make Eau de Verjus. A sort of sour grape used in France as a fine
acid in sauces.

Put on a quart of water three quarters of a pound of Verjus in grapes picked
out from the stalks. Squeeze it first in a marble or wooden mortar, without
pounding it, for fear the stones should give it a bitter taste. After having
put fruit, juice, and all in the water, handle it in the water, then strain it
to purse it from the coarsest grounds; add about five ounces of sugar in the
strained liquor, or more if wanted, according to the sourness of the fruit. As
soon as the sugar is dissolved, pass and repass it through the jelly-bag to
clarify it: then cool it in ice, as usual, for drinking.

XIX. To make orgeat-water.
Take one ounce of mellon seed, with three sweet and three bitter almonds.
Pound all together in a marble mortar, adding a few drops of water to it while
you pound to prevent its turning into oil. Make all into a paste with the
pestle in the mortar, then add a quarter of a pound of fine white lump sugar in
powder, which mix with the paste. Dilute this in a quart of water, and after
having mixed it well, strain it through a flannel. Squeeze well the grounds in
it till quite dry, and in the liquor add seven or eight drops of essential oil
of orange; and, if you like it, a quarter of a pint of milk pure as from the
cow. Put this to cool in ice, and shake the phial when you serve it in a glass
to drink.

XX. Other waters.
The pigeon, the pistachio, and the Spanish nut waters, are made in the very
same manner; the milk and almonds of either sorts, being only excepted.

XXI. To make a cooling cinnamon water.
Boil one quart of water in a glass vessel before the fire. Then take it off
and put in two or three cloves, and about half an ounce of whole cinnamon. Stop
well the bottle; and, when the water is cold, put half a pint only of it in two
quarts of water with sugar to your palate, a quarter of a pound is generally
the proper quantity. When done, cool it, as usual, in ice before service.

XXII. To make coriander water.
Take a handful of coriander, which shell, and put in a quart of water half
cooled again, after having boiled. Add one quarter of a pound of sugar, and
when the water has acquired a sufficient degree of taste, strain, cool, and
serve it as usual.

XXIII. Anise-seed water.
The anise-seed water is made in the very same manner as the coriander water.

XXIV. Citron water.
Take a citron, which strip of its peel, and cut in slices cross-ways. Put
these slices in a quart of water, with a quarter of a pound of sugar. Beat well
this water by pouring it backwards and forwards from one vessel into another,
and when it has a sufficient taste of the citron, strain it, etc.

XXV. Cinnamon water.
Bruise one pound of the finest cinnamon, and put it to infuse for twenty-four
hours in four pounds of distilled rose water, with half a pound or a pint of
white wine, which put all together during that time in a glass mattress on warm
ashes, and stop well the vessel, so that it should breathe no air. At the end
of twenty-four hours increase the fire so as to procure a distillation, by
putting the mattress in the balneum mari^, and keep this liquor in bottles well
stopped.

XXVI. To make cedrat water.
Have a dozen of fine lemons, which split into two parts. Take out all the
kernels, and keep nothing but the pulp wherein the juice is contained. Put them
in a new glazed earthen pan. Boil one pound of sugar to the plume degree, then
pour it in the pot over the lemons. Set this on a good charcoal fire, and boil
it again till the sugar comes to the pearl degree, and then bottle it.

XXVII. To make cedrat another way.
1. Squeeze the juice out of thirteen lemons, which strain through a cloth, and
put them aside. -- Then put two quarts and a half of water in a pan. In a piece
of linen put three other lemons parted into quarters, which tie and suspend in
the water, then boil them till the water has entirely extracted the taste of
the lemons, and take them out.

2. In this water, thus prepared, put four pounds of sugar, and make a syrup,
which clarify according to art, with the white of an egg. When done, put in
this syrup the juice of your thirteen lemons, and boil all together again to
the consistence of a syrup to the pearl degree, then bottle it.

3. When you want to use it, put four or five ounces of sugar in a quart of
water and strain it through a jelly bag, then put in a table spoonful or more
of your syrup, beat, cool, and drink it.

XXVIII. Juniper-water.
Put two pounds of juniper berries with two quarts of brandy in a stone bottle,
which stop well, and place on hot ashes to infuse for twenty-four hours. Strain
the liquor, and add one pound of sugar, half an ounce of cinnamon, as much
cloves, a preserved half-peel of a whole lemon, and two pugils of anise-seed.
These being put in the bottle, stop it well, and place it at two or three
different times in a baker's oven, after the bread is out, and when you may
bear your hand flat in it without burning.

XXIX. To make good hydromel; otherwise, metheglin.
Take honey and water equal quantities in weight. Boil them together and skim
the honey. When done sufficiently you may know by putting an egg in, which must
swim on the top. Pour then the liquor in a cask wherein there has been spirit
of wine or good brandy well soaked with either, and still wet with the spirit,
and add two or three grains of ambergrise. Stop well the cask, and set it in
the sun during the dog days. When it begins to ferment, unstop the cask to let
the scum out, which arises like that of new wine. Observe, during all that time
not to stir the cask. When the first fire of the fermentation has subsided,
stop the cask again, and the hydromel is fit for keeping.

Note. Instead of the sun, you may, in other seasons, make use of the top of a
baker's oven, a stove, or a hothouse.

XXX. To make Eau d'Ange.
1. Take half a pound of the best cinnamon, and fifteen cloves, which pound
into powder and put into a quart of water, with a nut-shell full of anise-seed,
and infuse for twenty-four hours, then boil on a charcoal fire, and strain.

2. If you want to make it stronger, you may, after it is cold, put what
quantity you like of brandy, with a proportionable quantity of sugar.

XXXI. Another Eau d'Ange.
Put a quart of rose water in a glass bottle with three ounces of benjamin, and
half an ounce of storax in powder, which incorporate all together for four or
five hours on a slow fire. Decant the liquor by inclination, and add to this
colatura six grains of musk, and as many of gray amber.

XXXII. Another Eau d'Ange.
1. Take three pounds of rose water, three of orange and two of
melilot-flowers; four ounces of benjamin, and two of storax; aloes, and
santalum-citrinum, one dram of each; cinnamon and cloves, of each one; the
bulk of a bean of calamus aromatica, with four grains of musk. Bruise coarsely
what may be susceptible of the mortar, and then put all the drugs together in a
varnished earthen pan, which set on a gentle fire to boil moderately to the
evaporation of one third. Then strain it clear.

2. With the grounds you may make lozenges, with a little gum adragant to
compact them. -- This ground is used also in making musk vinegar.

XXXIII. A light and delicate Rossolis, known under the denomination of Populo.
1. Boil three quarts of water, then let them cool again. Add one quart of
spirit of wine, one of clarified sugar, half a glass of essential oil of
cinnamon, and a very little of musk and ambergrise.

2. Observe the sugar should not be boiled too much in clarifying, for fear it
should crystalize when in the Rossolis, and cause clouds in it. Observe also to
boil the water first, as prescribed before using it, to prevent the corrupting
of the liquor; which would infallibly be the case were you to employ it
unboiled.

XXXIV. Angelic water.
1. Take half an ounce of Angelica, as much cinnamon, a quarter part of cloves,
the same quantity of mace, of coriander, and of green anise-seed, with half an
ounce of ^^dar wood. Bruise all these ingredients in a mortar, and set them to
infuse for twelve hours, with two quarts of genuine brandy, in a mattress or
retort. Then distill the liquor by the balneum mariae.

2. Two or three ounces only of this essential spirit in two quarts of brandy,
with the addition of a very small quantity of musk and ambergrise, will make a
very agreeable liquor.

XXXV. The preparation of musk and amber, to have it ready when wanted to put
in cordials.
Put in a mortar and pulverise four grains of amber, two of musk, and two
ounces of sugar. Wrap this powder up in a paper, and cover it over with several
others. With this powder you may perfume such cordials as require it -- The
dose is a pugil, which taken with the point of a knife, you shake lightly in
it. You may however increase or diminish this dose, according to your liking.

XXXVI. To make Eau-de-Cete.
To three quarts of boiled water, cooled again, put a gill of essential spirit
of anise-seed mixed into three pints of spirit of wine. Add one pint, or
thereabouts, of clarified sugar. -- If you want your liquor to be stronger, you
need only to increase, at will, the quantity of the spirit of wine.

XXXVII. To make the compounded Eau-clairette.
Take six pounds of the best and finest Kentish cherries very ripe, sound and
without spots; two of raspberry; and the same quantity of red currants; also
very ripe and sound, and without stalks. Mix the whole in a sieve over a pan.
To every one quart of that juice put one of brandy, with three quarters of a
pound of sugar, seven or eight cloves, as many grains of white pepper, a few
leaves of mace, and a pugil of coriander, the whole coarsely bruised in a
mortar. -- Infuse all these together, well stopped, for two, or three days,
shaking it now and then, to accelerate the dissolution of the sugar. Then
strain the liquor, first through the jellybag, next filter it through the
paper, and bottle it to keep for use.

XXXIX. The Cinnamon water.
In three quarts of once boiled, and then cooled again water, put half a pint
of essential spirit of cinnamon, distilled like that of anise-seed. Add three
pints of spirit of wine, and one of clarified sugar. Strain all through the
jelly-bag, etc. etc.

XL. To make a strong anise-seed water, or animated brandy.
Put half a pint of essential spirit of anise-seed, into three quarts of the
best genuine brandy, with one of boiled water. -- If you want it sweet, add one
pint of clarified sugar. Strain all through the jelly-bag, etc. etc.

XLL. To make white Ratafia, called otherwise Eau-de-Noiau, or kernal water.
Pound three quarters of a pound of cherry, or half a pound of apricot stones,
or both together if you will, which put altogether, wood and kernels, or
almonds, in aft one pitcher, with twelve quarts of brandy. Add one dram of
cinnamon, a dozen of cloves, two pugils of coriander, and three pounds and a
half of sugar. Let all these iufuse together a reasonable time. When
sufficiently tasty, and ready to strain, add four quarts of water that has been
boiled and is cool again. Then run it through the jelly-bag, and next through
the filtering paper; bottle and stop it to keep for use.

XLII. To make good Hypocres, both the red and white sort.
1. Take two quarts, more or less, as you like, of the best wine, whether red
or white. Put in one pound of the best double refined lump sugar, two juicy
lemons, seven or eight zests of Seville orange, with the juice squeezed out of
another of the same sort. Add half a dram of cinnamon bruised in a mortar,
four cloves broken into two parts, one or two leaves of mace, five or six
grains of white pepper bruised, half of a capsicum's pod, and one ounce of
coriander bruised, half a pint of genuine cow milk, half a golden pippin, or a
whole one peeled and cut in slices.

2. Stir well these ingredients together in your wine, and let it rest a
reasonable time, no less at least than twenty-four hours. Then obtain the
liquor through the flannel bag, repeating the same till it comes clear.

3. If you want to perfume that Hypocras, you must put in the bag when you run
it, a little pugil of musk and amber powder prepared, as mentioned in this
chapter, Art. xxxv. This Hypocras may keep for a twelvemonth without spoiling.

XLIII. To make good Rossolis.
Dissolve one pound and a quarter of sugar, in half a pint of spirit of wine.
Boil it one bubble or two only, to give an opportunity of skimming it. When
done, put it in a large glass bottle, with three pints of good white wine, and
a gill of orange-flower water. Musk and amber it as usual, and at your liking.

XLIV. An essence of Hypocras, to make this liquor instantly, and at will.
1. Put in a pint bottle one ounce of cinnamon; a little more than half an
ounce of cloves; and, on the point of a knife, a little musk and amber,
prepared as in Art xxxv. Fill it half way with spirit of wine, or the best
brandy; then stop it so that nothing can evaporate. Set all to infuse for seven
or eight days on warm ashes. And, when it shall have wasted two thirds, or
thereabouts, preserve carefully what shall remain.

2. When you want to make Hypocras instantly, melt half a pound of lump sugar
in a quart of good wine; and when perfectly dissolved, let fall one drop or two
of the above prepared essence, in a clean glass decanter, in which pour
directly the wine with the sugar dissolved in it, then run it through the
flannel bag. Bottle it again, or drink it; the Hypocras will be found good.

XLV. An exceeding good Ratafia.
On a quart of good brandy, put half a pint of cherry juice, as much of
currants and the same of raspberries. Add a few cloves, a pugil of white pepper
in grain, two of green coriander, and a stick or two of cinnamon. Then pound
the stones of the cherries, and put them in wood and altogether. Add a few
kernels of apricots, thirty or forty are sufficient. Stop well the pitcher,
which must be a new one, after all these ingredients are in, let the whole
infuse a couple of months in the shade, shaking twice or thrice during that
space of time, at the end of which you run the liquor through the flannel bag,
and next through the filtering paper, then bottle and stop it well for use.

Note. In increasing in due proportion the quantity of the brandy, and the
doses of each of the ingredients prescribed, you may make what quantity you
like of this Ratafia.

XLVI. An essence of ambergrise.
Pound one dram of ambergrise, and put it on a pint of good spirit of wine,
in a thick and green glass bottle. Add to it half a dram of musk in bladder,
cut very small. Set this bottle in the full south sun, on gravel, during the
dog days, taking it off every night, and during rainy weather. Stir and shake
well the bottle, and its contents, two or three times a day, when the sun
strikes on the bottle, that the amber may diffuse in the liquor. One month
after, take off the bottle from its exposition, and the essence is made. --
Decant, bottle, and stop it for use.

XLVII. Another, and shorter way of making the same.
Put two grains of ambergrise, and three of musk, in a mattress with one gill
and a half of good brandy. Stop the mattress well, and put it in digestion in a
balneo mariae, for two or three days. Strain it through a piece of flannel, and
bottle it to keep for use.

XLVIII. A smelling water.
1. Put in any quantity of brandy, benjamin, and storax calamite, equal parts;
a little cloves and mace, coarsely bruised. Set this a digesting for five or
six days on warm ashes. When the liquor is tinged of a fine red, decant it
gently from the residue in a glass bottle, and throw in a few grains of musk,
before stopping it.

2. Three drops of this smelling water in a common glass tumbler of water, give
it a very agreeable fragrance.

3. With the ground, or residue you may make lozenges, in adding a little
gum-adragant to bind them.

XLIX. A receipt to compose one pint of Rossolis, with which you can make forty.
1. Take two ounces of galanga; half a one of cinnamon; as much cloves; one of
coriander; a pennyworth of green anise-seed; half an ounce of ginger; two
drachms of mace, and two of Florentine orice. Bruise all, and put it to infuse
with three pints of the best brandy in a mattress with a long neck. Adapt it to
the receiver, and lute well all the joints, both of the receiver, and the
bolthead, with paper and starch.

2. Twelve hours after it has been a digesting, distill the liquor by the heat
of a very gentle balneum mariae, till you have got about one quart of distilled
spirit. -- Then unlute the receiver and keep the liquor.

3. You may adapt another receiver, or the same again, after being emptied,
lute it, and continue to distill as before. But what will come will be
infinitely weaker, though perhaps not altogether very indifferent.

L. To make a Rossolis after that of Turin.
Take six quarts of water, which boil alone, one minute or two; then put in
four pounds of fine lump sugar, which skim and clarify with the white of an egg
beaten up with a little cold water. Boil afterward that syrup to the wasting
of a third, then strain through the flannel bag; and, when cold, put in one
gill only of the above Rossolis, prescribed in Art. xlix. and of the first
distillation. Add to it besides a pint of spirit of wine, or, for want of it,
of the best genuine French brandy, in which you shall have put a crust of bread
burnt, to take off a certain bitter taste. After all this, perfume the liquor
with a few drops of essence of musk and amber.

Note. A pint of the second distillation is no more than half a pint of the
first.

LI. How to make Sharbat, a Persian species of punch.
There are various way of making sharbat. -- Some make punch here with rum
only, others with brandy; others again with arrack, and others with shrub. Some
will have it mixed with two of these spirits, and others will make it with
white wind. There are some who put acids, others do not; and, among the acids,
some choose tartar only, others lemons, and others Seville oranges; some again
squeeze a little of each of these two last tartar fruits together in the same
bowl of punch.

It is the same with respect to sharbat, the famous Persian drink. They make it
with the various syrups extracted from all the odoriferous flowers: and the
dose is, one part of such a syrup ten parts of any spirituous liquor. -- Or
again, they make a weak Rossolis, with the zests of oranges and lemons boiled
together in water with sugar. -- Some, in short, will make it with the
essential spirit of musk and amber only, put in boiling water with sugar, just
as we do our punch.

LII. An exceeding fine essence of Hypocras.
1. Take six ounces of cinnamon; two of santalumcitrinum; one of galanga; one
of cloves; two drachms of white pepper; one ounce of grains of paradise. Or if
you would not have it so strong put with the cinnamon and santalum one ounce
only of white dictamum, and four whole grains of long pepper. Pound well all
together, and set it to infuse for five or six days in a mattress, along with
half a pint of spirit of wine, on warm ashes. Decant it next gently without
disturbing the grounds, which put in linen and squeeze it, to get out all the
liquor, which put again in the mattress, with twenty grains of ambergrise, and
six of musk Stop well the vessel, and set it in a cool place for five or six
days more; then mix both liquors together, and filter them.

2. When you want to make Hypocras, dissolve half a pound of fine lump sugar,
in a quart of white Lisbon, or red claret, and let fall fifteen or sixteen
drops of the above essence in it, then shake all well together, and you will
have a most admirable liquor. To render it still more agreeable, you may strain
it through a flannel bag, at the bottom of which you shall have put some
pounded almonds.

LIII. To make Vin-des-Dieux.
Peel two large lemons, and cut them in slices; do the same with two large
golden pippins. Put all a soaking in a pan with a pint of good Burgundy, three
quarters of a pound of lump sugar in powder, six cloves, and half a gill of
orange flower water. Cover the pan, and keep it thus for two or three hours,
then strain the liquor through the flannel bag. You may musk and amber it, like
the Hypocras, if you will.

LIVE. Burnt wine.
Put a quart of good burgundy in an open pan, with one pound of sugar, two
leaves of mace, a little longpepper, a dozen of cloves, two or three tops of
rosemary branches, and two bay leaves. Place that in the middle of a wheel fire
of blasting charcoal. When the wine begins to be hot, set the fire to it with a
bit of paper, and thus let it kindle and blaze till it goes out of itself. This
wine is drank quite hot, and it is an admirable drink, especially when the
weather is very cold.

LV. To imitate muscat wine.
In a cask of new white wine, (that is to say, before it has worked) introduce,
by the bung-hole, five or six tops of elder flowers dried up. Let these flowers
hang by a string, and eight or ten days after take them out again. You will
obtain a wine which will not differ from muscat.

LVI. Eau-clairette simple.
Infuse for twenty-four hours three ounces of cinnamon bruised in three pints
of brandy. Strain it afterward through a clean cloth, and add two ounces of
good lump sugar, with a pint of rose water. Stop well the bottle and keep it
for use.

LVII. A violet water.
Infuse some violets in cold brandy. When these have lost their color, take
them out, and put in new ones. Repeat this till you are satisfied with your
tincture. When you take the violets out, you must press them gently; then
sweeten that brandy according to discretion; and, if you choose you may add
again a little orange flowers for the sake of the odor.

LVIII. To make a clear and white Hypocras.
To every one pint of claret, and eight ounces of sugar, and nine, if it be
white wine; half a lemon, four cloves, a little cinnamon, which should be
double the quantity of cloves; three grains of pepper; four of coriander; a
little bit of ginger; and eight almonds cut in bits. -- Let the whole be
bruised and put into a pan, with the wine poured over it; stir, infuse one
hour, and strain through the flannel bag.

LIX. For the white Hypocras.
To make the white Hypocras, three pints of white wine; one pound and half of
sugar; one ounce of cinnamon; twenty-three leaves of mace; two grains of whole
pepper; with two lemons cut in slices. Then, when you strain the liquor through
the flannel bag, fix a grain of musk in the pucked end of it.

LX. To make the true Eau-de-Noiau.
Pound one pound of apricot's kernels, without reducing them into oil. Then
bruise another pound of cherry-stones, wood and kernels all together. Put all
in a pitcher of five or six gallons, in which you put only three and a half, or
four gallons of the best brandy, and two of water; five pounds of sugar; and to
every one quart of liquor add two grains of white pepper, and eight drachms of
cinnamon both bruised. Let all infuse for forty-eight hours, and then strain
the liquor through the flannel bag.

LXI. To make Eau-de-Fenouillette, such as comes from the isle of Retz.
1. Take of one pound of Florence fennel, the greenest and newest you can find.
Put it in an alembick with one ounce of good liquorice-root, three quarts of
brandy, and two of white wine. Distill by the sand-bath, two quarts of good
essence, which you must take away as soon as the white fumes begin to rise,
because they would undoubtedly hurt the liquor by whitening it.

2. To every one quart of this essence, perfectly clear and transparent, add
six of genuine brandy, and one of spirit of wine, with one of boiling water
that has been cooled again, in which last, just before mixing it with the other
liquors, you must introduce one quart also of clarified sugar, or syrup.

3. Make this mixture in a large and wide glazed pan, and, when the doses are
thus introduced together, taste the liquor, that you may judge whether or not
all are right, and be in time to add either some more essence of fennel, or
syrup of sugar, or brandy, etc. -- If it taste bitter or rather tart, you may
correct that defect by the addition of a little more cold water which had
boiled.

4. After this, bruise half a pound of sweet almonds, which put in another pan,
with five or six quarts of crude water, and boil well with it, then strain
through a flannel bag, in order to season it as it were, by preparing and
greasing it. When, therefore, the bag begins to run clear, and all which was in
it is almost gone, so that it only drops, change the pan under it, put another
clean one, and pour your preparation, such as mentioned in the above n. 3. in
the bag, over the ground of almonds which was left in. -- Should this process
seem too troublesome to you, you may at once mix the half pound of bruised
almonds in your liquor, and then throw it in the flannel bag, straining, and
re-straining it over and over again in that same bag, till at last it runs
clear; to assist it even in which, you may add half a pint of pure and genuine
cow milk. But in observing the first prescription, there result less lie at the
bottom of the vessel in which you keep it for use.

5. When you run it for the last time, which cannot be before it runs quite
clear, observe to put a funnel on the mouth of the pitcher or bottle which
receives it, and over it a crape in order to retain the spirits which might
evaporate.

6. You may amber afterward the liquor, with a little powder of musk and
amber, prepared as mentioned in Art. xxxvi. of this chapter. This liquor is of
a superior delicacy.

LXII. To make an hypocras with water.
Take half a pint of white wine, and six times as much water which had boiled;
add the juice of two lemons, and five or six quarters; the juice of a Sevil
orange, twenty four grains of cinnamon; two or three cloves, one leaf of mace;
one pugil, or two of bruised coriander; four grains of whole pepper bruised;
one quarter of a pound of golden pipins cut in slices; half a pound of sugar;
half of a Portugal orange with a few zests, and a quarter of a pint of milk.
Mix all well; and two hours after the infusion, strain it through a flannel
bag, and perfume it with a little prepared powder of musk and amber. Some,
however, who do not like amber, content themselves with increasing only the
dose of cinnamon.

LXIII. Of the various liquors with which Hypocras may be made.
You can make hypocras with either of the following liquors; viz. Spanish wine;
Muscat, Rhyne-wine, Hermitage, Champaign, etc. adding to any of these wines the
same proportion of ingredients as above prescribed; and clarifying well
afterward by means of filtration.

LXIV. A rossolis, Turin fashion.
In three quarters of a pint of orange-flower-water put to infuse a little
storax, a little musk, a little amber. Twenty-four hours after these
ingredients have been put together, set them a-boiling for half a quarter of an
hour on the fire, then strain it through a cloth. Add next a pint of genuine
French brandy. Should any tartness (...) prevailing, add some honey or sugar
according to discretion. But, if you choose to have it stronger, then you may
add spirit of wine till the taste is come to the degree of strength you would
have it.

LXV. An admirable oil of sugar.
Rinse a mattress with vinegar, then put it in some dry powder sugar, or lump
sugar pulverised. Keep that mattress on hot ashes, turning and whirling it round
and flat ways, by means of the neck of the mattress which you hold in your hands
with a cloth, and stop it not. The effect is such; the heat occasions the
vapors to rise about the mattress; which by turning and whirling it as
aforementioned, makes the sugar which is in it re-soak and imbibe them again.
This operation dissolves the sugar, and reduces it into a sort of oil.

LXVI. Another oil of sugar, without the assistance of fire.
Take a lemon, which hollow, and carve out inwardly, taking out all the pulp as
skilfully as possible. Then fill it up with sugar candy in powder, and suspend
it in a very damp cellar, with a basin under it. There will drop an exceeding
good oil, which is endowed with the most admirable qualities for consumptive
people, or them who are affected with a difficulty of breathing.

Note. A little of that oil in liquors gives to any one of them, to which it is
added, a very fine flavor.

LXVII. An admirable essence of red sugar.
Pulverise five pounds of the best double-refined, or royal, sugar; which, when
done, put along with eight ounces of brandy in a large mattress, over a sand
bath. Distill some part of this first, on a slow fire to avoid burning the
sugar. Re-put the distilled liquor over the sugar again in the mattress.
Continue to distill and pour the liquor again in the mattress over the sugar till
the sugar becomes red, which will happen at the seventh or eighth iteration of
distillation.

2. Now distill out all the brandy, and on the remaining sugar pour common
water, which distill also, then add some more, continuing so to do, till you
have drawn out all the tincture of the red sugar.

3. Take next all these red waters, and run them through the filtering paper,
then distill the phlegm on a gentle fire to siccity (or dryness). Put again this
distilled phlegm on the residue, which place altogether in a cold cellar. You
will find some red crystals which pick up, and when dry pulverise; then pour
brandy over to dissolve that powder. Thus you will have an admirable
quintessence of sugar, which has the virtue of preserving the radical moistness
of the inside, and our health.

Note. If you mix a little quantity of this precious quintessence in any liquor
or cordial, it a very fine addition to it.

LXVIII. Another oil of sugar, excessively good.
Cut off the end of a large lemon, of which squeeze out the juice; then fill it
with fine sugar, and apply to it again the cut off piece. Put it in a clean
glazed pipkin, which place over a fire of charcoal. The sugar having thus
boiled one quarter of an hour only, put it in a bottle; it never will congeal,
and that oil is good for the stomach, colds, catarrhs, etc. The odor and
taste, are both excessively agreeable. The dose is one table spoonful at a time.

LXIX. How to extract the essential oil from any flower.
Take any flowers you like, which stratify with common sea salt in a clean
earthen glazed pot. When thus filled to the top, cover it well, and carry it to
the cellar. Forty days afterward put a crape over a pan, and empty all on it
to strain the essence from the flowers by pressure. Bottle that essence and
expose it for four or five weeks in the sun, and dew of the evening, to purify.
One single drop of that essence is enough to scent a whole quart of liquor.

LXX. Essence of jessamine, roses and other flowers.
1. Take roses of a good color and fresh gathered. Pick all the leaves, which
expand in the shade on paper. For two or three days, during which you are to
leave them there, asperse them once or twice a day, morning and evening, with
rose water stirring them each time, that the rose water may imbibe and
penetrate the better the leaves of these flowers.

2. When this has been performed, put them in a glass, or varnished vessel,
which stop as perfectly as you can, and place in the corner of a stable plunged
in the hottest horse-dung, which renew three times, that is, every five days. A
fortnight after this, place the vessel in a balneo mariae adapting a bolt-head
to it and a receiver, and lute all well. Distill the water, on which you will
observe the essence swimming. This you must divide by means of a wick, or
filtering paper. Put the essence in a glass phial well stopped.

LXXI. To draw an oil from jessamine, or any other flowers.
Soak some sweet almonds in cold water, which renew ten times in the space of
two days; at the end of which, peel them and make one bed at the bottom of a
vessel; next to this bed, make another of flowers, and thus continue to make
strata super strata with your almonds and flowers, till the pot is full. Renew
and change the flowers till you can judge that the almonds are perfectly
impregnated with the odor and fragrancy of the flowers, then extract the oil
by the press.

LXXII. To draw the essential oil of roses.
Pound in a mortar, thirty pounds of leaves of roses with three pounds of
common decrepitated salt; then put all in a pot well luted, which set in a cool
place. Fifteen or eighteen days after, moisten well this matter with common
water, stirring it with a stick till reduced into a pap. Then put it in an
alembick with its refrigerator. Make a pretty smart fire which will send first
the water, but next will come the oil susceptible of congealing by cold and
liquifying again by heat. One or two drops of that oil gives more smell a
hundred times than the distilled water from the same roses.

LXXIII. The oil of cinnamon.
Bruise first the cinnamon coarsely in a mortar, and put it a-soaking in water,
in which, add a little pounded tartar, with a table spoonful, or two of honey.
Eight or ten days after, place then vessel on the sand bath, and you will
obtain by distillation, an excellent oil of cinnamon.

LXXIV. An essence of jessamine.
Dissolve, over the fire, one quarter of a pound of sugar in a quarter of a
pint of common water. After having skimmed it, boil it to perfect evaporation
of all the water; then take it off from the fire, and fling two handsful of
jessamine flowers in it. Cover the vessel, and one or two hours after, strain
the essence, and bottle it. It is of an excessive agreeable odor. The dose is
one drop only, or two per pint of liquors.

LXXV. Essence of Ambergrise.
Set to infuse half a dozen of lemon peels in three half pints of spirit of
wine, and set them thus in a cold place for two days, in a vessel well stopped.
After that time take off the peels, which squeeze through a linen, and put as
many fresh ones in their stead, which reiterate three different times. When you
take off the last peels grind three grains of ambergrise and one of musk, which
put with the spirit of wine in a mattress over a gentle fire till the amber is
perfectly dissolved. There will fall some ground at the bottom of the mattress,
decant the clear part from it in a bottle, and keep it for use.

Note. This essence might be made with the burning spirit of roses.

LXXVI. Essence of capon and other fowls.
Cure the inside of any fowl by taking away all the entrails. Fill it with
lump-sugar pulverised and mixed with four ounces of damask raisins perfectly
stoned. Sew the fowl up again, and put it in a pipkin, which cover carefully
with is lid and lute all round with paste. Place this pot in an oven, when the
bread goes in and take it out along with it. Then uncover it, and strain the
liquor through a cloth, with expression of the animal. This essence is the
greatest restorative for old or enervated people; likewise to hasten the
recovery of health after long illness. The dose is two large table spoonsful
early in the morning fasting, and as much at night three or four hours after
supper.

LXXVII. Virginal milk.
1. Take one ounce and a half of benjamin, storax as much, and one of eastern
white balm. Put all in a thick glass-phial, with three half pints of spirit of
wine, which pour over. Put this in digestion over hot ashes till the spirit of
wine appears of a fine red color, then it is done.

2. To use (...) (...) only two or three drops of it in half a glass tumbler of
water, and it instantly turns as white as milk.

3. Exteriorly used, i^ whitens the skin if you wash yourself with it, it has
likewise the same effect upon teeth by rinsing the mouth and rubbing them with
it. Interiorly taken, it cures the heats and burning of the extinction of voice.

LXXVIII. How to make the Hipoteque.
To every quart of water you want to employ, put one quarter of a pound of
sugar, which boil and skim carefully. Then add a few cloves, a little cinnamon,
and some lemon zests, which boil all together four or five minutes longer, and
strain it through a cloth. To color it, you may put half a pint of good red
wine to each quart of water you have employed; and, to give it a certain
piquant, you may again add a little brandy if you like.

LXXIX. An exceeding good ptisan.
Boil well, in six quarts of water, one pound of liquorise root; to which you
may add one handful or two of coriander seed, and a few cloves. Two or three
hours after this infusion, strain the liquor through a cloth, and keep it to
make ptisan, when you want it, by putting a discretionable quantity of it into
some common water with a few lemon peels to give a point. The liquorice may
serve twice.

LXXX. How to color any sort of liquor.
Bruise into a coarse powder some santalum rubrum, which, put into a bottle
with a discretionable quantity of spirit of wine poured over in. In five or six
hours time the tincture will be very high; therefore it will be fit to give a
color to any liquor you choose, by pouring some of it into the liquor, and
shaking it till you find it is colored to your liking.

LXXXI. A ladies fine rouge, not at all hurtful to their skin like other
rouges, wherein there always enters a mixture of lead of quick silver.
The above preparation of santalum rubrum, modified with common water to take
off the strength of the spirit of wine, and an addition of one clove, a little
civet, a little cinnamon, and the bulk of a filbert of alum, per quarter of a
pint of liquor may be used with safety by ladies to heighten the bloom of their
face.

LXXXII. An exceeding fine smelling water, made at a very small expense.
Take two pounds or two quarts, of rose water drawn by distillation in balneo
mariae, which put in a large bottle filled with fresh rose leaves. Sop this
bottle well with a cork, wax it and cover it with parchment, then expose it to
the sun for a month, or six weeks; afterward decant the liquor into another
bottle in which, for every one quart of liquor, add two grains weight of
oriental musk, and cork it well. This water is of a charming fragrancy, and
lasts a great while whatever part of your body you may rub with it. It even
communicates the odor to them you touch after having rubbed your hands with it.

LXXXIII. The receipt of the Eau-imperial, or imperial water.
1. Set a-drying in the sun for a fortnight, the rinds of twenty-four oranges.
Then pound a quarter of a pound of nutmegs, the same quantity of cinnamon and
as much cloves. Put all together a-soaking in a large bottle with rose water,
and expose it for seventeen days in the sun.

2. At the end of that term pound one pound of rose leaves which have been
gathered two days before, with two handsful of sweet marjorum, two pounds of
lavender, two handsful of rosemary, two pounds of cyprus, two handsful of
hyssop, as much wild roses and as much betony. Put all these together by
themselves in a bottle well stopped, and place i^ in the sun for two days; then
having poured some rose water over them, set them again three days longer in
the sun.

3. When all this is done have an alembic ready, in which make a bed of one
pound of roses, and over it another bed of one half of your aromates; next,
another bed of one pound of violets of march, and over it a bed of the other
half part of your aromates with a crucible of musk, and as much of ambergrise.
Adapt the receiver to the bolt head, and distill the liquor by the gentle heat
of a sand bath.

4. When the water is entirely distilled, let the vessels cool, and having
unluted them, put on the faeces a pint of rose water. Lute the vessel, again,
and distill this water as you did the first, it will be far superior to it.
Unlute again and put vinegar in the Alembic over the same faeces, and distill it
likewise as you did the preceding waters. That vinegar will have great virtues,
and especially that of preserving you against an air infected by contagious and
pestilential disorders.

LXXXIV. The receipt of the syrup of orgeat of Montpellier.
1. Take a pound of barley which you soak in water; and, having peeled it grain
by grain, make a knot of it in a bit of linen. Put this knot in a pot over the
fire with about a quart of water. After having boiled it gently three or four
hours, put into the water one pound of sweet almonds, which mix and dilute well
in it. Then take off the knot of barley, which you pound like the almonds and
mix like them in the water. Strain all together through a piece of linen; then
pound the grounds well and pour all the water over it again, which stir all
together and strain again. This water will look very thick. Put one pound of
lump sugar in powder, to that liquor, and boil it into a syrup over a moderate
fire. You will know that the syrup is done to its right degree if, letting one
drop fall on the back of your hand, it remains in the form of a pearl. Then
take it off from the fire, and when cold, give it what flavor you choose,
whether amber, musk or other odor. Such is the syrup of orgeat, which you
bottle and keep for use.

2. To make the draught which, in coffee houses or other places of refreshment,
is called orgeat, put at the bottom of a decanter half an ounce, or one ounce,
of that syrup and put common water over it, then shake the decanter well to mix
the water and the syrup together. It is fit for drinking directly. In the
summer you may cool it, if you choose, in a pailful of ice and water, and you
may add syrup, or water, to the first mixture, according as it wants to make it
agreeable to the palate.

LXXXV. A receipt to make an imitation of coffee.
1. Take any quantity of such beans as they give to horses among their oats,
which put into a pan to roast over the fire till they begin to blacken. Then
take a little honey with the point of a knife, and put it among the beans
turning them well with it, till soaked in the beans, repeating the same process
seven or eight times, or till in short they are quite black, or of a very deep
brown like chestnut color. Now take them off from the fire, and while they are
quite burning hot put for every large handful of such beans, half an ounce of
casia-mundata, with which imbibe them well in stirring and shaking them in the
pan as much as you can, and they are done.

2. These if you grind in the mill and make coffee of, as you would of the
other, it will have the same taste and flavor as the true Moca-coffee, so as
not to be distinguished from it by the greatest connoisseurs.

Note. This coffee may be drank either thick or clear with sugar as usual.

LXXXVI. Another way.
Take a quart of rye, which clean and roast as the beans in a pan till of a
fine brown, then grind it. To use it, mix it half and half with the true coffee
and make it as usual, by putting it in boiling water and letting it boil five
minutes.

Note. This coffee is much used among the people of quality who prefer it to
the pure and real coffee to strengthen the stomach, especially when taken at
night before going to bed.

LXXXVII. Directions for preparing the true coffee.
1. True coffee must be torrified (vulgarly roasted) in an iron pan, or in a
glazed earthen pan, over a clear charcoal fire without flames. Turn it with a
wooden stick while it is on the fire, to make each grain take the roast more
regularly and equally; and shake it now and then by tossing it up from the pan
into the air, and in the pan again. It is well and sufficiently roasted when it
is all of a dark brown, or the color of tan.

2. There is a much better method of roasting it which is infinitely less
troublesome and more handy, by which coffee is excessively well and regularly
roasted. It is by means of a certain iron drum made in the form of a lady's
muff-box, with a handle at one end, an iron peg at the other, and a latch-door
in the middle. By this door you introduce the coffee, which you fasten in by
means of the latch. Then propping it on the top of a chafing dish made on
purpose, in which there is a charcoal fire, you roast the coffee by turning the
drum over it with the abovementioned handle; and thus the coffee roasts in the
most regular manner.

3. When the coffee is roasted, you grind it, in small mills which are made
purposely for it, and the powder you keep closely confined in a leather bag, or
better still, in those leaden boxes of Germany with a screwing lid. However it
is still much preferable to grind no more at a time than what one wants to use
at once.

4. The liquor of coffee is made by putting one ounce of that powder to three
quarters of a pint of boiling water to make three full dishes, or four small
ones of coffee. And, after an infusion of five or ten minutes, during which it
is kept boiling, the coffee is fit for drinking.

5. Observe that the strength of the powder occasions an effervescence in the
water when you put it in boiling; therefore to avoid that inconveniency which
would procure the loss of the most spirituous part of the coffee, you must take
the water from off the fire and pour some into a cup first, before putting the
powder into it, then stir with a long handled box spoon, the powder in the
water, avoiding to touch the bottom of the coffee-pot, which would immediately
make it rise and run over. If however, it should maugre all your cares, you
then stop it by pouring on it the water which you spared on purpose for it in
the cup from the beginning. Then, bringing it to the fire again, you let it
boil gently, as we said before, the value of five or ten minutes.

6. There are nice people who, not content with this plain way of preparing the
liquor of coffee, make the following additions to it. First, they pour it clear
from its ground into a silver, or other coffee-pot; and taking red-hot tongs
from the fire, melt between them, over the liquor of coffee, two or three large
nobs of sugar, which drop from the tongs into it; then they extinguish the
tongs themselves in it afterward. This ceremony gives it, it must be
confessed, an admirable flavor and most agreeable taste. Some put
super-additionally to it again one spoonful of the most perfect distilled
rose water. This last is excessively good for head-achs if, while boiling hot,
filling a cup with it and putting a tea spoonful of rose water, you set
yourself a-breathing the fumes: and, in order to breathe them more perfectly,
throwing an handkerchief over your head; and letting drop over the cup, bring
it round again to you, while you keep you nose over it. Thus you prevent the
avaporation of the fumes, and gather them all yourself. There is not so strong
a headache which can resist this operation.

LXXXVIII. Directions for the preparing of tea.
We should not have offered to speak here of the method of preparing the liquor
of tea in a nation wherein the ladies make it one of their chief talents and
most delightful past-time and amusement; and where it is so generally used, and
become in some measure, so necessary an evil, that such people might be found
amongst the lower class as would rather renounce one meal than go without their
tea even in the afternoon. But we have to mention two different methods of
preparing that liquor, after the Japanese fashion, whence the best tea comes,
which, to say but little of them, seem not unworthy of our notice, and, to do
full justice to them, may be said to have a right to claim preference over the
English method; the one for its superiority in point of flavor; the other for
its advantage in point of economy.

The first method is to put in a basin whatever quantity of tea you like; then,
pour boiling water over it: and after having covered it a reasonable time,
drink it out of that very same basin, without ever adding any fresh water to
the tea which remains at the bottom.

2. The second is practiced by the economists, who, in order to spare the
quantity without losing any of the flavor, reduce the tea into an impalpable
powder. This powder being put in the boiling water, incorporates with it in
such a manner, that it seems as if it tinged it only, since nothing subsides at
the bottom. By this means it is evident that a much smaller quantity is
required of this impalpable powder than of the leaves themselves: therefore
that one pound must go infinitely farther, which must of some be advantage in a
country where duties are so immense on that commodity.

3. The French who have no notion of making tea one of their amusing
entertainments and periodical objects of visiting, have a very bad method of
making it. As they never use it but on physic days, and as a physic itself,
they indeed make it as they would any preparation of that kind. In a coffee-pot
they boil first their water; when this does boil, they put in their intended
quantity of tea, and let it throw one or two bubbles, then take it aside from
the fire to let it infuse about half a quarter of an hour, after which they
drink it by basins full, as here we do water gruel, to assist the physic and
promote its effect.

Note. Those who are not used to regular and daily drinking of tea, have not a
finer and more powerful remedy against indigestions caused by repletion of the
stomach, or excess of eating. One basin, or two, of very strong tea, drank hot,
will, in less than half an hour, unstop all the conducts, and free all the
passages.

LXXXIX. A receipt for making of chocolate.
1. Dissolve in a copper pan some pulverised royallump-sugar, with a little
orange water. When the sugar is turned into a syrup throw in the cocoa, the
vanilloe, the cinnamon, Mexican-pepper, and cloves, all, and every one of
which, ought to have been first reduced into an impalpable powder. Stir all
well while it boils; and when you judge it to be sufficiently done, pour the
paste on a very smooth and polished table, that you may roll it and give it
whatever form and shape you like.

2. To drink it you prepare it with either milk or water, in which, when
boiling-hot, you first dissolve it, then, with a box-mill, made on purpose,
with a long handle, you mill it to froth in the pot in which it is amaking, and
pour it afterward in cups to drink.

CHAP. XIV.
SECRETS relative to the CONFECTIONARY BUSINESS.
I. Preserved nuts.
1. GATHER the nuts at Midsummer, or thereabouts, that is to say, before the
woody shell begins to harden under the green rind. Cut open and throw off that
green rind: and throw immediately, as you do it, the nut into a pailful of cold
water, to prevent its blackening. When all are ready, boil them four or five
minutes, and throw the first water away because it is bitter. Put fresh water,
which boil again and throw away as the first, and repeat this operation, a
third and fourth time, if required, to take off all the bitterness of the nuts.

2. After they have boiled in their last water, take them out and throw them in
cold water for fear they should turn black still. From this water change them
again into another, cold likewise, in which you are to put them one by one, as
you take them from the first, and pressing them between your fingers to purge
them from all the bitter water they might still contain.

3. Now make a syrup as usual, in which boil some lemons peels for the sake of
fragrancy only, taking them all out after a few minutes of their being in, then
put the nuts in their stead which leave to boil in the syrup as long as you
think proper.

Note. Some add a few cloves in the syrup; but they should be very sparing in
doing it, as this ingredient might tinge the nuts in black.

II. Orange-flower paste.
1. Boil in four quarts of water one pound of the bare leaves of orange-flowers
well picked. When these are deadened and softened by this boiling, take them
out with a skimmer and set them to drain. Then pound them in a mortar with the
juice squeezed out of two lemons, more or less according to your taste.

2. In the juice, which shall come from these flowers by pounding, dissolve one
pound of sugar, and put the paste in. Stir it a little, then let it cool, and
shape it afterward to your liking.

III. Paste of Jessamine.
Have one quarter of a pound of jessamine flowers, and pick them. Boil them
next in water till softened, and they have given their odor to it. Then take
the flowers out, which drain, and pound afterward in a marble mortar. Put
sugar in the water, and boil it to a surup; put the paste and spirit in, while
it boils for two or three minutes. Now take it out and shape it as you would
like to have it.

IV. Apricot paste.
Boil one pound and a half of sugar into a syrup. Put in three pounds of
apricots, deterged of their skin, and pounded in a marble mortar, etc. Then
proceed as above for the rest, observing only to choose the ripest apricots you
can find.

V. Current paste.
1. weigh ten pounds of currants, which put into a pan with one of clarified
sugar. Skim them while on the fire, and after they shall have boiled a while,
drain them on a sieve, then strain them.

2. Now put this liquor again in the pan and boil it, adding more sugar in
powder, till consumed and wasted to the consistence of a paste. Then form the
paste in the shape you like.

VI. See p. 285. Art. xviii.
A verjus-paste.
Choose verjus half ripe; cure it from all stones, and put it in a pan on the
fire with a pint of water to every three pounds of fruit. After five minutes
boiling take it out and drain it. Squeeze it through a sieve, then waste it to
thickness for a paste. Now boil as many pounds of pulverised lump sugar, to a
syrup as there are of fruit. When done, abate the fire, and add the fruit paste
to the syrup, (...) ^tinuing to concoct all together on that mild fire for
(...) while. Then give the paste, as soon as it is come to a proper
consistence, what shape and form you like.

VII. How to make syrups with all sorts of flowers which shall be possessed of
all their taste, flavor and fragrancy.
1. Heat in a pan about half a pint of water, then put it in sugar in the
proportion to the quantity of flowers you may have; boil, skim and thicken it
to a proper consistence. When done put your flowers in a glazed vessel, and
cover it over with a linen, through which pouring the syrup, you strain this
upon the flowers. These being thereby quite deadened, put all together again in
the same piece of linen, and strain it again in another vessel squeezing well
the flowers. Then bottle this syrup, and keep it for use well stopped. --
Whenever you want to give the flavor of those flowers to any liquor, you
sweeten it with this syrup -- To every four ounces of flowers, the quantity of
sugar requisite to make that syrup is generally one pound and a half -- Observe
that all flowers whatever must be well picked of all their cups, staminas, etc.
and nothing but their leaves ought to be made use of.

VIII. Raspberry syrup.
Mash the raspberries, and dilute them with a moderate addition of water, then
strain them to divide the thick from the clear part. To every quart of this
clear liquor put one pound of lump sugar pulverised, and boil altogether on the
fire in the preserving pan. Skim and clarify carefully the sugar, according to
art with the white of an egg beaten in water. When the syrup is come to its
right degree, (which you may know if, by throwing a drop of it in a glass of
water, the drop sinks whole to the bottom, and fixes itself there, without
running out along with the water, when you throw this way); take it off from
the fire, and let it cool till fit for bottling.

IX. Apricot-syrup.
Cut in small bits six pounds of very ripe apricots, which boil afterward in a
gallon of water till they are all reduced almost to a pulp. Let them cool, then
squeeze them through a sieve. Now strain again this liquor through the
jelly-bag, and put it in the preserving pan on the fire, with four pounds of
sugar. Skim, clarify, and boil the whole to a syrup, which try as
above-directed in a glass of water; and when done, let it cool, and bottle it
to keep for use.

X. The verjus syrup.
Have verjus in grapes, which pick out of its stalks, and pound in a marble
mortar. Strain it through a sieve first, then through a jelly-bag to get it
finer. To two quarts of this juice, which put into a preserving pan, add four
pounds of sugar, and boil it according to art to a of syrup.

XI. A general manner of making syrups, applicable to almost all sorts of
fruits, especially currants.
Pick a quantity of red currants of all their stalks, and squeeze them through
a sieve in a commodious vessel. Carry this vessel to the cellar placing it on a
stool, or any suspended shelf from the ground; and, after that juice shall have
worked three or four days, strain it through a sieve in another vessel, then
through the flannel bag to get it as clear as possible.

2. Now for every two quarts of such liquor, have four pounds of sugar, which
put in a preserving pan, and melt over the fire, with a little cinnamon water
to help the dissolution of it. Boil it thus to the consistence of caramel,
without however burning it; and, when at that degree, pour through the holes of
the skimmer, the measured liquor which you must boil also to a perfect syrup
according to the afore-prescribed trials. All this being well executed, take it
off, let it cool, and bottle it for use.

Note. All sorts of syrups, such as cherries, raspberries, and others, may be
made in the same manner, with this difference only, that they are not to be put
to work in the cellar, but employed directly as soon as the juice is squeezed
out of the fruits.

XII. To make liquid currants-jam.
Pick four pounds of currants, and clear them of their stalks. Put aside two
pounds and a half of them in a dish, and squeeze the other one pound and a half
remaining. Now, in a preserving pan, dissolve four pounds of sugar; and, when
come to a syrup, put in the two pounds and a half of whole currants along with
one pound and a half of juice of the same, which boil altogether to perfection.

XIII. To make the same with cherries.
Have two pounds of the finest cherries, from which take off both tail and
stones. Press out the juice of them, and put it in a preserving pan with a pint
of water, and four pounds of sugar. Boil all together to thickness, then add
six other pounds of the finest cherries, from which the tails only, and not the
stones, have been picked. Boil all to a syrup, and when this stands the trial
of the glass of water, as mentioned above, all is done, and fit for potting.

XIV. Another way to preserve cherries, with or without stones.
Put eight pounds of cherries, either with or without their stones, in an
earthen pan over a very moderate charcoal fire, to evaporate their superfluous
moistness; which to obtain, you keep incessantly stirring, taking care to avoid
mashing them. Then add four pounds of lump sugar pulverised, in which continue
to stir the cherries, and boil all so that the bubbles should cover the fruit,
and that the syrup might hereby be skimmed till done to perfection, which you
know when a drop of it put on a plate runs with difficulty, being cold; then
the cherries are fit to pot.

XV. To make the liquid raspberry jam.
Boil, to a strong syrup, four pounds of sugar. When done, take the pan out of
the fire, and put in four pounds of raspberries well picked, and not mashed in
the least. Put them in gently at first, and with a very particular care, for
fear of squeezing them; for, when the heat of the syrup has once seized them,
they are not so apt afterward to break. Stir them therefore a little in the
sugar, and when they have thrown in their juice, put them again on the fire, to
complete and perfect the making of the syrup, according to rules and proper
trials.

XVI. The verjus-jam.
1. Open four pounds of verjus in grapes, with a penknife; and, with the same,
pick out all the stones. Throw these grains, as you do them, into a bowl of
clean and fresh water. When all is done, take them out again with a skimmer,
and put them a-draining in a sieve, whence throw them next into a pan of
boiling water.

2. While this is in the water, let it not boil but only summer: and when the
verjus begins to swim on the top of the water, take it off directly from the
fire, and cover it with a cloth to cool gently, while you dissolve, boil, and
clarify four pounds of sugar to a syrup.

3. A little while before the syrup is ready, set your verjus a-draining in a
sieve, then throw it in the sugar, when this is done to the proper degree.
Continue to keep up a gentle and regular fire, till you see the verjus taking a
good green: and, when that is the case, give it a good brisk fire, and finish
it quickly, else it would first turn black, and then yellow. -- Take care also
not to do the surup too much, for it would be apt to candy.

XVII. The same with powder sugar.
1. If you want to do the same with powder sugar after the verjus is picked,
and the stones taken out as before, it must not be thrown in the cold water,
but in a dry preserving pan only, not to lose the juice which comes out of it
when cut.

2. Then to every one pound of verjus add another of sugar, such as we
mentioned, you powder this over the verjus which is in the pan, and set all on
a gentle fire, on which it can only simmer and not boil. This will make it come
very fine and green, when you must, as in the preceding receipt, be very
expeditious in finishing it, for the same reasons therein mentioned already.

XVIII. Peeled verjus.
Peeled verjus is made as follows. Choose some fine ripe verjus, which peel
carefully with the point of a penknife and stone, then throw it into a dry
bowl, to preserve the juice. -- Then dissolve, boil and clarify, according to
art, as many pounds of sugar as you have of fruit, in which, when done to the
consistence of a syrup, throw in the verjus from the bowl. Stir and boil it
gently, till it turns green, and finish it with speed. Let it cool, and put it
in very dry pots.

XIX. To preserve March, double or single, violets.
Have one pound of violets, gathered on the same day, before the rising of the
sun; and pick them well of all their tails and green which is about them. Then
make a syrup with two pounds and a half of sugar clarified, etc. In this syrup,
while boiling, throw the violets and plunge them all well under the rising
bubbles of the sugar. Let them not boil more however than five or six minutes,
for fear they should lose their color. And by this method they are done to
perfection for them who want a liquid preserve. But whoever wants a dry
preserve of the same, must attend to the following prescription.

XX. To make a dry preserve of the same violets.
When you want to make a dry preserve of March-violets, whether double or
single, you must, as soon as they are come to the degree we just now mentioned
to make them liquid, take them out immediately from the fire, and while the
sugar is still boiling, take the violetsout of it with a skimmer, and put them
a-draining in a sieve, calender, or table cloth, till they are cold. Then put
them in another pan over a very slow charcoal fire, stirring them incessantly
with your hand, for the space of two hours, or thereabouts, and powdering over
them, at distances of times, some of the finest royal loaf sugar, in small
quantities at a time, in order to dry and candy them.

XXI. Another way to make them liquid.
If you want to make the best use of the same clarified sugar, which served to
make dry preserved violets, you may do it by putting half a pound, or
thereabouts, of these flowers in the same syrup then boiling on the fire, and
there let them soak and lie for five or six minutes, they will then be liquid
as in Art. xix.

XXII. To preserve apricots, when neither too ripe nor too green.
Choose a quantity of apricots, just turned, but not ripe, and the fruit of
which has still all its hardness and greenness. Take out the stones, by means
of a small-bladed knife, or stick, which introduce at the point of the apricot,
till you feel the stone, and then push to make it come out at the tail. When
you have thus prepared four pounds of them, (weighed after stoning) have a
large and wide pan of boiling water on the fire, in which throw them in order
to blanch them, taking great care that they should not spot in the water. When
blanched, take them out with a skimmer, and set them a-draining on a sieve.
Then boil and clarify four pounds of sugar, and make it into syrup. When done,
take it out, and put it in your apricots softly, one by one. Then set them
again on the fire, and give them two or three bubbles. As soon as after which,
take the pan from the fire, and let them cool. By this means they throw off
their superfluous moistness and take the sugar. A certain while after, that is,
when cold, take them from the sugar with a skimmer, and set them a-draining,
while you put the syrup on the fire to boil. When drained put them again into
the boiling syrup, and give them five or six bubbles more, after which let them
rest two or three hours in the syrup as they are, or even till the next day if
you like it, at the end of which term you may pot them in that state.

XXIII. How to make a dry preserve of them.
When you want to make them in dry preserve, or what is called mi-sucre, you
must always proceed from beginning to end as above-directed, till the time they
are fit for being potted in liquid, instead of which you take them again once
more out of the syrup, and set them a-draining, then range them on states at
regular distances, so that they may not touch one another. When thus prepared,
powder on them, through a silk sieve, some of the finest loaf sugar pulverised,
and put them in the stove to dry. When dry on that side, take them out from the
slates, and turning them the other side upwards on a sieve, or some sort of
small light willow grates made on purpose; powder them again with sugar as
before, and when equally dried and cooled, you may put them in boxes with white
brown paper.

Note. Some like to have them done in halves, otherwise called, in genteel term
of art, en-oreilles, (in ears), which changes nothing in the process of the
operation, but that of opening them in two from the beginning. -- All sorts of
plumbs, and the peach, admit of the same mode of operation, to make them into
dry or liquid preserves, either whole, or in ears.

XXIV. To preserve green apricots.
1. Gather yourself your apricots when green, that you may be sure they are all
very fresh, and have not had time to wither. Then pound some salt in a mortar
and make it as fine as you possibly can, and putting a handful of this salt in
a napkin, with as many apricots as you think you can well manage; fold the
napkin, lengthways, bringing the long sides of it over the apricots, and taking
the ends of it gathered one in each hand, shake and roll them backwards and
forwards with the salt in the napkin, adding one spoonful or two if requisite,
of vinegar, which pour over them when thus agitated. This process is with
intention of curing them of their down, and when that is obtained, throw them
in cold water to wash them well, and continue so to do with the rest, till they
are all done.

2. After having thus well washed them in that first water, put them into new
cold water, to wash them well in it over again, after which put them a-draining
on a sieve. Then boil some water, and throw them in, wherein they are to be
kept boiling till they become soft, and which you take care to try now and
then, by taking one or two with the skimmer, and thrusting in a wooden
toothpick, or very fine skewer; if this get an easy admittance in the apricots,
they are sufficiently done. Now take the pan from the fire without delay, and
with the skimmer, take the apricots from that boiling water into some cold.

3. When your apricots are in this situation, make a syrup, by dissolving,
boiling, and clarifying, according to art, as many pounds of sugar as you have
got fruit, and, having put in your apricots, let them boil very gently. They
will immediately turn of a very fine green. You must not press on the finishing
of them; on the contrary, take them off from the fire, and give them a couple
of hours rest, during which they soak in the syrup, throw off their moistness,
and take the sugar. After they have thus rested a while, set them again on the
fire, and finish them as fast you can, that they may preserve their greenness.

Note. There are some people who get the down off the apricots by means of a
lie made with greenwood, or pearl ashes, in which they wash them once first,
and then twice afterward, in other pure and clean cold water. But the first
method we have recommended with salt, is the best, the most expeditious, and
that which procures them the finest green. -- When you want your preserve to
keep, you cannot do your syrup with less than pound for pound of sugar with
fruit; but if they be not to keep, a little less may do.

XXV. To make the Cotignac liquid.
Suppose you to have fifteen pounds weight of quinces, you must have three
pounds of sugar, and a gallon of water, all of which you manage as follows.

1. Pare the quinces and cut them small, after having taken away the cores and
kernels. Put your gallon of water a-boiling, then put them in, and let them
boil there, till reduced almost to a pulp. Strain all through a cloth, and
squeeze it in a bowl. When done, set it on the fire in the preserving pan, with
four pounds of sugar, and boil it gently, till taking some with the skimmer,
and letting it fall on a plate, it shall rise up like a jelly. Then push on the
fire, and in five minutes afterward the Cotignac is done.

Note. If you put the peel and knernels into a knot, and boil them in that
manner in the water, the jam will sooner be red.

XXVI. Another way.
Pare some pounds of quinces, which cut into bits, and put in the preserving
pan, with a sufficient quantity of water to soften them by boiling gently. Then
add four pounds of lump sugar, and continue boiling the whole till it is half
done. When this is the case strain all through a calender, and put it again in
the same pan over the fire to boil it to perfection, which you know, when by
stirring the jam hard, you may see the bottom of the pan quite plain, and
entirely uncovered. Then it is time to take the pan from the fire, to let it
cool and hot the marmalade.

XXVII. How to make the caramel.
Boil some sugar, till it be almost in powder: then, for every half-pound of
sugar, throw in one ounce of syrup of capillaire, and immediately throw the
whole into cold water.

XXVIII. To make Raisinet.
Take any quantity of black grapes, the best and the ripest. Pick the grains
from the stalks, throw away these, and squeese the others between your hands,
and put both the hudds and the juice in the preserving pan, to boil on a clear
and smart fire. Neglect not to stir well this liquor, all the while it is
a-boiling, with a wooden spatula, for fear it should burn at bottom. When you
perceive it may have wasted a third, or thereabouts, strain it through a
sheer-cloth, to express well all the juice out of the hudds, which last throw
away. Put your juice again into the pan to boil, and skim it, stirring as
before with the spatula, especially toward the end when it begins to thicken.
To know when it is done, put some on a plate, and if, by cooling it becomes
solid, it is a sign it is sufficiently done. Then is the time to take it off
from the fire, and let it cool, after which you put it into stone jars.

XXIX. To preserve quinces in red.
1. Choose the most even quinces not stony, and vulgarly called female quinces.
Cut them into four, or eight quarters as you like best, then pare and core
them. If you meet any stones in the quarters cut then off too. In proportion as
you prepare them thus, throw them into cold water. Save the peels and cores:
and mixing among them, when all your fruits are prepared, such of them as are
small, crooked, and otherwise ill formed, and unfit to go along with the
others, boil all in a sufficient quantity of water to make a strong decoction,
which pass when done, and strain through a strong cloth into a pan.

2. In this decoction, put your other quarters, and boil them in the preserving
pan. When sufficiently done, put as many pounds of sugar as you had fruit, or
three quarters of a pound at least. Boil this gently, and in a short time the
quinces will become most beautifully red. When you see they are come to
perfection, take them off the fire, and pot them; but do not cover them for a
day, or two after.

XXX. To do the same in white.
1. To do the same preserve in white, you must not make the decoction of the
pairings. On the contrary when the fruit is pared and prepared as before
mentioned, you must throw it into boiling water, and there let it continue to
boil on the fire, till sufficiently done: then, take it out with the skimmer,
and put it a-draining on the sieve.

2. While they are thus a-draining, make a syrup; and, when this is skimmed and
clarified properly, put your fruit in it boiling. Ten minutes after, or
thereabouts, take the pan from the fire, and let all rest awhile, then squeeze
on it the juice of a lemon to whiten the quinces: and setting them again on the
fire, finish them quickly.

XXXI. To preserve Rousselet, Muscadine, and other sorts of pears.
1. Choose Rousselet-pears, which should be neither too ripe nor too green;
which pare very neatly, and boil in water till properly done. Before boiling
them, observe to strike them to the heart from the head, with the point of a
knife. When properly done in the boiling water, take them out with the skimmer,
and throw them into fresh water.

2. Make next a syrup, with as many pounds of sugar as you have pears, in which
you put these and boil them five or six minutes at first, then take them from
the fire, and let them rest a while to throw out their superfluous moistness,
and take the sugar. When that is done, set them again on the fire, to complete
them quickly.

Note. By doing as above, you will have a liquid preserve of pears; but if you
want to have them dry, follow the directions given in. Art xxiii. with respect
to apricots.

XXXII. A preserve of green almonds.
1. Prepare a lie of pearl ashes, in which wash your almonds to rub their down
off. Wash them next in another common clean water, whence throw them into
boiling water, in which they are to boil till softened, so as however, not to
open themselves, and which you try now and then, by thrusting a pin or a fine
skewer in some of them. When done enough, skim them out from this water, and
throw them into cold, set them a-draining in a sieve.

2. Now make a syrup, and throw your almonds in while boiling. They will
immediately recover their green; then finish them as expeditiously as you can,
for fear they should turn black. -- If you want to keep them, you must put
pound for pound of fruit and sugar.

XXXIII. To make the same into a compote.
To make a compote of almonds, you must, after having softened them by boiling
in water, put no more than five or six ounces of sugar to every pound of fruit.
Then boil the syrup into a pretty strong consistence, because it liquifies
sufficiently afterward by the moistness which the fruit returns.

XXXIV. To make dry portable cherries.
Prepare four pounds of fine Kentish cherries, by depriving them both of their
stones and tails. Then have one pound, or one pound and a quarter at most, of
sugar, which put a-dissolving on the fire in a pint of water. When this begins
to boil, throw your cherries quickly in, and make them boil thus in the sugar
about one quarter of an hour, or till the syrup begins to thicken. When they
are sufficiently done, take all off from the fire, and let cool, after which
put them a-draining in a sieve; then, putting three or four of them one in
another, range them on slates, and powder, through a sieve, put some sugar all
over them, and place them in the stove, or, for want of this convenience, in a
baker's oven, after the bread has been taken out. No sooner they are dry on
this side, but you must turn them all on the other, and powder them over with
sugar as you did before; dry them also in the same manner, and box them when
cold, to keep for use.

Note. Plumbs may be done in the same manner. This sort of preserve is very
agreeable, and may be carried any where. Few persons are acquainted with the
method of making it.

XXXV. The preserve of orange-flowers; whether in loose leaves, or in buds, or
even in grapes or bunches.
Have four or five pounds of orange-flowers; and that you may lose nothing, but
on the contrary, make the best you can of them, put them in an alembic with two
gallons of water. Lute well the vessels, and distill about two quarts of good
water. Stop then distillation, let the vessel cool: and, unluting them, put the
orangeflowers a-draining on a sieve. When done, throw them afterward in cold
water, squeezing over them the juice of a small lemon to whiten them. Now take
them out again from this water, and put them in a very light and thin syrup,
not much more than lukewarm, for them to take the sugar. When all shall have
become quite cold, skim the flowers out of this syrup, and set them a-draining
in a sieve placed over it. After they are well drained, boil that syrup for
five or six minutes, then let it cool again, till only lukewarm, and then put
your flowers a-soaking again for twenty-four hours in it. On the next day skim
them off again, and repeat the same operation over again exactly as you did the
day before. At last skim them out once more from the sugar, and put them
a-draining for the last time, after which scatter them on tin sheets, slates,
or small boards, and having powdered them over with sugar, put them a-drying in
an oven; when dry on this side, turn them on the other, and repeat the same
again; till all is done and fit to put in boxes.

XXXVI. A marmalade of orange flowers.
1. To make a marmalade, or jam, with the same sorts of flowers, take one pound
of them, which wash and dry in a cloth, and having put them in a mortar, give
them a few strokes of the pestle only to bruise them a little, not to mash them
quite, and to whiten them squeeze the juice of a lemon over them.

2. Now clarify three pounds of royal sugar; and, when come to a proper syrup,
throw in your pound of orange flowers, which boil in five or six minutes,
andlet cool. When cold, stir all well with a spatula, in order to mix well, and
equally, the flowers along with the syrup, then put the jam into pots, and,
having left them twenty-four hours uncovered, paper them over as usual.

Note. They who have no alembic, being deprived of the opportunity of having
orange-flower water, must boil their flowers in a large quantity of water in
the preserving pan, and when done, change these flowers immediately into cold,
or some other boiling water. These flowers will assume a greater whiteness if
you squeeze the juice of a lemon into this second water. Then drain it, and
proceed for the rest as directed in the preceding article.

XXXVII. To make an apricot, or peach jam.
1. Choose the ripest apricots, which clean of all hard knobs, spots, and rotten
parts. Cut them in small bits in a preserving pan, which you have previously
weighed. If you have put four pounds of apricots in it, reduce them by boiling
over a gentle fire to two pounds only, which you must find out by weighing pan
and fruit together, now and then till you find your right weight. When this is
the case, put among your apricots thus reduced to one half, two pounds of lump
sugar pulverised, and mix all well for the space of five minutes over the fire,
then take all off, let it cool, and pot.

2. This same composition, you may, if you will, put into paste on slates, or
in tin moulds. There is not more exquisite eating. You may also, with two or
three roasted, or baked apples, mix a couple of spoonsful of this marmalade,
and make excessive nice tarts with it, or again with pears baked under ashes,
nothing can be more delicate.

XXXVIII. An apricot jam, after the French way.
1. Choose such ripe apricots as are fit to eat. Peel their skin off very
neatly, and give them a bubble of two in boiling water, so as not to have them
dissolve however in the water, and put them a-draining. When done, mash them
through a sieve, and let them rest a certain time to evaporate their
superfluous moistness.

2. While this is doing, make a syrup with as many pounds of sugar as you have
fruit, and take it off from the fire; when the syrup is cooled, put your fruit
in, which stir well with a spatula, then put all again on the fire for ten
minutes in order to make the fruit take well the sugar. When the jam is well
done, fine and transparent, you pot it.

XXXIX. To make raspberry, currants, and cherry jam.
All these fruits must be squeezed through a sieve, then clarify the sugar, and
throw in the juice, which you bring to perfection afterward as directed in the
last receipt.

These jams may also be made into paste; and, if you require to have them
clearer, more pellucidous, and susceptible of drying quicker, you may put a
quarter of a pound more sugar, than the prescription, to every one pound of
fruit; but it must be confessed that the paste will so much less have the
flavor of the fruit.

XL. To make a good current jelly.
Have four pounds of currants after picking. Then, dissolve in water four
pounds of loaf sugar, which make into a pretty strong syrup. Now, put the
currants in, and boil so hard as to have them all over covered with the
bubbles. Six minutes after such boiling, take the pan off from the fire, and
pour the contents in a sieve to strain of all the liquid. Put this liquor again
in the pan and boil it, till taking a drop with the skimmer, and pouring it on
a plate, it congeals as it cools. Then it is fit to pot.

They who want to spare the sugar, and have a great deal of jelly at a smaller
expense, may employ four pounds only of sugar to six of currants, after
picking, and proceed as above. They must however observe to do the jelly rather
more than in the preceding caser, when the fruit and the sugar are put pound
for pound.

XLI. To make a verjus jelly.
Take ripe verjus which pick from its stalk. Put it in a pan with a couple of
glasses of water. Let it boil for two or three minutes, and when deadened,
throw it in the sieve to drain. Then put the juice on the fire with the sugar,
and boil into a jelly, to pot it afterward.

XLII. To make an apple jelly.
1. Cut in small bits a dozen of gold rennets, and put them in the preserving
pan, with three or four quarts of water, which boil to the reduction of one
half. Throw all in a cloth to strain it through, and draw all the juice from
the apples. Then, to this, put four pounds of sugar which boil to a jelly.

2. To give a point to that jelly, you may add the juice of one lemon, and
even the rasping of one half of its rind.

XLIII. To make the conserve of orange-flowers.
Take one quarter of a pound of orange flower-leaves well picked, which chop as
small as you can, and wet over by squeezing the juice of a lemon. In the mean
while clarify, and make into a strong syrup, two pounds of sugar, then take it
off the fire and let it rest a while. Some time after, stir it all around, and
in the middle, with a spoon; and having thrown in your orange flower, prepared
as before directed, mix all well with the same spoon, and put part of this
composition into paper moulds, or cases, and form the rest into drops or
lozenges, on sheets of paper.

XLIV. A conserve of violets.
Pound in a mortar one quarter of a pound of violets well cleansed and picked,
which, while you are a pounding, you must wet with a quarter of a pint of
boiling water. When it is thus wetted and pounded strain it through a flannel
cloth; then having melted and clarified two pounds of sugar into a strong
syrup, take it off the fire, let it rest, and pour in afterward what you have
expressed from the pounded violets, stirring all well together with the spoon,
and proceed in every other respect for the rest as directed in the preceding
article.

XLV. A conserve with raspings of Portugal oranges and lemons, conjointly or
separately.
Put your raspings to dry in a plate whether silver or china, it does not
signify. Prepare some sugar into a syrup not quite so strong as recommended in
the two last receipts. Take this from the fire, and stir it with a spoon, both
round the pan and in the middle; then throw in your raspings of lemon or
orange, or even both together; and, having stirred all well, put it in the
moulds and make your drops.

XLVI. To make almonds a-la-praline.
Make a strong syrup with one pound, or one pound and a quarter of sugar. Then
throw in two pounds of almonds, which stir well with a spatula, for fear they
should stick to the pan. Therefore stir them well till they have consumed all
the sugar; then place them over a small fire to dissolve all the little knobs
of congealed syrup which remain about the pan, and stir it till there is none
left, and all should absolutely stick to the almonds. Have a great care that
they should not turn into oil, and take notice when they pop, because it is a
sign they are done. Take the pan from the fire, and cover them with a cloth;
and, when cold, put them in boxes.

XLVII. To whiten cherries, currants, raspberries, grapes, strawberries and
other such like fruits.
Beat one, or two, whites of eggs with orange flowerwater, then steep your
fruit in, and roll it afterward in a dish wherein there is lump sugar
pulverised and sifted very fine. When it is well covered over with sugar, put
it on a sheet of paper and set it in the sun, or before a clear fire, at a
certain distance of it, only to dry it. You may thus ice all sorts of fruits
susceptible of icing.

XLVIII. To make iced maroons.
Slit the bottom skin of every one of your chestnuts and loosen it at that part
without peeling them yet, then throw them into boiling water. When you think
they have boiled sufficiently take a few of them and try whether or not a pin
gets easily into them by the slit you have made. If it does, take the maroons
from the fire, then peel them one after another as expeditiously as you can
while still burning hot, and put them in a dry sieve. In the mean while, boil
some new water, and when all are peeled, put them all into it to make them
throw all their reddish liquor without putting them any more over the fire, but
only and merely into the boiling water which you just took out; when they have
well cleansed themselves in this water, take them off with a skimmer and put
them in a light thin syrup, in which boil them gently for ten minutes, then
take them off the fire, let them rest so that they may, take the sugar, then
skim them out of it and put them in a sieve to drain. Now add some more
clarified sugar to your thin syrup, which boil together to a stronger one: then
put your maroons in, one by one, set them on the fire again, and boil all till
the syrup comes to be what confectioners call a-la-plume. Then take them off
the fire, and let them rest. Some time after, take a spoon and cause a certain
agitation with it in the syrup by stirring it on one side of the pan so as to
cause a thick and muddy look in the syrup no farther than the width of your
hand. While the syrup looks thus, take your maroons gently one by one between
two forks, and sauce them well in that thick part of the syrup, then put them
on a sieve over a dish.

XLIX. To make the Royal-massepins.
1. Take one pound of sweet almonds which throw in a bowl filled with boiling
hot-water, to help the peeling of them. In proportion as you peel them, throw
them into another bowl filled with cold water. Then drain them, and pound them
in a mortar, watering them at the same time so as to make them into a kind of
paste. Now put in the preserving pan one pound of sugar with a sufficient
quantity of water to dissolve it. Boil it to a-la-plume, and then take it from
the fire to dilute your paste into it. Set the pan again on the fire, and turn
your paste over and over till it quits the pan freely without any adhesion at
all. When, passing your hand on the paste, you see it smoothening without
sticking to your fingers, it is a proof that it is done. Now take it from the
fire, and dress it with your spatula on small boards covered with sugar, in the
form of small oblong cakes, of what size you like.

2. When the paste is all employed and dressed in that form, let it grow quite
cold. Then take every one cake one after another singly; and give each of them
by itself half a dozen of strokes of the pestle in a mortar to render that
paste more delicate, adding also as you pound it thus, half the white of an egg
or a whole one if requisite, per pound, or pound and a half, of paste. You may
likewise, if you choose, introduce in the paste, while you pound it, a little
orange or lemon peel preserved. Then you roll it again in the pulverised sugar,
and dress it again on the same boards as before, either in oblong cakes, or in
round rings. When done take and steep it in whites of eggs beaten with orange
flower-water; and, draining it well when you take it out, roll it again next in
pulverised sugar, then put it on a sheet of paper. When every one has thus been
worked all through this process, put the sheet of paper, thus loaded with these
massepins, in an oven, so moderately hot as not to affect them too much, and
give them only a very faint coloring.

3. They who want their massepins to taste of the bitter almonds, may introduce
one quarter of a pound, or even half a pound of bitter almonds among the pound
of sweet ones, from the very beginning and for the rest, proceed as directed
from the time of peeling.

L. To make Savoy biscuits.
1. Separate the whites of four eggs from their yolks. Beat them by themselves
to a very hard froth, at which time, you then put the yolks previously well
diluted and continue beating all well together. Now introduce half a pound of
sugar pulverised, and beat them all together again.

2. When you are ready to dress your biscuits, have a quarter of a pound of
superfine flour, which incorporate by beating well, then dress it on a sheet of
paper in the form you like best, either round or oblong, and ice them over with
sugar in powder to prevent their running. Put them in an oven, no hotter than
for massepins; and, after a reasonable time they will be done.

LI. To make bitter almond-biscuts.
Pound in a mortar three quarters of a pound of bitter, and one quarter of
sweet almonds. When thus pounded, have eight or nine yolks of eggs which beat
up and mix with your paste of almonds, and two pounds of pulverised lump sugar.
This paste must be a good deal harder than that of the Savoy biscuits. Then
with the end of a knife taking some of that paste, you place it in rows on a
sheet of paper, in what form or shape you like, and ice it with pulverised
sugar; then put it in the oven as you do the Savoy-biscuits or massepins.

LII. To make meringues.
Beat well into a hard froth, four whites of eggs: then introduce in them four
large table spoonsful of sugar into a subtle powder, and a tea-spoonful of
orange flower-water, with a little musk and amber prepared. Put this paste on a
table, and roll it with the rolling pin to the thickness of a crown piece, or
double that thickness at most. Cut it in the form and size you like, bake it
half way, or little more, and take it out. Make a strong icing with the white
of an egg, sugar pulverised, and the juice of a lemon, in order to whiten that
ice, which you thicken as a strong pap by means of the sugar in powder, steep
your pieces of cut paste one by one, and set them to dry under the lid of the
stove covered with fire, on the top of it.

LIII. The same with cinnamon, or chocolate.
The meringues, with chocolate, or cinnamon, are made as follows. Pound and
sift into subtle powder and distinctly each by itself the cinnamon, and a
quantity of the above described paste, after a thorough drying. Then mix these
two powders and a discretionable quantity of sugar together in the same mortar,
by means of whites of eggs beaten, continuing to pound the whole till the paste
be firm and however flexible. Now spread it with the rolling pin to the
thickness you like, and cut it in the shape and form you please, then bake and
ice it as usual. If you will not have your meringues too hard, bake them on one
side only, and ice them on the other with orange flower water and sugar. When
you dry them let it be with the lid of the stove, and take care not to make the
fire too strong, left it should blow the ice. When properly dried, the ice is
as clear and transparent as real glass.

Note. With the chocolate the same process is to be observed as with cinnamon.

LIVE. Another way of icing, contrived for the sake of certain scrupulous
persons.
For the sake of them, who, in the time of Lent have some scruple to eat messes
wherein there enters any thing belonging to eggs, you may contrive the
following method of icing. Take some gum adragant which put into a glass
tumbler with a little common water and orange flower ditto. When perfectly
dissolved, strain it through a cloth, and use it instead of whites of eggs for
pounding your paste in the mortar as above directed. Then for the last icing,
use orange flower water and sugar, pulverised as above.

LV. To make gimblettes.
Suppose you take one quarter of a pound of flour, then one ounce and a half of
sugar in powder, or two ounces at most, will be quite sufficient with two or
three yolks of eggs and one white only, then a little orange flower water, with
a very little quantity of musk and amber prepared. Knead all together, so as to
make a stiff dough with it; to obtain which you discretionally increase the
quantity of flour if necessary. But should it become so stiff that you could
not manage it to put in rings; then you must put it in the mortar, and soften
it with a few str^kes of the pestle and a little orange flower, or even mere
pump water. Then you spin it in rings; which, when made, you throw into boiling
water and give a bubble or two; and afterward, dress it on sheets of paper,
and bake it till it is dry and brittle.

LVI. To make biscotins.
Boil one pound of sugar to a syrup a-la-plume; then throw in half, or three
quarters of a pound of flour. Stir quickly all together to make a dough, after
having previously taken the pan off from the fire, then take this paste out of
the pan and dress it on a board, or table, covered with pulverised sugar. Knead
it quickly, and pound it next in a mortar with the white of an egg, a little
musk and amber prepared, and orange flower water. When it is thus kneaded and
pounded pretty stiff, make it into small balls of the size of a small apricot
stone, then throw them into a pan filled with boiling water. First they fall to
the bottom: but as soon as they rise on the top you must skim them out of this
water, and put them a draining in a sieve. Then range them on a sheet of paper,
or tin, and place them in the oven to bake and make them take a fine color.

Note. If, when baked, you find any difficulty in taking them out of the paper;
wet a napkin and wring it, then set the sheet of paper on it, soon after they
will easily come off.

LVII. To make lemon lozenges.
Take one or two whites of eggs, which beat with some orange flower water. Then
add as much pulverised sugar as they will soak up, to make a pretty stiff paste
of it. Introduce also the raspings of lemon peels. All being well incorporated,
roll it all into small balls of the bigness of your thumb, which range on a
sheet of paper and flatten afterward a little, then put them in the oven to
bake.

LVIII. How to preserve orange-peels all the year round, but especially in the
month of May.
Cut some oranges in four quarters, and peel those quarters. Then put the peels
to soak in water for about ten or twelve days; after which term, dry them
between two cloths, and put them in a cauldron with a sufficient quantity of
honey to half cover them. Boil them thus one minute or two, stirring them
incessantly. Then take them off the fire, and let them rest till the next day,
when you put them on again, and let boil ten minutes or a quarter of an hour.
For six or seven days repeat the same operation, taking great care incessantly
to stir, turn and return them all the while they are on the fire. On the eighth
day change the honey, and in the fresh honey boil them as long as it would take
you to repeat your creed, then pot them with that new honey in which they
boiled last, and keep them for use after having added some cinnamon, cloves and
white ginger, mixed and both reduced into subtle powder.

LIX. To make a paste with whatever fruit it may be.
Take whatever quantity you please of any fruit, which peel and boil well in
water, then strain the juice through a sieve, or a flannel. Now weigh ten
pounds of that paste of fruit, and ten more of sugar pulverised. Mix first five
pounds of sugar with ten pounds of fruit, and put it a-doing on the fire; then
mix four more pounds of your sugar. When done, put with a spoon (or iron plates
previously powdered with some of the pounds of sugar which were left (some of
that paste from distance to distance. Set these to dry on a chafingdish, in the
sun, or in the open air, turning and re-turning them often, and powdering them
morning and evening with sugar. When these little cakes are perfectly dry, put
them in Dutch deal boxes and in white papers, that they may not touch each
other.

Note. In the same manner you may make the conserve of roses, bugloss, burrege,
etc. even red currants.

LX. The Genoa paste.
Take equal quantities of quinces and odoring apple's pulp. The pulp is
prepared thus: peel these fruits, and clear them of their kernels. Then pound
them in a mortar with rose water, and strain them through a sieve. Put the
paste on the fire to dry by degrees, stirring it all the while with a wooden
spatula. Then add as much sugar in powder as you have pulp, and go on in doing
it, till it has acquired the consistence of a paste.

LXI. Quinces-jam, and other fruits.
Boil, in a sufficient quantity of water, both the flesh and the peelings of
your fruits to perfect softness. Then let the decoction clarify in the sun,
before the fire, or by residence. When settled, decant it, and adding to the
liquor the proper quantity of sugar boil it to a jelly.

LXII. Genoa biscuits.
Take four ounces of sugar in powder, one pound of flour, a little Coriander
and anise-seeds in powder, which mix with four eggs and as much lukewarm water
as needs to make a dough of the whole. Bake it in the oven; and when bake, cut
it in five or six slices which you bake again.

LXIII. The Queen's cakes, or biscuits.
Take twelve ounces of flour, one pound of fine sugar in powder, and twelve
eggs, from which take out three yolks, with a discretionable quantity of
coriander and anise-seeds. Beat, and mix well all together, till it comes to a
thick but running paste. Some add yest to make it lighter and rise higher.
Divide this paste into several paper cases, or tin ones, of the width of two
fingers and twice as long, which put in an oven to bake; but take care that it
be not too warm.

LXIV. Macaroons.
Pound well one pound of sweet almonds, moistening them with rose water.
Introduce one pound of sugar, and beat all well in a soft paste, which you put
round a dish and half bake in a lukewarm oven. When the paste is half done,
cut it in small round pieces, and having ranged them on a sheet of paper,
finish baking them.

LXV. A method of making cakes exceeding fine.
Take two whites of eggs, which beat well to a froth after having taken away
their germen. Add one quarter of a pound of the finest flour, and as much sugar
in powder. Beat all well, and add a little brandy to it and coriander-seed in
Powder. All being well mixed spread the paste on a sheet of paper, glaze it
over with sugar in powder, and put it to bake.

LXVI. Another particular method of making cakes.
Wash and clean well a dozen of eggs and wipe them thoroughly dry. Then break
them and take their whites only, which beat in a mortar along with their shells
till these latter be perfectly dissolved. Now add sugar and flour, though not
so much flour as sugar. When all is well mixed, spread the paste. Which ought
to be a little firm, on a sheet of paper; and, after having glazed it, bake it
in a slow oven.

LXVII. A cream made without fire.
Take one quart of double cream, in which, put four ounces of sugar pulverised
fine, and the quantity of one thimblefull, or two, of runnet. Stir all round
together to mix it more equally and make it take the better. If the runnet be
good the cream will take in one hour. When you are ready to serve it on the
table, rasp some sugar over it, and spill on it a dozen drops of orange
flower-water.

LXVIII. A cream which cuts as a rice pudding.
Beat in a dish two whites of eggs and one yolk, in which, while you beat,
introduce by degrees one quarter of a pound of sugar in proportion as it melts,
and a pap-spoonful of rose water. When that is completed, pour in the dish,
and stir a quart of milk and cream mixed half and half, then set it gently on
warm cinders to take without boiling nor disturbing it any more. In one hour's
time it generally is sufficiently taken. Then you color it in passing a
red-hot shovel over it. It is to be served cold, after having rasped some sugar
on it.

LXIX. To make an exceeding good boiled cream.
Take cream or good new milk from the cow which boil with a crum of stale bread
rasped very fine, and a little fresh butter. As soon as it begins to quake,
stir it continually with a spoon; and having diluted some yolks of eggs, strain
them through a cloth. Put as much salt and sugar in your cream as you think it
may require. And, when it boils and begins to rise pour the yolks of eggs in,
never ceasing to stir it in order to prevent its rising so far as to run over.
As soon as you see it begins to render the butter, take it out of the fire;
and, to serve it, glaze it over with sugar in powder.

LXX. To make whipped cream.
Take one quart of good sweet cream in which add one, or two spoonsful of
orange flower water and a quarter of a pound of sugar pulverised very fine.
Whip it With a handful of fine white and dry willow twigs tied together on
purpose. In proportion as it comes to a froth take it and put it in a bowl, or
dishes, to serve it on the table.

LXXI. Another sort of a cream.
Peel and pound as much as possible, a dozen and a half of bitter almonds,
wetting and diluting them at the same time with a little milk: then strain them
through a flannel and put the product of that squeezing among three half pints
of good new milk from the cow, with one quarter of a pound of sugar, and a few
spoonsful of orange flower water. Stir all well together; and having made it
lukewarm on the fire, put a little runnet in it, and mix all well. Then fill as
many soop plates with it as you have guests, and put them on warm ashes only,
covered with another plate, which you now and then use to take up in order to
sup the moistness which rises. When the cream is congealed, take it from off
the fire and serve it.

This cream is that which is called by the name of cream blanc-manger, or
custard like. It may keep very well for two days, after it is done.

II. Of Summer compottes, or stewed fruits.
LXXII. The raspberries compotte.
Boil half a pound of sugar into a syrup to a la-plume degree, in which throw
one pound of raspberries well picked, clean and whole. Take the pan off from
the fire, and let all rest. A little while after, shake the pan gently in which
the fruit is, and stir it a little, then set it again on the fire to boil five
minutes; after which, take it off again and let it cool before serving. Forget
not to skim the fruit well when in the pan. Currants admit of the very same
preparation, and by the same process.

LXXIII. The apricots-compotte.
Make a lie with pearl ashes; and, when that lie shall have boiled five, or six
minutes, put in about a quart of green apricots, which you stir in gently with
the skimmer; then take them out and throw them into cold water. Clean them well
one by one of all their down, and throw them as you go on, into another cold
water. Then boil some water in a preserving pan, and put them into blanch, till
you can thrust a pin into them easily. When this is the case pour them all in a
sieve and let them strain. Then clarify a pint of syrup; and, when it boils,
put in the apricots and boil them gently in that sugar for ten minutes or
thereabouts. Then take them out, stir and skim them; let it cool and serve.

LXXIV. Another way of doing the same.
Put what quantity you like of apricots in a napkin with a handful of salt, and
shake them backwards and forwards length ways, moistening them now and then
with a drop or two of vinegar. By these means you take off the down much sooner
from them. Then wash them in cold water; boil them afterward to softness, then
skim them out from that water into cold. When they have been there a little
while, pour them all into a sieve to drain; then put them in sugar in which
they are to boil till they turn green. When they are such, finish them quickly,
take them out, and serve.

LXXV. To do the same fruit, as well as peaches, when ripe.
You may peel them if you like, though they taste more of the fruit when they
are not peeled. Stone them, and having splitted them, take the kernels away
from the stones. Now, boil into a syrup half a pound of sugar, more or less,
according to the quantity of fruit you have to stew. When the syrup is ready,
throw in the fruit and the kernels all together; boil all about one quarter of
an hour, then take the pan from off the fire, shaking it gently to gather the
scum together. Take this out with a card and let your fruits rest a while to
throw off their water. When you judge they may have done it, set them again on
the fire to boil eight or ten minutes longer; and, if there be any more scum,
take it off again, and the compotte is done.

LXXVI. To make a compotte of the same fruits as above, and even plumbs,
broiled.
Take any quantity of either peaches, plumbs, or apricots: broil them on all
sides over a chafing dish of bright and live coals. Peel them next as fast as
you can, and put them on a silver plate with one handful or two of sugar
pulverised, and sufficient water only to help melting the sugar. Set them next
on the fire, and boil them one minute or two, then take them out and let cool.
When you are ready to serve them, squeeze the juice of a lemon, or orange, over
them.

LXXVII. To make a compotte of perdrigon-plumbs.
Take off the skin of about two pounds of perdrigon plumbs, which throw in the
mean while into cold water, then strain it out and put into boiling one for
about two or three minutes only; after which having taken them out of this
water and drained, you range them in three quarters of a pound of sugar boiled
into a pretty strong syrup. When they shall have boiled eight or ten minutes in
it, skim them, let them cool and serve.

Note. The lit-de-verd plumbs are made in the same way. Whenever a plumb is not
ripe enough you may let it do a little longer in the water in which they are
boiled previous to the syrup, taking care however they should not come to mash
in it.

LXXVIII. The same for mirabelles, purple and black damask, Sainte-Catherine
and other plumbs.
Take any quantity of the abovementioned plumbs, we suppose two pounds. Pass
them in the boiling water without peeling them, especially the mirabelles, then
put them in a syrup of half a pound of sugar, and finish them like the
perdrigons.

LXXIX. Compottes of verjus in grain.
Take a pound or two of verjus in grain and the finest you can find; stone it
carefully with the point of a tooth-pick, and throw it in the mean while into
cold water. When all is done, take it out with a skimmer, and put it into
boiling water. Then take it out from the fire, and let it cool. Skim it again
and put it in a syrup of one pound of sugar, in which boil it gently over a
slow fire; and when the verjus begins to turn green, finish it quickly like the
other compottes, but take great care not to do the syrup too much.

LXXX. Compottes of peeled verjus.
Take the skin and the stones out of two pounds of verjus, and put it in a
bowl, in proportion as you do it. Then clarify one pound of sugar, which boil
into a syrup to ala-plume degree, and put in the peeled verjus, which you boil
also till you find it sufficiently done. Take care not to do it too much in
syrup for fear it should turn black.

Note. Muscadine grapes may be done just in the same manner.

LXXXI. The compottes of pears called muscat, the first and most early.
Peel two pounds of those pears, serape their tails, and cut off the end of
them. In proportion as you prepare them, throw them into cold water. When done,
take them out and drain them. Then put them in boiling water, and, when they
are softened and almost done, take them out of that water to put them into cold
again. When they have been there a while, take them out to drain, and put them
afterward in one pound of sugar boiling, wherein leave them till the syrup be
almost completed: then remove the pan from the fire, stir and skim them. Add
the juice of half a lemon; then let it cool and serve them.

You prepare in the same manner the sorts of pears called Rousselet,
Martin-sec, Jargonelle, and Blanquettes. But as they are larger than the
muscat, you may blanch them, that is to say, boil them in water before peeling.
As for the rest, there is no sort of difference in the process of making
compottes of them.

LXXXII. The compotte of the largest sorts of pears, such as Beurre,
Messire-jean, Bergamotte, Vertelongue, Bzidery, Mouille-bouche, Amadotte,
Doublefleur, Bon-chretien-d'hyver, Franc-real, etc. etc.
Boil in water any quantity of the abovementioned pears, till they are done.
Then peel them, core them, and throw them into cold water. Now melt a quantity
of sugar proportionable to that of your pears, in which you put them and boil
to a syrup, as for the other sorts of compottes. When done, take them from the
fire, and skim them well. Squeeze over the juice of half a lemon, and serve
them either warm or cold, as you like.

LXXXIII. A compotte of pears a-la-braise.
You may put a-la-braise all sorts of pears, especially of the large size
abovementioned. To do this you proceed as follows. Broil your pears over a
chasing-dish of bright and live coals: and, when sufficiently done, place them
a moment on the naked coals, that you may peel them the more easily and to
color them. Then peel and core them, and put them in a weak syrup, in which
boil them a little while, but not too much.

LXXXIV. A compotte of quinces.
The quinces are prepared in the same manner when a-la-braise. The white
quinces are best boiled in water first, before being put into the syrup, which
is made with the same quantity of sugar as for pears.

LXXXV. Compotte of apples, Portuguese fashion.
Cut a few apples by the middle into two halves, and core them. Then put them
on a silver plate with sugar under and over them. Set this plate on the stove
with fire underneath, (and cover it with such a lid as can admit, by means of a
rim railed round it at the top,) of some lighted charcoals put on it. Let the
apples do thus between these two fires till the sugar turns all brown and in
caramel, without however being burnt. Such compottes are served hot.

LXXXVI. A jelly-compotte of apples.
Cut into quarters, pare and core, a few golden pippins, and throw them into
cold water. In the mean while chop five or six more apples to pieces, and boil
them with the parings of the others in two quarts of water. Then strain all
through a flannel; and, in that liquor put one pound and a quarter of sugar,
then set it on the fire with the quarters of pippins which you first prepared.
Boil them thus gently for fear they should mash. When done, take the pan from
off the fire, and take the quarters out of the syrup, one by one, and range
them in order on a dish. Then set your syrup again on the fire and boil it till
it comes into a jelly, when cold you take it and lay it on your apples which
you thus cover with it. This compotte may keep for five or six days.

LXXXVII. A compotte of apples a-la-bouillonne.
Cut a few apples into two halves and core them. Range them in the pan, and for
the quantity of six or eight apples put one pint of water and a quarter of a
pound of sugar. Cover them over and set them on the fire to boil; then when the
liquor is almost all wasted, dress them on a dish and serve them.

The compottes of calvil apples are made in the same way.

CHAP. XV.
SECRETS relative to the Art of PREPARING SNUFF.
I. How to reduce tobacco into powder.
UNCORD the tobacco, and spread the leaves on a carpet to dry in the sun. Then
pound them in a mortar, and sift through a coarse sieve to get the coarsest
powder out of it. As for sifting, you must observe to do it in due proportion
as you pound it, and not to pound much at a time. You may also take another
method, that of grinding it in one of those small mills which are made on
purpose for grinding tobacco. By these means you may, without much trouble,
make it as coarse and as fine as you like, by screwing tighter or slacker the
nut.

II. How to purge snuff, and prepare it for admitting of odours.
Have a small tub pierced with a hole at bottom which you stop and unstop with
a cork as you want it. In this tub put a very thick and close weaved cloth
which you turn over the rim of the tub and six there by the outside. Put your
snuff in it, and pour water over it. After it shall have soaked thus
twenty-four hours, unstop the whole of the tub and let the water drain away,
wringing the cloth in which it is, to help the expression of the water. Repeat
this operation three different times to purge it the better. When this
operation is performed set the snuff to drying in the sun. When dry, put it
again in the tub in the same manner as before, and soak it again no more with
common water, but with some smelling ones, such as for example orangeflower
water, eau-d'ange, etc. Twenty-four hours after let the water run off and
drain, then set it in the sun to dry as before. In the mean while stir and
asperse it again now and then without smelling water. Such is the indispensible
preparation absolutely requisite to dispose snuff to receive the odor of
flowers. If you do not care to have it so perfectly nice, and should not like
to waste so much of it, you may give it but one wash of the common water. This
moderate purgation will do pretty well, especially if, while it is a drying in
the sun, you knead it the more often in proportion with your fragrant waters,
and let it dry each time between.

III. How to perfume snuff with flowers.
The tuberose, the jessamine, the orange flowers and those are the roses which
communicate the more easily their fragrancy to the snuff. To produce this, have
a box lined with white paper perfectly dry, in which make a bed of snuff the
thickness of an inch, then one of flowers, another of snuff and another of
flowers again, continuing so to do till you have employed all your snuff. After
having let this stratification subsist for twenty-four hours, separate the
flowers from the snuff by means of the sieve, and renew the same stratification
again as before with new flowers. Continue thus to do till you find that your
snuff has acquired a sufficient fragrancy from the flowers: then put it in lead
boxes to keep it.

IV. Another way to do the same.
There are people who make the stratification another way. They enclose their
flowers between sheets of white paper filled with pin-holes as thick as
possible; this bed they lay between two of snuff; and, as for the small
quantity which may have got in the papers through these holes, you sift it out
by means of a sheer horse-hair sieve. The flowers must be renewed four or five
times. This method seems the less troublesome, and the snuff catches the odor
nearly as well.

V. Another method.
A preparation of snuff may be made of an excessive nice fragrancy with buds of
roses. The process is this. Rob those buds of their green cup and the pistillum
which is in the middle, instead of which last you are skilfully to introduce a
clove without damaging and breaking or loosening the rose leaves which are
closely wrapped up one in another. Such buds, thus prepared, put into a glass
vessel well covered over with a bladder and a leather besides, and expose them
for a month in the sun, after which term you may make use of these buds as
before directed for the other flowers.

VI. Snuff of mille-fleurs.
The mille-fleurs snuff, or snuff of one thousand and one flowers, is made by
mixing together a number of various odoring flowers, managing the quantity of
each of them according to the greater or lesser degree of fragrancy they are
empowered with, so that none could be found to have a predominancy over the
others. When that is executed you proceed, as before directed, to the alternate
stratification of this mixture and of the snuff's powder.

VII. The odoring snuff after the method practiced at Rome.
Take the snuff after its being perfumed with flowers, and put it in a large
bowl or other proper vessel. Pour over it some white wine, with an addition, if
you choose, of essences of musk and amber, or any other such like odours. Then
stir your snuff and rub it all between your hands. In this manner you may have
snuff of whatever odor you desire, which to distinguish from each other, you
put into separate lead boxes with a particular mark.

VIII. The snuff with the odor of civett.
Take a little civet, in your hand with a little snuff; spread that civet, more
and more in bruising with your fingers and an addition of snuff. After having
mixed and remixed it thus in your hand with the whole quantity of snuff, put
all again together in its box as before. You may do the same with respect to
other odours.

IX. Amber-snuff.
As for the amber-snuff, you had better heat the bottom of a mortar, and pound
in it twenty grains of amber, adding by degrees one pound of snuff to it, which
you handle, rub and mix afterward with your hands, to introduce the odor the
^^^ter among it.

X. The odoring snuff, Malthese fashion.
Take a snuff ready prepared with orange-flower-water (as directed in this
chapter, art. ii.) then perfume it with amber as we have just said; after which
with ten grains of civit, which pound with a little sugar in a mortar, you,
introduce again your snuff by degrees to the quantity of one pound for these
ten grains, increasing either the snuff or the odours in the same proportion to
each other.

XI. The true Malthese method of preparing snuff.
Take rose tree and liquorice roots which you peel. Reduce them into powder and
sift it; then give it what odor you like, adding white wine, brandy or spirit
of wine, and mix your snuff well with this. Such is the true Malthese method of
preparing snuff.

XII. The Spanish method of preparing perfumed snuff.
1. Pound in a small mortar twenty grains of musk with a little sugar. Add by
degrees as much as one pound of snuff to it; then pound ten grains of civit,
and introduce your pound of musked snuff to it in a gradual manner as you did
before, and rub all together between your hands.

2. The Seville-snuff is the same with only an addition of twenty grains of
vanilla, an ingredient which enters in the composition of chocolate.

3. They who are fond of a milder and sweeter odor in their snuff may increase
the quantity of snuff for the prescribed doses of odours, or deminish the doses
of odours prescribed for the quantity of snuff. You must take great care not to
let odoring snuff be uncovered in the air, but to keep it very close for fear
it should lose its fragrancy.

4. As the Spanish snuff is excessively fine and drawing toward a reddish hue,
to imitate it in the above prescription, you must choose fine Holland well
purged reddened and granulated, pound and sift it through a very fine silk
sieve. Then you give it whatever odor you like, after having purged it in the
manner we prescribed in this chapter, art. ii.

5. There is no inconveniency in taking a snuff already prepared with flowers
to give it afterward, when you like an odor of musk, amber or other prefume.
On the contrary such a snuff is the readier to take the odours, and preserve
them so much the longer.

XIII. To give a red or yellow color to snuff.
Take the bulk of one or two nuts of red or yellow ocher, with which mix a
little white chalk to temperate the above colors at your pleasure. Grind either
of these ochers with three drachms of oil of almonds; then, continuing to grind
it on the stone, add by little at a time some water to it till you see the
paste admits of it freely and becomes very smooth and equal. Now take some gum
adragant water and introduce it likewise to the above paste, stirring and
grinding continually all the while. At last gather it out of the stone in a
large glazed bowl and dilute it in, and with, about one quart of common water,
or thereabouts. Then take your snuff well purged and prepared as in art. ii.
and throw it in this bowl, therein handle and rub it well to make it take color
more regularly and equally. When it is thus made all into a lump, let it rest
twenty-four hours before putting it to dry in the sun, which immediately after
that time you are to do, spreading it on a dry cloth and turning it now and
then to help its drying the faster. Then you gum it again by aspersion with gum
adragant pulverised and dissolved into some smelling water: or you may again
dip your hands into that water and rub your snuff between your hands thus
wetted; which last method is preferable, as it gums the snuff infinitely more
regular. Lastly dry it again in the sun; and, when perfectly dry, sift it
through the finest sieve you can find, and then it will be ready to admit of
whatever odor you please to impregnate i^ with.

CHAP XVI.
SECRETS relative to the art of taking out SPOTS and STAINS.
I. To take off iron-moulds from linen.
PUT boiling water in a bowl and spread the stained part, or parts of your
linen over it, so as to let it be well penetrated with the steam of the water.
Then rub the places with sorrel's juice and salt till they are perfectly and
thoroughly soaked with it. Such linen washed afterward in the lie of
wood-ashes, will be found to return entirely free from the iron mould spots it
had before.

II. To take off carriage-wheel's grease from clothes.
Rub the place with butter. Then with blotting paper and a hot iron, or a bit
of red-hot charcoal in a silver spoon, you may take all off as you would a drop
of wax or tallow on a cloth.

III. Against piss-spots.
Boil some chamber-lye and wash the place with it Then rinse it with clear
water.

IV. To take off all sorts of spots from cloth of whatever color it may be.
Take half a pound of crude honey, the yolk of a new laid egg, and the bulk of
a nut of ammoniac salt. Mix all well together, and put some on the spots which
happen to be on either silk or cloth. After having left it there a while, wash
the place with clear water, and the spot will disappear.

V. A general receipt against all sorts of spots, upon every sort of stuff.
A water impregnated with alkaline salt, black soap and bullock's gall, takes
off extremely well the greasy spots from any cloth or silk stuff.

VI. Against oil spots.
Take a piece of white soap which you shave very fine, and put in a quart
bottle, with a wide mouth and neck, half filled with lie. Add to this the bulk
of a nut of ammoniac salt, two yolks of eggs, cabbage juice and bullock's gall
a discretionable quantity, and in short, one ounce of salt of tartar in subtle
powder sifted. Stop the bottle well, shake it and expose it to a south fun for
four days. After that time, if you poor off that liquor on any oil spot and rub
it well with it in and outside, then let it dry, and wash it again with the
following composition of soap, that spot will entirely disappear.

VII. A washing ball to take off spots.
Take fuller's earth, or soft soap which mix and incorporate with vine brush
ashes, white chalk, alum and tartar pounded all together in a mortar and sifted
through a very fine silk sieve. When all is made into a paste, form your balls
with it and let them dry in the shade, To use them, rub any spotted place with
it and wash it after wards with clear water.

VIII. To take out pitch and turpentine spots.
Rub well the spot with oil of olive, which set to dry for one day and one
night. Then, with warm water and the above washing ball, you will entirely
ungrease the place.

IX. Against ink spots, whether on cloth or linen.
Wet immediately the place with lemons, or sorrel juice, or with white soap
diluted in vinegar.

X. Another more simple remedy against ink when just spilled.
Prejudice always did, and always will prove fatal, from the minutest to the
most interesting circumstance in life. The time which is spent in lamenting
over an accident, just happened before our own eyes, is but too often the only
one which could have saved and prevented the dire consequences of it, nay
perhaps repaired it entirely without leaving the least scar behind, had we ran
instantly to the remedy. Ink never does nor can spoil the cloth, stuff, silk,
lace, or linen on which it is spilled, unless it lies there to dryness. And it
is well known, on the other hand, that if you put as much water in your
ink-horn, as there is ink, you make it too pale: if twice, still more so: if
three, four, five, six, if twenty, if fifty times; then it will be such indeed
that it will be no more ink at all. What could a pint of ink do in a quart of
milk? A great deal of mischief without doubt. But, in fifty or a hundred
gallons nothing at all. By parity of reasoning it must be obvious that if on
the finest silk, cloth or velvet, muslin or lace ruffles, etc. a whole phial of
ink should be spilled, an undeterminate greater quantity of water than there
was ink, poured instantly on the place, by degrees and not all at once, must
weaken it to such a degree as to wash it off at last entirely. What reasoning
thus once dictated naturally, reiterated experience since proved: therefore,
here it is recommended. Sense only and judgment must be consulted in the
execution. As for example, if the ink be spilled on a ruffle or apron, etc.
while you have it on, let one hold the affected part between his two hands over
a basin and rub it while another is pouring gradually water from a decanter;
and let a whole pitcherful be used if necessary. If the ruffle, apron, etc. be
at liberty and not actually worn on, the place dipped into a basin filled with
water, and there squeezed and dipped in again, may do; provided you change the
water in abundance, every two or three squeezes. If the ink be spilled on a
green carpet table, it may immediately be taken out with a tea-spoon so that
any water at all shall hardly be wanted afterward, provided it has not laid
any time on it, and was only that instant spilled; as the down of the cloth
prevents the immediate soaking of the ink or any liquor indeed (except oil)
through and through. But if it have laid some time, let the time be ever so
long, provided it is still wet, by pouring a little fresh clean water at a time
on the place, and gathering it up each time with a spoon, and pressing hard to
squeeze it out of the cloth into the spoon again, you will at last bring it to
its natural color as if no such accident had ever happened. These few
circumstances explained, are sufficient to guide any one, who has a common
share of good sense and understanding, how to act on this principle in others.

XI. Against oil spots on satin, and other silk-stuffs, even on paper.
If the spot is fresh and just done, heat on the shovel some ashes from
calcined sheep's troters, and put some under and upon the place. Then, laying
something heavy upon it let it remain so for one night; the next morning the
spot ought to be gone: but, if not quite, renew the precept.

XII. A preparation of balls against spots.
Take half a pound of soap, four ounces of clay, and one of quicklime. Dilute
all with a little water, and make it into pills or small balls. With these rub
the spots, and wash the place afterward.

XIII. For silks.
If you rub the spots which are upon a silk with spirit of turpentine, they
will disappear: because the volatility of that spirit exhaling into vapor,
carries along with it the oil of the spot to which, on account of its
homogeneous quality, it communicates its volatility, by penetrating and
subdividing it infinitely.

XIV. To restore gold and silver laces to their former beauty.
Mix equal quantities of water, bullock's and jack's gall. With this
composition rub your gold or silver and and you will see it changing color
directly.

XV. To restore Turkey carpets to their first bloom.
Beat the carpet well first with a rod, till perfectly free from dust. Then, if
there be any spot of ink, take them out with a lemon, or with sorrel; and wash
the place afterward with clear water. Shake the rest of the water off, and let
it dry where you rubbed it with any. When dry, rub the carpet very hard all
over with the smoking hot crum of a white loaf: and when you find in the
evening, the skies clear and a likelihood of being a fine night, let the carpet
be put out for two or three such nights.

XVI. To make tapestries resume their first brightness when their colors have
been tarnished and spoiled.
Shake and clean well the tapestry by rubbing it all over with white chalk
which you leave on it for about one day. Next, with a rough hair brush, get all
that chalk out again, and put on fresh, which leave as before. Then with the
same rough hair brush get this out also, and beat it soundly with a rod, and
brush it afterward with the soft cloth-brush. This operation will restore a
tapestry to its pristine state.

XVII. To take off all the spots of wax from the velvet of any color, except
the crimson.
Take the crum of a stale loaf, and cut a thick slice out of it, which toast,
and apply, when burning hot, on the spot of wax; when cooled, renew it till all
the wax is soaked out of the velvet.

XVIII. To take the same off from silks and camblet.
Put on each wax spot, some soft soap, and set in the sun till grown warm; then
by washing the place with clean water, the spot will disappear.

XIX. To wash a gold or silver, or silk embroidery, on either linen or any
stuff whatever, and render it like new.
Take bullock's gall, one pound; soap and honey, three ounces of each; and
Florentine orrice, about the same quantity in subtle powder. Put all in a
glass vessel, in which mix it well, into a paste, and let it be exposed for ten
days in the sun. When you are ready to use it make an infusion of bran, which
boil in water and strain through a cloth. Then smear the work over with the
above-described paste, in such places as you want to clean, and wash them
afterward with the said bran water, renewing this till it receives no more
alteration in its color. Wipe then well the places with a white cloth: and wrap
the work in a clean napkin to set it in the sun to dry, after which pass it
through the polishing and lustring press, and the work will be as fine and
bright as when new.

XX. To take the spots off from silk and woollen stuffs.
Take French starch, without any mixture of indigo or blue whatever, which
dilute in a cup with good brandy, like a thick pap. Of this paste, put on each
spot, and, when dry, rub it off and brush it. If the spot is not quite gone at
the first time, renew the operation, and it certainly will at the second.

XXI. To color velvet in red.
Take four ounces of adragant, and one of Arabic gums, both of which
pulverise. Put this powder in clean water, wherein let it dissolve for two or
three days. After which time, steep a sponge in the liquor, and rub the wrong
side of the velvet. If, after being dry, you find it not high-colored enough,
renew it and the effect will surprise you.

XXII. To revive the color of a cloth.
Pour one quart of water on one pound of burnt potashes. Twelve hours after
decant the water off in another vessel, and put in a handful of a dry
moth-mullein's leaves, with two bullocks galls. Boil all together till the
leaves go to the bottom. Then set this water for a few days in the sun. Then
putting in it whatever color you want, boil it along with the cloth in that
lie, and let it thus soak afterward for fourteen or fifteen days, then the
cloth will have resumed its primary color.

XXIII. To take the spots off from a white cloth.
Boil two ounces of alum for half an hour, in a pint or a pint and a half of
water; then put in a piece of white soap, with another pound of alum; and
having soaked thus three days in the cold, you may with it, wash all the ^pots
of any white cloth whatever.

XXIV. To take off the spots from crimson and other velvets.
1. Take one pint of lie made of vine-brunch ashes, in which dissolve half an
ounce of alum's (...). When settled, strain it through a cloth; then take
a^^ther dram of alum, half a dram of Spanish, and as much of soft soap; a
scruple of common, and half a dram of ammoniac salts; a calf's gall, and a
little celandine's juice. All being well mixed, strain and keep it for use.

2. Before using, take the quantity you think to have need of in a cup, in
which put a little-Brasil wood and bourre d'ecarlatte (or goat's hair from the
dyers, dyed with madder) to boil a bubble or two, then strain through a cloth.
In that state, your preparation will be sit to take off all the spots from
crimson either cloth or velvet.

Note. For cloths or velvets of others colors tinge your liquor with bourre, or
goat's hair, of the same color.

XXV. To take off an oil spot from cloth.
Take oil of tartar which put on the spot, then wash it immediately, first with
lukewarm water then with two or three cold waters, and it will be perfectly
cl^ansed.

XXVI. A composition of soap to take off all sorts of spots.
1. Take one pound of Venetian white soap, six yolks of eggs, and half a
spoonful of salt pounded. Incorporate all together with a sufficient quantity
of the juice from the leaves of white beet. Make this composition into small
cakes, which dry in the shade.

2. To use them, wet the place of the cloth where the spot is, with clear
water, and rub it over on both sides with the said soap; then, washing it, the
spot will disappear.

XXVII. To take the spots off from a white silk or crimson velvet.
Wet the place well with brandy of three rectifications, or with the very best
spirit of wine, then smear it over with the white of an egg, and set it to dry
in the sun. When dry, wash the place with clean water, passing and squeezing it
between your fingers; and, if the spot is not gone at the first operation, it
will not fail at the second, therefore renew it again.

CHAP. XVII.
SECRETS relative to the ART of FISHING, ANGLING, BIRD-CATCHING, etc.
I. How to entice a great quantity of fish to resort to a certain place.
YOU may draw all the fish into whatever place you find most commodious, by
throwing in the following composition. -- Take bullock's, goat's and sheep's
blood, which is found in curds among the entrails in the body of the animal
fresh killed, thyme, origan, flour, marjoram, garlic, wine-lye, and some suet
or marrow of these same ingredients together, and make them in small pills,
which scatter in that place of the river or pond where you wish to have the
fish come.

II. Another receipt to the same purpose.
Pound nettles with joubarbe, and some of that grass called quintefolium; add
some wheat boiled in marjoram, and thyme water, well pounded also with the
rest. Put of that composition in your net, and it will soon be full.

III. Another way.
Grind together coculus Indicus with cumin and some old cheese, and make a
paste of it with wine-lye and wheat flour, when all is well incorporated, make
it into pills of the size of a pea. Throw them into a river or pond wherein you
know there are a great quantity of fish. In a part where the water is clear and
undisturbed. Every fish who shall swallow those pills will be to intoxicated
that they will all come to the side of the water, and you will be able to take
them with your hand. In a short time afterward their intoxication will go off,
and they will become again as brisk as ever they were before eating that bait.

IV. Another way.
Marjoram, marigolds, wheat-flour, and rancid butter, goat's suet, and lumbrici
terreni, (or earth worms) pounded and mixed all together, are of infinite
service to entice all sorts of fish into the net.

V. Another superstitious method.
As there is no extirpating from the narrow minds of low people, and that
extirpating and exclaiming against it, is by no means persuasive nor
successful, we cannot refrain however mentioning the following receipt which
has been given us by an old obdurate fisherman, whom nothing could have
persuaded against the absurdity of it. It will excite the laughter of some of
our readers, while it will not fail to meet with simpletons enough to try again
the experiment, in order to convince themselves of the absurdity of such and
the like prescriptions, as there are plenty in old women's books, for the
head-achs, the gout, the rheumatism, the scaldings, the hooping-cough, etc.
etc. -- "Whenever you want to assemble a (...) (...) of fish in a particular
place in the sea take three shells of them which grow among the rocks; and
having taken out the fish which is in them, write with your own blood, in the
inside of them, the two following words JA SABBATH, and throw them in that part
of the sea where you would have the fish gather. In less than the twinkling of
an eye you will see a prodigious quantity of them flocking there."

The absurdity of this secret is glaring, and stares one in the face in every
word which composes it. First, the two words here recommended are meant for two
Hebrew ones, the first of which, JA is cramped, and broken for JEHOVAH, which
signifies God. Now if we may suppose any virtue in a word whatever, there can
surely be none in the broken limbs of that word, therefore, the pretended
secret must fail here and prove unsuccessful at the very first step whenever JA
is used instead of JEHOVAH. -- Secondly if any virtue might be supposed to be
attached to these words, that virtue must more naturally be bound in them when
spelled and written in their proper, peculiar, and original dress, than when
painted by the borrowed uncertain and contested figures peculiar to another
language; whence it is plain that ^^^^ must be preferable in every respect,
since they really express what is meant, and are not liable to the accident of
the corrupted JA for JEHOVAH. -- A great deal more could be said on this
subject, was it in a more proper place; but we forbear carrying the scope of
our reflections any farther, in a book wherein on philosophical, still less
theological matters, can with any propriety, find admittance. Therefore, we
must here drop the subject, till we meet with another opportunity, in a
performance better calculated for, and appropriated to the purpose.

VI. Another on the same subject.
If you want to catch a great number of craw-fish, you have but to find out the
places wherein they harbor; then put into your nets some bits of goat's
bowels, or skinned frogs, the smell of which bait will draw every one out of
their holes into the net.

VII. To prevent the birds from spoiling a field sown with grain.
Get the largest toad you can find, and confine it in a new earthen pot along
with a bat. At the same time write with a crow's blood, the word Achizech in
the inside of the lid of the said pot, which bury in the middle of the sown
field. Then never fear ever to see the birds coming near that field. When the
corn comes to ripen, you must take care to dig out that pot, and throw it far
off from the field in some lay-stall. -- Another most absurd superstitions
receipt.

VIII. How to get a good many birds.
Have an owl or chough which tie in the night to a tree in the forest. Near him
place a large lighted candle, which shall blaze very much. Then let two or
three people make a noise about the tree with drums. The birds will come in
crowds to (...) (...) the owl to make war against him, and you (...) (...) have
an opportunity to kill numbers of them by firing in the midst of them with
small s^ot.

IX. Another way.
Put a-soaking some birds seed in good brandy, with a little white hellebore,
and place it in some part of your garden as a bait for the birds which frequent
it; and all those who shall eat of that seed will so suddenly be intoxicated by
it, that they will suffer themselves to be taken by the hand.

X. Another way.
If you want to catch live swallows or crows, make papers in the form of a
sugar loaf, with some strong brown or blue paper, the entrance of which rub in
the inside with bird-lime, and bait at the bottom with some stinking piece of
meat or carrion to entice them. By these means when they go to thrust their
heads in those papers to take the meat, the lime catches hold of their feathers
all about their neck and bead, and caps them in such a manner that they find
themselves blinded, and cannot fly when they go to rise for it, which gives an
opportunity of taking them alive with the hand.

XI. Another way.
Mix a little nux vomica among the seed, which you lay as a bait for birds. As
soon as they shall have eat any of it they will fall into a swoon, and it will
be easy to lay hold of them with the hand.

XII. To preserve and multiply pigeons.
In a large devecote, prepare the following food, which will induce your
pigeons to love their cote, and also to bring you a great many strangers when
they go abroad. -- Take thirty pounds of millet, three of cumin, five of honey,
half a pound of bishop's-wort, otherwise costus, two pounds of agnus castus's
seed, which boil in river water to the total evaporation of the last. Then in
its stead pour a gallon and a half, or two gallons of red port, with about
eight pounds of old mo^tar well pulverised, which set on the fire again for
about half an hour to concoct. Thus all those ingredients will harden and form
a lump, which, if placed in the middle of the dovecote, will in a short time
amply reward you for your expense.

XIII. Another for the same purpose.
If you hang in your dovecote a couple of the oldest stinking and dry salt
cod-fish, you will, by this means, not only keep your own pigeons safe at home,
but also cause a desertion among all those of your neighbors; for the smell of
that fish, of which they are excessively fond will reach them many miles off.

XIV. How to fatten pigeons.
Experience shows that nothing will keep pigeons in better order, and fatten
them sooner, than a paste made of fried beans, with cumin and honey.

CHAP. XVIII.
SECRETS relative to subjects entertaining and useful.
I. To whiten wax.
MELT it in a pipkin without boiling. Then take a wooden pestle, which steep in
the wax two fingers' deep, and plunge immediately into cold water to loosen the
wax from it, which will come off like sheets of paper. When you have thus got
all your wax out of the pipkin, and made it into flakes, put it on a clean
towel and expose it in the air on the grass till it is white. Then melt it
again, and strain it through a muslin to take all the dirt out of it, if there
be any.

II. Another way of whitening wax in large manufactories.
1. Melt your wax in a large copper, such as those brewing or washing coppers
which are fixed in mortar. Near to the copper, have a kind of trough, made of
oak or deal, and six or seven feet long, at the farther end of which a cock of
cold water will be placed in the wall to fill it, and at the other, toward the
copper, a tub laid upon it, to receive the wax from the copper. Let that tub
have also a cock at four fingers breath from the bottom, and in that tub pour,
with a wooden bowl, the melted hot wax from the copper. Cover it with a blanket
in four doublets to make it retain its heat, and let it rest thus a couple of
hours to give time to the dirt and nastiness which may happen to be in it to
settle at the bottom of the tub. When that is done, fill your trough with cold
water; then have a kind of tin basket to sit the width of the trough so as to
fit upon its edges, and bored at bottom with twelve or sixteen small holes, at
equal and regular distances, and which you place so as to receive the melted
wax from the cock of the tub, and render it in the trough through the said
small holes of its bottom, while, with a polished wooden stick or roller, under
the tub, and armed at both ends with iron in the form of a spit, and half of
the thickness of which enters into the water, while the other keeps above it,
you keep continually turning equally and regularly. This process will make the
wax stake in the water into small ribbons as thin as silver paper. Now in sine
clean hampers, or hand baskets, made of white peeled willow twigs, take your
wax from the trough with a wooden shovel, and carry it to an open field, where
lay it thick upon a thin coarse cloth in the sun, and turn it every other day
once, for two weeks, running, after which time it will be of a perfect
whiteness.

2. Now clean well your copper, and put in alum water to warm, in which throw
your whitened wax, and stir well. When melted, renew the operation as before,
and carry it again to the open field to expose it in the sun. In a week's time
it will have its whiteness in the highest degree it can be carried to.

3. Melt it then for the third and last time, and put it in small round cakes,
which is done by casting it in small moulds carved purposely on several boards.

III. How to multiply wax.
Take bullock's suet, which pound well, and put asoaking for seventy-two hours,
in the strongest French wine-vinegar, then (...) afterward for forty-eight
hours, keeping perpetually skimming, as long as there appears any scum upon it.
When that is done, let it cool a while, and throw it afterward into a tub of
cold water, wherein beat and stir it till it resumes its wonted consistence and
firmness. Then put it again into other fresh vinegar, and repeat they very same
process (...) through and exactly for three different times. Next to that,
gather the tops of rosemary, sage, bay, and mint, which pound and boil well in
water, then strain through a double flannel bag. In this water, boil for the
last time your prepared suet as before, and after it shall have boiled there
one hour it will have no more any bad smell. To color it you must put one
dram of saffron to each pound of suet, and melt it afterward with an equal
quantity of real beeswax, then it will be impossible to discover the mixture.

IV. To make mutton suet candles, in imitation of wax candles.
1. Throw quicklime in melted mutton suet; the lime will fall to the bottom,
and carry along with it all the nastiness of the suet, so as to leave it as
pure and fine as wax itself.

2. Now, if with one part of that suet, you mix three of real wax, you will
have very fine bougies, or real wax candles, in which nobody will ever be able
to find out the mixture, not even in the moulding and casting way for figures
or ornaments.

V. To make soap.
They generally make three sorts of soap, white, black, and marbled. The white,
or, as it is called, the Genoa soap, is made with wood-ashes, Alicant kali,
lime and olive oil. The black is made of the same materials, with this
exception however, that it is made with the faeces and tartar of the oils. The
marbled is made with Alicant kali, bourde, and lime; and when it is almost
done, they take some red earth, which they call cinnabar, with copperas; they
boil these together, and throw it in the copper wherein the soap is. It
occasions a blue marbling, as long as the copperas keeps the better of the two
ingredients; but as soon as the cinnabar has at last absorbed the vitriol, this
blue hue subsides entirely, and the red alone predominates. -- In order
therefore to form the soap, the method is to make different lies with all these
sorts of matters; and, when they are sufficiently charged (which beginners know
by their carrying an egg swimming, without its sinking to the bottom, and
experienced soapboilers are judges of by degustation, and the time they have
been at work) they put all these lies in proper coppers, and pour at the same
time, in Provence and Languedoc, oil of olive; in Germany, grease; and in
England, oil of fish. That done they boil all together with a great blasting
fire; and eighteen, or twenty days afterward these oils have so well aspired
all the salts of the lie, that this is left quite flat and untasty. Then by the
cocks which are at the bottom of the coppers, the water or lie is let out, and
the lump of soap taken out and placed to dry in drying houses built on purpose,
to make it take sufficient consistence, and such as we know it to have.

VI. To prevent any thing from burning in the fire.
Pound into powder cherry-tree gum and alum in equal quantities, and imbibe
that powder with strong wine-vinegar, which leave thus a digesting on warm
ashes, for the space of twenty-four hours. If with this composition you rub any
thing and throw it on the fire, it will not be consumed by it.

VII. To prevent burning one's fingers in melted lead.
Take two ounces of bol armenian, one of quicksilver, half a one of camphire,
and two of brandy. Mix all together with the pestle in a brass mortar, and rub
your hands with this composition, before steeping them into a pot of melted
lead, and this will have no effect upon them.

VIII. A fire which cannot be extinguished by water.
Take five ounces of gum powder; saltpeter, three; brimstone, two; camphire,
rosin, and turpentine, one of each. Mix all together, and imbibe it with
rectified oil of rosiny fir tree. If you fill balls with this composition, and
throw them thirty feet deep in the water, they will burn still, even if you
cover them entirely with mould.

IX. To prevent the oil of a lamp from smoking.
Distill some onions, and put of the distilled liquor at the bottom of the lamp,
and the oil over it, then you will see the oil will give no offensive smoke.

X. Another receipt for the same purpose.
Melt some May butter on the fire, without frying or boiling it, and throw
common exsiccated salt in it. That salt will go to the bottom, and carry along
with it the watery and earthen particles of the butter, so that this will turn
into a very fine, clear, and limpid oil, which, when burnt in the lamp, will
render no smoke.

XI. To make an incombustible wick.
Take a long piece of feathered alum, which cut of what size you like, and bore
in its length several holes with a large needle; then put this wick in the
lamp: the oil will ascend through these holes, and if you light it, you will
see the effect of it.

XII. A stone which is inflammable with water.
Take quicklime, refined saltpeter, Alexandrian tutty, and calaminary stone,
in equal quantities, with brimstone and camphire, of each two quarts. Put all
into subtle powder, and sift it through the finest sieve. Then put all into a
new piece of cloth, and tie it very close and tight. Put this knot into a
crucible, which cover with another crucible, and lute well with greasy clay.
Let the lute and all be set in the sun, or over a baker's oven, to dry. After
which time place these crucibles in a brick kiln, and do not take them out
before the bricks are baked. Then you will find a stone, which the least drop
of water will inflame, so as to light a match if you put it to it. To put it
out you only blow upon it.

XIII. A receipt to make the true phosphorus, extracted from urine, and which
is inflammable by the air, so that two pieces of wood may be lighted by it.
Put a large quantity of chamber lie in bottles, which set in the sun during
the dog days, till the urine become entirely foetid. In proportion as the urine
diminishes in the bottles by the evaporation the heat occasions, let them be
filled again by pouring from the one into the others but not by any fresh
urine. When it is come to its utmost degree of corruption, put it into a glass
retort on a sand bath; and having luted a bladder for receiver, there will
arise first a spirit, and next a phlegm. When the distillation is ended, and
you see that nothing more arises, let the retort cool, and unlute it to fill it
again with new urine of the same degree of corruption as the last. Lute and
distill again as you did before, first the spirit, and then the phlegm,
continuing so to do (that is to say to unlute, fill again and distill) till you
find you have got at the bottom of the retort a good quantity of faeces. --
Observe and be very careful at every distillation not to force the distillation
beyond the phlegm. But when it comes for the last time, re-adapt the bladder,
and give the gradual rising fire till the oil ascends in which case, keep up
your fire to that degree, and when you see it stops, then is the time to
increase your fire, to force out any thing which can be forced and distilled
from it. When that is done, let the resort cool, and break it. Therein you will
find two sorts of matters; the one rare and spongy, which occupies the upper
part, and another under, very nasty and tartarous. Separate carefully, and
dexterously with a wooden knife, or spatula, the uppermost matter from the
undermost. Put the spongy one in a new retort, and give a gradual fire on the
sand bath. The first which arises will be an oil which you put aside: the next
will be a matter not unlike melted sulphur. Then take the oil which first
ascended, and mix it with that of the preceding distillation, which pour all
together on the residue of this second one, and set it on a very slow fire, to
exhaust gently all the humidity from it. Then empty this humidity or phlegm out
of the receiver, and replace it with clear and clean water; and, having
re-adapted it to the retort, distill all your greasy and bituminous oil; it will
come out like stars and spangles of fire which will fall into the receiver. But
then is the time to take care and not be too hasty by pushing the fire too
hard, for you would cause the breaking of the retort, and lose at once all the
fruit of you labor. -- The operation being therefore well conducted
throughout, you will find your matter at the bottom of the receiver: break it
into several pieces, put it in a phial with water, and cork it well. Such is
the true process to be observed in making the phosphorus from urine, which had
not hitherto been faithfully and accurately described in books of this nature,
and which we here publish from experience.

FINIS.
[ Printed by W. W. WOODWARD.]


