PLAN OF ASSOCIATION OF THE North American LAND COMPANY. ESTABLISHED FEBRUARY,
1795.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. AITKEN AND SON, MARKET STREET. M,DCC,XCV.

NORTH AMERICAN LAND COMPANY.
THE SUBSCRIBERS HERETO having, at a great expense of money and time, with much
industry acquired a large and valuable property, consisting of lands in the
States of Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia and
Kentucky, which have been chosen or selected (in preference to other tracts) in
consideration of the good quality of the soil, advantageous position, certainty
of title, and other circumstances that induced them, as purchasers, to give
such preference, they now offer a plan expressed in the articles of agreement
hereto annexed by which all persons who have money may, if they please,
participate in the advantages resulting from the purchase, sale and improvement
of these valuable estates.

THE lands upon which this plan is grounded amount to SIX MILLION OF ACRES,
agreeably to the shedule thereof hereto annexed, which are valued, one with
another, at the average price of half a dollar per acre or three million of
dollars being the capital stock; this, divided upon thirty thousand shares,
gives one hundred dollars per share at which the proprietors agree to sell in
the first instance.

THE titles to these estates are vested in trustees as joint tenants in trust
to convey the same to purchasers conformably to the articles of agreement
hereto annexed, the moneys arising from the sales thereof are for the use and
account of the holders or possessors of the shares in the stock of the North
American Land Company.

ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT indented made this twentieth day of February one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, BY AND BETWEEN the Honorable Robert
Morris, Esquire, of the City of Philadelphia, John Nicholson, Esquire, of the
said City of Philadelphia, and James Greenleaf, Esquire, Consul from the United
States at Amsterdam, but now in New York, of the one part, and those who shall
become purchasers, owners or holders of shares in the North American Land
Company of the other part.

FIRST. This association shall be styled "THE NORTH AMERICAN LAND COMPANY."

SECOND. Every owner of one or more shares shall become a member thereof, and a
party to these articles in virtue of such ownership, as fully to all intents
and purposes whatever as if such owner had actually signed and sealed these
presents, and cease to be so when he parts with his share or shares.

THIRD. The capital stock in this company consists in six millions of acres of
land situate in the States of Pennsylvania, Virginia, Kentucky, North Carolina,
South Carolina and Georgia; the titles to which are vested in Thomas Willing,
Esquire, now president of the bank of the United States, John Nixon, Esquire,
now president of the bank of North America, and John Barclay, Esquire, now
president of the bank of Pennsylvania, IN TRUST to convey the same agreeably to
these articles,

FOURTH. Where two or more persons shall claim the same land under different
contracts with the board of managers, or where any person or persons shall
claim a tract or tracts of land under contract or contracts with the board of
managers and the said board shall dispute such claim, in such cases a suit or
suits may be commenced against the said board, in the county of Philadelphia,
in the supreme court of Pennsylvania, or in the federal circuit court of
Pennsylvania, by the person or persons claiming, and one or more feigned issues
joined in order to determine the right of the parties and trials had thereon,
in the city of Philadelphia, and the said board shall request the trustees to
convey the lands so claimed, to the person or persons in whose favor such
determination shall be had, and if the said board shall not agree to the
commencement of such suit and to form such feigned issue or issues, or shall
not request the trustees to convey to the person or persons requesting such
suit to be commenced or in whose favor such determination shall pass, such
person shall be deemed and taken to be in full and perfect possession of the
disputed premises, and the trustees being served with a notice in writing, that
the said board refused to agree to the commencement of such suit, or to form
such issue or issues or refused or neglected to request the said trustees to
convey to such person or persons in whose favor such determination passed,
shall be deemed to hold the legal estate therein, in trust for such person or
persons and shall in three months from the service of such notice convey the
same accordingly, unless the said board shall within the said three months
agree to the commencement of such suit or request, the trustees to convey to
the person or persons in whose favor such determination shall pass, and where
any person has any demand upon or cause of complaint against the company (other
than a claim of title to lands) that cannot be amicably adjusted by the board,
a suit shall be commenced by such person against the board, in the supreme
court of Pennsylvania, or in the federal circuit court of Pennsylvania, and one
or more feigned issues joined in order to try the right of the party and
ascertain the quantum of damages, and a trial had thereon in the city of
Philadelphia and if after a certificate of the verdict and judgment in such
trial shall be served upon the board and upon the secretary, the sum recovered
and the costs of such suit shall not be paid to the party, he may then maintain
his action against the board for money had and received to his use and the
board shall be personally liable to the payment of such sum, unless they can
show that they had not at the time such certificate was served upon them or at
any time afterward moneys of the company in their hands sufficient to pay such
sum and such costs.

FIFTH. The said capital stock in lands shall be represented by thirty thousand
shares or actions of two hundred acres each so as that every person holding a
share or shares will be entitled to one thirty thousandth part of the said
capital stock of lands or the moneys and profits resulting therefrom upon each
share.

SIXTH. The affairs and business of this company shall be conducted by a board
of managers, to be elected at their office in the city of Philadelphia on the
thirty first day of December in every year unless when that day happens on a
Sunday and then on the next day, by the holders of shares or actions each share
entitling the holder to a vote in the said election to be given personally or
by proxy duly authorized; the following form must be executed by a share-holder
to entitle his proxy to a vote, and acknowledged by the party or proved by the
oath of one of the witnesses before a notary public or some magistrate
authorized by the law of the country where the person executing such proxy
shall be to take such acknowledgement or proof and the same certified under
some authentic public seal "Know all men by these presents that I (...) of
(...) do hereby appoint (...) to be my substitute for and in my name and behalf
to vote at (...) election of a president member or members of the board of
managers or secretary of the North American Land Company as fully as I might or
could was I personally present, IN witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand
and seal this (...) day of (...) one thousand (...) hundred (...) Seal."

SEVENTH. The board of managers shall consist of a president and four members
to be chosen from among the share-holders of whom the president and two members
or three members, in case the president shall be absent shall be a board
competent to transact business, a majority to prevail where more than three of
the board vote, but where only three vote, they are to be unanimous. They shall
have a stated meeting on one day (to be fixed on by themselves) in every week
and shall meet as much oftener as the business of the company may require.

EIGHTH. The said board for the present year one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, must be named within articles as there are not at present any
share-holders to elect, and accordingly Robert Morris, Joseph Ball, Thomas
Fitzsimons, John Vaughan and John Nicholson are hereby nominated and appointed
the board of managers (and shall choose from amongst themselves a president)
until the thirty first day of December next when the first election is to be
held. The said board and all future boards shall have authority to employ a
secretary, clerk or clerks, office-keeper or runner, and occasionally counsel
learned in the law and scriveners, and also one or more agent or agents,
surveyor or surveyors, to be stationed at the most proper and convenient places
for making surveys and sales of the land belonging to the company* and who
shall be allowed such salaries or compensations for their respective services
as may be agreed to by the president and board of managers on behalf of the
company.

NINTH. The board of managers shall have authority to sell or contract either
by themselves or by their agents for the sale of any lands belonging to the
company* preferring such purchasers as shall engage to become settlers or to
place settlers on the lands they buy. The board are to obtain the highest
prices they can, and may give such credit as they shall judge to consist with
the real interest of the company. The board of managers shall also have power
and they are hereby authorized to lay out and open roads, to lay out a town or
towns and sell the lots therein and to improve upon such tracts of land
belonging to the company as they shall think proper, one or two farms, of from
five hundred to one thousand acres and thereon to erect a dwelling house, barn
and other needful outhouses, a saw-mill and grist-mill at the expense and for
account of the company, all which may be occupied (upon terms to be agreed on
by the board of managers) by the agents or surveyors they may employ to sell
and settle the said tracts, the said farms and improvements to be finally sold
for the benefit of the company.

TENTH. The board of managers shall, whenever they make sale of any lands
belonging to this company, deposit the money received for the same whether in
whole or in part in one of the three banks already mentioned (that is to say)
the bank of the United States, the bank of North America or the bank of
Pennsylvania, opening an account for the North American Land Company with the
bank in which the deposit is made, and the moneys so deposited shall be subject
solely to the drafts of the president of the board of managers attested by the
secretary and expressed to be signed in presence of the board, the draft
mentioning the purpose for which it is drawn and that it is for the use and
service of the company.

ELEVENTH. All covenants articles of agreement or contracts made by the board
of managers or by their agents, for the sale of lands shall be to and in the
name of the individuals composing the board and shall be to them and the
survivor of them and the executors and administrators of such survivor to this
intent expressly, that suits shall be brought in their names for the use of the
said company, and that if such persons shall cease to become members of the
board their suits may be brought and maintained in the name of them or the
survivor of them, or the executors or administrators of the survivor of them
for the use of the said company, and such covenants, articles of agreement and
contracts shall be deposited with the secretary in their office for safe
keeping and for the purpose of collecting the payments which may be stipulated
therein as they become due: all moneys received thereon or from any other
source on account of the company shall be deposited in the same manner and upon
the same conditions as mentioned in the preceding article.

TWELFTH. The trustees in whom the titles to the lands of this company are
vested shall in case of the death of any one of their number immediately after
such event convey by a deed to be prepared and presented by the board of
managers a joint tenancy with themselves to such person as the board of
managers shall choose for a successor to such deceased trustee.

THIRTEENTH. The trustees for the time being shall upon receiving a request in
writing signed by the president and board of managers attested by the secretary
execute a deed or deeds of conveyance in fee simple to the purchaser or
purchasers for any tract or tracts of land which may have been sold by the
board or their agents, it being first certified by the said president and
attested by the secretary in the manner as before provided to the said trustees
that the consideration money has been paid or secured to be paid, if paid,
that it has been deposited agreeably to the tenth article; if secured, that
such securities have been deposited agreeably to the eleventh article.

FOURTEENTH. The secretary shall for the present year be appointed by the
president and board of managers but in future shall be elected by the
share-holders, at the same time and place of election of the president and
managers, and shall keep records in a book to be opened by him for that purpose
of all deeds of conveyance executed by the trustees and of all articles of
agreement, covenants, mortgages, etc. that concern the company, which book
shall be produced at every meeting of the board, and the original papers shall
be produced whenever called for by the board.

FIFTEENTH. The board of managers or their agents may covenant to make title to
purchasers when the payments are completed or title may be granted at the time
of sale and mortgage, or the lands be taken to secure the payments agreed on.

SIXTEENTH. The secretary shall attend every meeting of the board of managers;
he shall keep regular minutes of their proceedings; he shall summon such
meetings when directed by the president or upon application of any two or more
members of the board or upon application of twenty share-holders by sending a
notice in writing to the president and to each member naming the time and place
of such meeting.

SEVENTEENTH. Vacancies which may happen in the board of managers by death,
resignation or removal to a distance of ten miles from the city of Philadelphia
of any member or members may, and shall be supplied by an election of the board
out of other share-holders residing in the city of Philadelphia for the
remainder of the year until the next general election by the share-holders and
in case of death resignation or absence of the president or secretary the said
board of managers shall choose a president and appoint a secretary pro tempore
or for the remainder of the year as the case may require.

EIGHTEENTH. The secretary shall provide a set of books of account for the
concerns of the company wherein shall be regularly entered a proper account of
all sales made, of all moneys received and paid, of all notes, bonds, mortgages
and specialties of every sort and kind, and of all expenditures and these
accounts shall be settled and adjusted so as that an abstract thereof shall
together with the said books be laid before the share-holders at every annual
meeting to be held for the purpose of electing the board of managers, and at
every such meeting the board of managers shall give a full and fair account of
their proceedings and of the actual state of the company's affairs, and in
order to give time for the secretary to prepare the accounts and statements,
the transfer of shares shall be suspended from the twentieth to the thirty
first days of December inclusively in every year.

NINETEENTH. The board of managers shall provide an office in the city of
Philadelphia wherein to hold their meetings and the secretary shall give a
constant attendance therein, day by day, at such hours as may be fixed on by
the board of managers to perform the duties of his station and for the purpose
of laying before any share-holder that may desire it, the book of minutes, book
of records, book of accounts, and to give such other information respecting the
estate and affairs of the company as will convey a true idea of its actual
situation.

TWENTIETH. The certificates for shares or actions shall be transferable at the
pleasure of the holder, but the transfers must be made by the holder in person
or by his attorney or legal representative at the office of the board of
managers in presence of the secretary, who shall keep a record of all transfers
in a book to be provided and kept for that purpose, which transfers shall be
signed by the person transferring who shall also deliver up the old certificate
or certificates to be cancelled and filed, and new one's shall be issued to the
same amount to the transferer. Persons wanting to transfer shares as attorneys
must produce a power in the following form "Know all men by these presents that
(...) do make constitute and appoint (...) to be (...) true and lawful attorney
for (...) and in (...) name to sell, assign and transfer (...) stock or shares
standing in (...) name in the books of the North American Land Company, with
power also an attorney or attorneys under (...) for the purpose to make and
substitute and to do all lawful acts requisite for effecting the premises
hereby ratifying and confirming all that (...) said attorney or (...)
substitute or substitutes shall do therein by virtue hereof, In witness whereof
(...) have hereunto set (...) hand and seal the (...) day of (...) in the year
of our Lord one thousand (...) hundred and (...) And the same shall be
acknowledged proved and certified in same manner and form as is before provided
with respect to the execution of proxies.

TWENTY-FIRST. The president and board of managers shall cause a statement of
the company's sales and receipts to be made out and printed annually or if they
see proper half yearly one copy of which shall at the time be forwarded to
every share-holder that may leave his address at the office for that purpose at
his expense and as he shall direct.

TWENTY-SECOND. The board of managers shall in the course of the last ten days
of the months of December in every year during the existence of this company
cause the accounts of the company to be made up, and after paying office-rent
salaries and contingent charges and after reserving such as they may think
necessary for a contingent fund not exceeding four thousand dollars, they shall
declare a dividend of the remaining balance of the cash in hand by dividing the
same into thirty thousand parts, and allowing one of those parts to each share
dividend so made shall be advertised in the public newspapers and the
share-holders be notified that they may personally or by their attorney or
legal representative apply at the company's office and receive payment, and if
at any time the receipt of moneys on account of the company should be so great
previous to the end of the year as to admit of more than one dividend, the
president and board of managers may in their discretion declare one or more
dividends at such time or times as they shall deem proper the said dividends to
be advertised and paid in the same manner as is above provided.

TWENTY-THIRD. It is agreed by the said Robert Morris, John Nicholson, and
James Greenleaf parties of the first part, that the dividend or dividends shall
not be less than six per cent per annum or six dollars on each share in every
year and that if the cash arising from the sales does not amount to that sum,
they the said parties of the first part do hereby promise and bind themselves
their heirs, executors, administrators, and to advance and lend to the board of
managers such sum as may be necessary in addition to what they have in hand of
the company's money to enable them to pay six dollars on each share, the board
of managers granting their obligation to the said parties of the first part to
repay the said advances out of the first moneys they may receive thereafter on
account of the company, except such as the said board are obliged by article
the fourth to pay to persons recovering against the board, and also excepting
the moneys reserved for a contingent fund, and in order to secure the
performance on the part of the said parties of the first part; they do hereby
agree to deposit in the hands of the trustees each three thousand shares or
actions, making in all nine thousand shares to be held by them for the use of
Robert Morris, John Nicholson and James Greenleaf, respectively subject however
to the payment of such sum or sums on any or every year during the continuance
of this company as may be necessary to enable the board of managers to pay a
dividend of six per cent. and they are hereby authorized to sell and transfer
so many of the said shares as may be needful for that purpose, in case the said
Robert Morris, John Nicholson and James Greenleaf or some of them their, or
some of their heirs, executors or administrators fail to provide by other means
the sums necessary; the sums of money arising from such sales of deposited
shares to be in the first instance applied to the payment of the dividend, and
afterward the same sums to be replaced from the company's funds which shall be
reinvested in shares for account of the said Robert Morris, John Nicholson and
James Greenleaf, and the shares so purchased shall again be deposited as before
and for the same uses and purposes, it being understood that the said parties
of the first part, are to draw the annual dividends on their respective parts
of the deposited shares.

TWENTY-FOURTH. The president, and managers must necessarily devote much time
and labor to the business of this company, the profits will be great and
certain therefore the company can well afford to pay those who serve them. It
is therefore agreed that the president and managers shall be allowed a
commission of two and an half per cent. on the amount of the sales they make,
receivable by them only out of the payments actually received or as the cash
comes into the company's possession, which commission shall be divided into
five parts, one for the president and one for each member of the board.

TWENTY-FIFTH. The president and each member of the board of managers and the
secretary shall severally give security to the trustees in the sum of twenty
thousand dollars for the faithful discharge of their respective trusts. The
board of managers will also take security from the agents and surveyors they
may appoint for the faithful discharge of their duty and trust.

TWENTY-SIXTH. Certificates for thirty thousand shares or actions will be
immediately made out, signed and delivered to the parties of the first part,
after the execution of these articles in the following form." This is to
certify that (...) is entitled to (...) share in the entire property of the
North American Land Company, the dividends whereof shall not be less than six
dollars on each share annually, conformably to articles of agreement duly
executed dated at Philadelphia the twentieth day of February one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-five-transferable only at the company's office in that city
by the owner in person, or by his executor, administrator, attorney, or legal
representative, signed in the presence and by order of the board of managers at
Philadelphia, this (...) day of (...) 17 (...) president. attest. (...)
secretary."

TWENTY-SEVENTH. This company shall exist for fifteen years (unless the sales
of their lands and the collection of the moneys shall be sooner effected) and
as much longer as may be necessary to close and settle their concerns and make
a final dividend. At the end of fifteen years from the date of these articles
of agreement, it shall be the duty of the then board of managers to call by
advertisements in the news papers upon the share holders to appear in person or
by proxy at a meeting to be held at the company's office six months after the
date of such advertisement then and there to determine upon the best mode of
disposing of any part of the company's estate that may then remain unsold or
uncollcted so as to make a just and final division thereof, and a majority of
votes given by the share-holders and proxies that meet shall be conclusive. The
said board shall carry the same into effect and make a final division as soon
thereafter as may be practicable.

TWENTY-EIGHTH. It is further agreed that if upon experience it shall be found
necessary to alter, amend, add to, or diminish those articles of agreement the
same may be done upon the following terms and conditions and on no other, the
person or persons wishing for an alteration, shall propose the same at an
annual meeting of the share-holders by laying the proposed charges before them
in writing, and if such charges or alterations or any part thereof meet the
approbation of a majority of the share-holders and proxies then met, the
propositions so laid before them shall be printed, with notice that a decision
is to be made thereon at the next annual meeting, and copies thereof be
transmitted to every share-holder who shall leave his address at the office for
that purpose at his expense and as he shall direct, when two thirds of the
whole number of share-holders and proxies then met concurring or agreeing to
the said charges or alterations, or any part thereof (provided that the said
two thirds of the share-holders and proxies represent not less than two thirds
of the whole number of shares) the same shall become a part of these articles,
and be incorporated in this plan, and be binding upon all concerned as if the
same had been now inserted and accepted.

SCHEDULE of the LANDS whereon the above PLAN is founded, viz.
PENNSYLVANIA. Acres. Northampton County, 72,000 Northumberland, 217,046
Luzerne, 4,500 Mifflin, 34,328 Huntingdon, 29,172 Westmoreland, 40,000 North
and West of Allegany and Ohio Rivers. 250,000 647,046 VIRGINIA. Monongalia
County, 19,700 Washington, 25,000 Harrison, 44,155 Ohio, 30,000 Randolph,
18,825 Montgomery, 484,025 Greenbriar, 156,355 Russell, 20,000 Kenhawa, 134,560
932,621 ^/4 NORTH CAROLINA. Beaufort and Hyde counties, 200,000 Rowan county on
Yadkin river, 17,299 Robison, Moore, Cumberland, Richmond and Anson counties,
500,000 717,299 SOUTH CAROLINA. Orangeburgh District, 577,875 Ninety-Six,
17,034 Washington, 340,680 Pinkney, 1,883 Camden, 15,130 Cheraw, 4,636 957,238
GEORGIA. Washington County, 1,453,516 Franklin, 320,370 Effingham, 432,910
Camden, 108,000 2,314,796 KENTUCKY. Fayette County, ^30,943 Jefferson, 2^,200
Lincoln, 4,000 Mason, 246,9^^ 431,043 Total. 6,000,043

Sealed and Delivered (the words "hundred" in two places in the twenty third
article being first observed to be struck out, and the words "thousand"
inserted in their stead) in the presence of Robert Morris, ( Seal.) John
Nicholson, ( Seal.) James Greenleaf, ( Seal.)
N. B. The name of Thomas Fitzsimons, Esquire. one of the board of managers is
observed to be written on an erasure. Thomas Pike Lathy, Garrett Cottringer.


The twentieth day of February Anno Domini 1795. Before me Matthew Clarkson,
Esquire. Mayor of the city of Philadelphia in the state of Pennsylvania, came the
above named Robert Morris, John Nicholson, and James Greenleaf, and
acknowledged the above written articles of agreement to be their and each of
their act and deed, and desired the same to be received as such, and that it
may be recorded. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and seal The
Seal of the City of Philadelphia


MATTHEW CLARKSON, MAYOR.

PENNSYLVANIA ss. THOMAS MIFFLIN Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TO ALL to whom these presents shall come GREETING.
KNOW YE that Matthew Clarkson Esquire. whose name is subscribed to the foregoing
instrument of writing was at the time of subscribing the same and own is Mayor
of the city of Philadelphia in the state of Pennsylvania, duly appointed and
commissioned and full faith and credit is and ought to be given him accordingly.

Great Seal of the State of Pennsylvania.


Given under my hand and the great seal of the state at Philadelphia the twenty
first day of February in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety five, and of the Commonwealth the nineteenth. THOMAS MIFFLIN. By the
Governor, JAMES TRIMBLE, Deputy Secretary.

I Clement Biddle Notary Public for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the
United States of America, duly commissioned and qualified dwelling in the City
of Philadelphia in said Commonwealth, Certify and make known that I have
carefully compared the foregoing Plan of Association of the North American Land
Company with the original Articles of Agreement indented made the twentieth day
of February one thousand seven hundred and ninety five by and between the
Honorable Robert Morris, Esquire. of the City of Philadelphia, John Nicholson,
Esquire. of the said City of Philadelphia and James Greenleaf, Esquire. Consul from the
United States at Amsterdam, but new of New York of the one part, and those who
shall become purchasers, owners or holders of shares in the North American Land
Company of the other part which said original Articles of Agreement duly
executed and recorded in the office for recording deeds in the city and county
of Philadelphia, in deed book No. 43. page 277, etc. are deposited in the hands
of the board of managers of the American Land Company and the foregoing printed
book from the 1st line of the 3d page thereof to the end of the 25th page
thereof inclusive, contains a just and true copy, by me compared and found to
agree with the said original Articles of Agreement, and of the Schedule
thereunto annexed, and of the acknowledgement of the execution of the said
Articles of Agreement taken before and certified by Matthew Clarkson Esquire. Mayor
of the said city of Philadelphia under his hand and the seal of the said city,
and also of the attestation of the said Matthew Clarkson Esquire. being Mayor of
the said city of Philadelphia, by Thomas Mifflin Governor of the Commonwealth
of Pensylvania, under his hand and the great seal of the said Commonwealth; And
I do further Certify that I have seen and examined certain deeds of conveyance
and assurance vesting four millions four hundred and seventy nine thousand
three hundred and seventeen acres and one quarter of an acre, part of the said
tracts of land mentioned in the said Schedule, annexed to the said Articles of
Agreement, in Thomas Willing Esquire. John Nixon Esquire. and John Barclay Esquire. in
trust to convey the same agreebly to the said Articles of Agreement, duly
executed by the said Robert Morris, John Nicholson and James Greenleaf, and
that I have this day attended on the president and board of managers of the
said North American Land Company, who in my presence passed the following
resolution and entered the same in their minutes, viz.

Whereas the conveyance of the lands already made by Robert Morris, John
Nicholson, and James Greenleaf in trust for the use of the North American Land
Company as yet amount to only 4,479,317 acres. And there are several persons
now applying for certificates of shares.

Resolved by the president and board of managers, that certificates may and
shall be issued in proportion to the quantity conveyed that is one certificate
for every 200 acres of land actually conveyed and no more, and that one third
part of the certificates so issued shall be deposited with the trustees in
conformity with the 26th article, until the whole number of 9000 shares shall
be so deposited.

In Testimony whereof I the said Notary, have hereunto set my hand and affixed
my Notarial seal at Phil^ aforesaid this ninth day of March in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety five.

