A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN TO HIS FRIEND, IN ENGLAND, DESCRIPTIVE OF THE
DIFFERENT SETTLEMENTS IN THE PROVINCE OF UPPER CANADA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. W. WOODWARD, Franklin's Head, New Sign, South Side
Chestnut street. 1795.

To THE PRINTER.
AS all new settlements in their progress, exhibit new scenes to the eye of the
curious, and more or less attract the attention of the farmer, the merchant,
and philosopher, it becomes a pleasant task to a liberal mind, from time to
time to mark that progress, and impartially transmit any information to the
community, whereby they may be likely to benefit, but more especially to that
class of men who cultivate the soil; for by their prosperity are every other
description of ^^n benefited, and commerce, arts, and sciences promoted.

If the following letter should answer any of these desirable ends, the object
of the publisher will be fully attained.

A LETTER.
New York, 20th November, 1794. MY DEAR FRIEND,
SINCE I had last the pleasure of writing to you from this city, in which I
gave you a particular description of the lands in this state, and in the state
of Pennsylvania, together with the mode of settlement, and the manner in which
they are to be purchased, I have made a tour through the province of Upper
Canada, and shall endeavor to give you a particular and impartial account of
that country, so far as I have traveled through it, with its laws, government,
and commercial advantages. In my letter from Albany, I mentioned that I went to
that city by water, from thence I proceeded to Schenectady, fifteen miles by
stage, Schenectady is a handsomely situated little town on the banks of the
Mohawk river, inhabited mostly by Low. Dutch, but from the appearance of the
place, one would imagine it a deserted village, the houses being generally old,
small, and mostly shut up, but surrounded by the finest flats of interva^l land
you can possibly imagine, which continue to the source of that river. The
desolate appearance of this town was accounted for to me by the current of
Indian trade turning down the River St. Laurence, since the revolution. It has,
however, the prospect of becoming a flourishing place, ere long, by the vast
increase of the settlements to the west of it, the produce of which must center
there. -- At this place I took an open boat, navigated by three men, in which I
passed to Lake Ontario, without any other interruption than two short portages,
one at the little falls of half a mile, round which they are now cutting a
canal; the other of one mile, at Fort Stanvix, about one hundred miles west of
Schenectady; at which place we leave the Mohawk river, and descend the current
to Oswego, one hundred miles more to the west, where the British hold a post at
the entrance of Lake Ontario, commanded by a captain, from whom I received
every mark of civility and attention. A Custom-House Officer is also stationed
there to prevent an illicit trade being carried on between the United States
and the British Colonies. No merchandise i^, nor furs out, are permitted to
pass this post, without a passport from the Governor of Upper Canada; but
settlers moving into that province to reside, are permitted indiscriminately to
pass with all utensils of husbandry, household furniture, and stores for their
own consumption. -- The high prices which hatters' fur at present command in
the United States is the only inducement I conceive for smuggling past that
post, for except a few articles imported from the East Indies, I found the
retail shops at Kingston and Niagara, selling as low, and many articles,
particularly woolens, lower than in the City of Philadelphia.

From Oswego, vessels sail to Niagara, Kingston, and any other port on the
lake; but settlers more frequently continue along the south shore of the lake
to Niagara, about one hundred and twenty miles in the same open boats which
bring them hither, as they are generally manned by themselves. But finding a
vessel here ready to sail for Kingston, I dismissed my boatmen, and embarked in
her for that place, about twelve hours fail.

Laurence, the banks of which are thick settled down to Lake St. Francois,
where the provinces of Upper and Lower Canada are divided. This river is
navigable for vessels of one hundred tons, and upwards, to Oswegatche, seventy
miles below Kingston, but vessels seldom go down the river, as the fort which
is at Kingston serves as a deposit for all the public stores, provision, and
merchandise for the upper posts.

The land immediately about Kingston, is covered by valuable quarries of
limestone, and through all the settlements round it are plenty of thin
valuable stones, which are considered by the inhabitants rather as an
acquisition than detriment to their plantations. The most flourishing part of
this settlement is round the bay of Kenty, the soil of which is rich, easy
worked, and produces from one to three crops, without any other cultivation
than what is done by the iron tooth harrow, and yields from 20 to 30 bushels of
wheat to the acre; those lands are somewhat heavy timbered, having vast
quantities of the sugarmaple, hickory and bass wood, and in some places white
pines of a surprising height, but where the latter grows the land is more
sandy, and although it is warm, sweet land, it is not so stony as the maple or
oak land. This bay is seventy miles in length, beginning about twenty miles
South West from Kingston, leaving a neck of land from two to twelve miles wide,
between it and the lake, all (...) which is settled, and round the whole bay so
thick settled, that their improvements already meet, and form the appearance of
a beautiful old settled country. This bay and the creeks emptying into it,
abound in great quantities of wild fowl, and fish of various kinds.

From Kingston I proceeded to Niagara, in a schooner of upwards of one hundred
tons burden across this little sea of fresh water; a sea it may justly be
called, for we were a great part of the time for three days out of sight of the
land; though passages have been made in twenty hours; we enter the Niagara
river between the fort and the town called Newark, with a beautiful prospect of
both.

The fort stands in a commanding situation, on a point formed by the junction
of the river and lake, upon the East side of the river, and is a regular
fortification, in good repair, and well garrisoned.

The mouth of this river affords a safe and copious harbor, sufficiently large
for half the British navy.

The town of Newark is situate in latitude 43 north, on the West banks of the
river, extending along the lake about a mile, enjoying in the summer the fresh
breezes from this little sea, in almost every direction, plentifully supplied
with fish at all seasons of the year. In the winter here are caught by seines,
quantities of white fish, which seem to be peculiar to that river, they are
generally from two to six pounds weight, and are considered the best fish in
the lakes; besides there sturgeon, bass, and many other excellent fish, are in
great plenty; salmon are taken in all the creeks round the lake; these
varieties of fish are not only esteemed a luxury, but a great assistance to new
beginners in supporting their families, many laying in a half dozen barrels or
more for their winter's use.

The land about the town of Newark for many miles, though not so good as the
land further back is well inhabited each way upwards of fifty miles around. --
What gave me a more particular knowledge of this settlement was, being intimate
with the Surveyor-General, a gentleman of liberal education, good information,
and indefatigable in the duties of his office, by which means he has collected
notes, from the different field-books of his Deputies, of the soil, timber, and
streams, of all that country; and such parts as I went over I found his notes
very correct, and by no means exaggerated. In many places there is little more
for the farmer to do, than cut a sufficiency of timber to fence his fields,
girdle or ring the remainder, and put in the harrow, for in few places only is
it necessary to make use of the plough, till the second or third crop, there
being little or no under brush; yet in many places, there is beautiful white
pine, oak and black walnut timber; sugar wood which is also found here in
plenty mixed with beach, hickory, and bass wood.

At Newark resides the Governor whose character is well known in England, and
is deservedly held here in high estimation. -- Here are also most of the
principle officers of government, besides many other gentlemen of
respectability who form a very intelligent and agreeable society.

Besides Newark there are several important situations in this part of the
province, which bid fair to become places of consequence, the most important of
which are, the landing places at each end of the portage, Fort Erie, the head
of Lake Ontario, and York, called by the natives Torento.

The lower landing or Queenston is about seven miles up the river from Newark,
where the vessels discharge their cargoes, and take in furrs collected from
three to one thousand five hundred miles back, there have I seen four vessels
of sixty and one hundred tons burden unloading at the same time, and sometimes
not less than sixty wagons loaded in a day, which loads they carry ten miles
to the upper landing place or Chipawa Creek, three miles past the great falls.
This portage is an increasing source of wealth to the farmers for many miles
round, who carry from twenty to thirty hundred weight for which they get one
shilling and eight pence N. Y. currency, per hundred weight, and generally load
back with furrs etc. -- From Chipawa the merchandise is transported in batteaux
to Fort Erie a distance of eighteen miles and are shipped there on board of
vessels for Detroit and Michilamackinac. -- Detroit I was told was a pleasant
country, though a low and marshy soil, more noted for its furr trade, than its
agriculture.

At the head of Lake Ontario, about fifty miles west from Newark a small town
is laid out and public stores are building, being a central place between
Newark, York and Detroit, from thence a road of twenty two miles to the grand
river is cut our and crosses that river about fifty miles above its entrance
into Lake Erie, and continues in a southern direction to the river La Trenche,
now called the Thames, which empties itself into Lake St. Clair, about twenty
miles above Detroit. Settlements are making (...) road, and along the river
Thames partial ones are made for an extent of eighty or ninety miles in length.
-- On these two rivers are extensive open flatts of land equal to those of the
Mohawk river, on which may be cut a sufficiency of hay for many thousand head
of cattle yearly; the lands on this road are of an excellent quality and in
many places light timbered, in others covered with thristy oak, black walnut,
sugar maple, beach and lindar.

York formerly Torento is situate on the best harbor round the lake, opposite
Niagara, and about forty miles distance across the lake, but round by land near
one hundred miles, along the shore of which great quantities of fish are
caught; a town is here in great forwardness, and should the seat of government
be removed from Newark thence, as is contemplated, it will soon become a
flourishing place. -- From this a road is cut out across to Lake Simcoe, or the
Rice Lakes thirty three miles, the outlet of which empties itself into Lake
Huron a distance of forty five miles from Lake Simcoe, thirty six miles in
length; this rout affords an easy communication with Michilimackinac. -- From
York to that lake, a tier of lotts of two hundred acres each, is laid out on
each side of this road called Dundas-street, granted on the express condition
of building and improving on them, within one year from the time they are taken
up; many of these are now built upon and occupied.

On the east side and joining the rear of these lotts is a settlement of near
one hundred German families, on an excellent tract of land, much of which is
open, white oak woods; these Germans came on this summer, furnished with every
thing necessary to make their situation comfortable and enable them to improve
their land to advantage, and no doubt in a short time will make a fine
settlement; they are supported by a company who have liberally supplied them.
With teams, farming utensils and provisions, sent them a Clergyman of their own
country, and are about to build them mills, a church, and school house.

If this generous example was with equal spirit followed by a few more
companies, it would add to the population of the country, more than any other
mode yet pursued. -- There is still plenty of vacant lands of the best kind,
and such as show a disposition to settle and improve them, meet from the
Governor every encouragement they merit, who makes liberal grants to all such
as do actually bring on settlers, and prove themselves desirous of promoting
the interest of the country, the whole of which is well adapted for raising
wheat, Indian corn, and other summer grain; flax (where the land has borne a
few other crops) succeeds remarkably well, and the face of the whole country
yields grass in abundance; hops of a good quality grow here spontaneously, also
a variety of wild fruits such as plumbs, mulberry, blackberry, strawberry,
raspberry and grapes. -- Orchards are in great forwardness, for the age of the
settlement, some of which already bear fruit. -- Peaches, cherries, and
currants are plenty among all the first settlers. -- The farmers raise great
quantity of pork, without any other expense than a little indian corn, for a
few weeks previous to killing, and often kill their hogs out of the woods, well
fatted on nuts; in many places salt springs have been discovered, and some of
them already work. ed to such advantage that in all probability that article,
which generally comes heavy in the interior part of a country, may in a short
time be afforded here, as low as in many of the old settled places in the
United States. -- Many valuable streams for water works, run in every direction
through this country; and upon some of them are mills built, which prove very
lucrative to the owners, particularly saw-mills, from the quantity of good
timber and great demand of boards, as more buildings are going on than
carpenters and masons can be found to finish: stones being scarce, bricks are
generally used in mason work.

This settlement was begun by a few disbanded troops after the peace of 178^,
and being but little known by the people of the United States, who had imbibed
an opinion that it was entirely under control of the military, few emigrants
bent their course this way, till they were convinced of the civil government,
being well established, and upon a constitution happily adopted to the minds of
the people, since which numbers of respectable inhabitants have come in from
the different States. Some of whom have come in their wagons quite from North
Carolina, but as there is a space of countiy, for about seventy miles, between
Niagara and the Genesee country, where the roads are not sufficiently open for
wagons, they transport them from the mouth of that river to Niagara in boats.
However this obstruction will probably be soon removed, when it will be a
pleasant jaunt to get into a carriage at Niagara, and drive to this city, which
may be effected without difficulty, in about two weeks, particularly by sleighs
in the winter. -- The mode of settlement generally pursued here, and which
seems best calculated to save expense, is by two, three or more men coming on
in the summer, who throw up a log house each, put in a field of wheat, and
return for their familier, which they bring on the following spring, by the
rout before described pad Oswego, if by water; but such as come by land, bring
their families as far as the mouth of Genesee river, there take boat, and send
their cattle by land. This country from the reduction till the year 1790, was
included in the province of Quebec, and from the year 1774, the civil
administration was vested in a Governor and Legislative Council, at that time
best adapted to the ideas of the people, who were most entirely French, and
from prejudice, preferred that form of government, being most analogous to what
they had been accustomed to prior to the conquest of Canada, but at the
conclusion of the late dissentions between Great Britain and Ame. rica, Upper
Canada, then called the back posts, was held out as an assylum to those who had
adhered to the unity of the British Empire, and who generally came under the
denomination of Loyalists. -- From the peace to the year 1790, government
delegated to land boards the power of granting lands to any applicants, if men
of morality and sobriety.

In the year 1790, the wisdom of the British government, was eminently evinced
in dividing that large country, into two separate governments, and granting to
each a constitution, on the most liberal and disinterested principles, a
constitution for freedom and the just rights of man, perhaps unequalled in the
historic page, with all the advantages, enjoyed by the British colonies in
America previous to the revolution, and with many additional, the British
Parliament having renounced for ever the right of taxation. -- Here no man's
property for any cause whatever, is taxed, directly or indirectly; the British
government most generously paying for even the surveying of the lands, and the
whole support of the civil establishment.

You will naturally wonder, how with all these advantages this country has
hitherto escaped the notice and keen observations of Land Speculators, and the
elogeums of Pamphleteers too frequently the hired and useful assistant of the
former class of men, but this I have found is accounted for on the best of
principles. The Indians being undoubtedly the original proprietors of the soil,
and it even has and continues to be the policy of the British government to
extinguish their right, by fair and equitable purchases. Large purchases of
this kind has been made from time to time by government, as the population of
the country required, and as yet there is not a single instance of
dissatisfaction on the part of the Indians; having thus liberally paid them for
their lands, very advantageous terms are held out to actual settlers, (the only
class which at first can enrich any country) who get a grant of two hundred
acres each. However for the encouragement of men, commanding the means of
improving on a larger scale, by proper application they get a handsome
additional quantity. By this means the substantial farmer becomes the
inhabitant, and large tracts to the detriment of any country, never lie waste.

Had I not resolved on examining minutely, and judging for myself, I should
never have become acquainted with a country which for richness of soil,
agriculture and trade, in fact every thing that will conduce to make an
industrious man happy, yiedling to none I have as yet seen.

Niagara is at present the temporary seat of government, consisting of a
governor, a legislative council, and house of assembly chosen by the people;
here annually in the month of May, they meet for the purpose of legislation. --
Members of the assembly are chosen for four years, and have already sat three
sessions. -- In this time they have made many wholesome and necessary laws. --
Weekly courts, called courts of request, are held throughout the province, by
two justices of the peace, who have cognizance of all debts under half a Joe;
there are also district courts every three months, in which a judge presides,
and gives trial by a jury of twelve men, in sums not exceeding twenty four
pound York currency, whose judgment is unappealable, and all sums above that,
are tried by a jury before the chief justice and two associate judges, who make
an annual circuit through the province; from them is an appeal to the governor
and council. -- The people have it fully in their power to regulate all local
matters which respect their several towns, such as constables, path-masters,
and other town officers, in the same manner as formerly in the other colonies.
now United States of America. -- The militia in the several districts have an
annual meeting, and all males from the age of sixteen to forty-five are
mustered, except the Friends, Tunkers, and Menonists, and those of that
religious description, who are exempted from bearing arms. In short, sir, it
would swell a letter to too great a bulk to give a more minute account of the
local laws that have been already made for the public good, suffice it to say,
that, with respect to that government and its laws, its administration is
conducted with every wish and attention to render the situation of those who
may settle under it comfortable and happy, being neither land tax, quit-rent,
or any other tax whatever, excepting the county rates, to be paid by the
freeholders, for the regulation of their internal police.

The noble river St. Laurence supplies this country for an extent of two
thousand miles with commercial advantages inferior to none on this side of the
Atlantic. -- Conceive to yourself vessels of six hundred tons burden,
unloading all kinds of British goods at the port of Montreal, five hundred
miles from the sea, and again receiving in return, furs from the interior parts
of the country, as far as the Missisippi is known to the westward, and the
waters emptying into Lake Superior from the northward. -- This town, when the
banks of the different lakes and rivers are settled by husbandmen, which is at
no distant period, must have a vast increase of trade, for without doubt all
British manufactures, through these vast water communications, will come much
cheaper, through the whole course of its windings, than can be afforded from
any other quarter. Goods on importation being liable to no duty; which will
undoubtedly give this country a vast advantage over the new settlements that I
described in my former letters; indeed nature points out this place as the
emporium of trade for the people inhabiting both sides of these lakes and
rivers emptying into them as far as they extend to the west. From Montreal
boats called by the Canadians batteaux, containing twenty five barrels bulk,
are worked by four men to Kingston, a distance of nigh two hundred miles up the
river in the course of six or eight days, and again return in three, loaded
with furs, potash, and other produce of the country. -- Vessels, generally
schooners, receive the goods at Kingston, and convey them in a short time to
the landing or Queenston, below the great fa^ls of Niagara. Here the portage
gives employment to a number of teams in transporting them to Chipawa, as
before described: they are again received at Fort Erie in vessels of the same
burden as formerly, which navigate all Lake Erie, Huron, and Michigan. The
expenses incurred during all this rout are comparatively trisling, as you will
observe there is but one portage, and that only ten miles in the course of this
communication. And when one reflects on the temperate climate, rich soil, And
other natural advantages of this interior country, you anticipate a great
population in a short time. -- The streights of Niagara, from its peculiar
situation, being the channel through which all the produce of the vast country
above must pass, is looked forward to as a place of the first consequence, and
where a farmer will at all times find a market for his produce, the transport
being easy from thence to the Atlantic. -- Here have I seen with amazement that
famed cataract, which exceeds every description I have ever heard of it, but it
would be idle in me to pretend to give you an idea of it -- It strikes the eye
with more grandeur and sublimity than the pen can convey. -- Amongst many other
natural curiosities, a spring, about two miles above these falls, attracts the
attention of the curious; emitting a gas, or inflammable air, which, when
confined in a pipe, and a flame applied to it, will boil the water of a
tea-kettle in fifteen minutes: -- whether this may hereafter be applied by
machinery, to useful purposes, time will determine.

It was lately discovered in clearing away and burning: the brush under the
bank of the river, to erect a mill, and was observed after the brush was
consumed to burn for days together, to the great astonishment of the
inhabitants.

About three hundred miles west of this is Fort Detroit, situate on the east
side of the streights, between Lake Erie and Huron, around which, a French
settlement was established before the reduction of the province, but attending
more to the Indian trade than agriculture, made but little progress as farmers.
The English settlements lately begun on the opposite shore are already in a
higher state of cultivation, however the French have line orchards, from which
Niagara is at present supplied with cider and apples. About one hundred miles
west from Detroit lies a valuable country on the waters emptying into the
Missisippi, now unhappily contested by the United States and the natives of the
soil.

To the northward of Detroit about three hundred and fifty miles, lies Fort
Michillmackinac, on an island between Lake Huron and Michigan, is about five
miles round, and an entire bed of gravel incapable of cultivation, but most
remarkable for being the general depot and grand rendezvous of all the Indian
traders, who meet in the month of June from every quarter, deliver their furs
and receive their outfits for the ensuing year. Spanish settlements many miles
down the Missisippi are supplied with British goods through this channel, to
much greater advantage than from New Orleans, where the rapids of the
Missisippi oppose almost unsurmountable difficulties in ascending it.

This fort, the forts of Detroit, Niagara, and Oswego, fell within the United
States, when the lines of separation were drawn, at the treaty of peace, in the
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty three; fort Miami, which was built
by the British lately, is also within those lines. -- Previous to that peace,
stores of deposit had been occupied at the foot of the Miami rapids, where the
fort now stands, and the annual presents to the Indians, which they have long
been in the habits of receiving from the British government, were there issued.
This place was prudently chosen for thar purpose, in order to prevent the
Indians from coming through the settlement, crouding about and mixing with the
troops at Detroit, where the too frequent use of spiritous liquors would have
occasioned numerous quarrels and ac cidents, which might have terminated fatal
to that friendly intercourse and good understanding which has ever prevailed
between the English and the natives in America.

Hitherto, have I said little respecting the aborigines of this country. --
Various are the opinions entertained by different people, and different
historians have risked conjectures how this continent was originally peopled;
their own ideas of it are not less curious than extraordinary. They do not
believe, nor have rhey the smallest vestige of traditional memorial to induce
them to believe, but that they are a distinct race of men from the whites, some
of the most intelligent amongst them will at this day relate in detail the
natural and original history of themselves and the continent they live upon. --
They fully believe in a good and evil spirit, and in a future state of rewards
and punishments, and have certain times in the year for their particular modes
of worship, when they more generally endeavor to appease and avert the wrath of
the bad, than invoke the good Spirit, to which, however, after favorable crops,
a good hunt, or success in war, they, in a servent manner, return thanks. --
They say that the face of the globe was first covered with one great water, in
which the turtle was the principal inhabitant. That the Great Spirit caused
this turtle to grow to such a size that the waters could no longer float it,
and in consequence, it became stationary, continuing to grow until the moss and
rubbish collecting on his back, became a soil, and shot forth herbs, bushes,
and at length trees, and now forms this great island (as they term it) upon
which they were created a distinct race of men, and that the Great Spirit made,
after them, every kind of beasts and birds of the forest, for their food and
use, (from the first twelve of which they took the names of their twelve
tribes,) and that these are as different in their kind, from those given by the
Great Spirit to the white people, for their use, as they are themselves from
us. -- That they increased in strength and numbers, till the white people came
amongst them, and introduced their habits, with the use of strong drink, to
which they justly impute their degeneracy.

When the feeling mind reslects on the former situation of these credulous
people; the various deception practiced on them under the mask of friendship,
the artless, and faithful attachment they bear to the white people where they
are treated with, upon seeming principles of justice and candor, it must truly
sympathize with them in their present gloomy prospects.

This people who were two centuries ago possessed of the whole of this vast
continent, affording them spontaneously every comfort of life, without rivals
in the enjoyment of it, now driven back step by step, to the last spot of their
fertile soil, and that contested. Contested by the very people whom they have
been led to consider, as their brothers, fathers and protectors. -- Prejudice
from education, habit, and particular situations in life may warp the minds of
the best of men, but a virtuous and penetrating mind, will always estimate in a
proper degree, the relation and ties they have a claim to on us, if it is only
from our superior cultivation of mind and manners. Would it not therefore argue
a greater degree of virtue, and redound more to the honor of humanity, for
Christians, bordering on the remains of their country, to turn their attention
to the civilization of these people, than to endeavor by art and arms to
extirpate them from the face of a country, which they conceive to have been
given by the Great Spirit to them alone. It is idle to say that people of their
quick ideas, and lively imagination, are incapable of civilization, for where
education, and a proper attention to their morals has been bestowed, there are
proofs to the contrary. -- Instance Joseph Brant a full blooded Indian, who
having received an early education, though residing still with the Indians, is
much the gentleman, easy in his manners, mild and friendly in his disposition,
regular and methodical in his whole deportment, and has by his good examples,
brought many of his nation into a regular system of husbandry, and a decent way
of living in their families.

Thus have I now as generally made you acquainted with this great country, as
correctly as my short stay in it would admit of; but I cannot conclude this
without giving you a piece of information, equally new to every body here as to
me.

For many years past adventurers have attempted without success to cross to the
Pacific Ocean. The honor of this arduous task was left to a Mr. Alexander Mac
Kenzie, a partner in the North-west fur company, who lately returned by the way
of the lakes, having fully accomplished the object of his undertaking in the
course of two years, by traversing the Continent of America to the northward of
west, over vast mountains covered with ice, which obliged him to make new
canoes, wherever he had the waters in his favor. On his arrival on this coast,
seven weeks fail from Canton in China, and 2 degrees to the north of Nootka
Sound, he sound the Indians without firearms, but furnished with some
clothing and ornaments, principally Spanish manufacture. The Indians
accompanying him were not understood by those on that coast, and appeared to be
perfect strangers to one another. It was with difficulty he could reconcile
them to him as a white man, on account, as he understood, of some injury given
them by people of his color, a few days before that time. These are supposed to
have been the Americans from the port of New York, who had touched there in
their trade with China.

After remaining a few days and making the necessary observations, he returned
and brought along with him some valuable skins of the sea offer, and other
natural curiosities, peculiar to that coast; but as the gentleman himself has
it in idea to go soon to London, I have little doubt but he will meet with the
reward due to his exertions, and give to the world an account of the wild and
uninhabited tract he traversed.

THE END.

