THE CONSTITUTION OF THE COLUMBIANUM, OR AMERICAN ACADEMY OF THE FINE ARTS.

Adopted February 17, 1795.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS and ROBERT BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, NO. 116,
HIGH STREET.

MDCCXCV.

THE CONSTITUTION, etc.
City of Philadelphia, Jan. 1, 1795.
A number of Artists and Amateurs having associated together to promote and
encourage the fine Arts in America; and having deliberated thereon, did
determine to establish an ACADEMY OF PAINTING, SCULPTURE, ARCHITECTURE and
ENGRAVING, in the City of Philadelphia in the State of Pennsylvania. And on the
17 th day of February, 1795, the Association of Artists and Amateurs did adopt
and ordain the following principles for the government of their Society: that
is to say --

ARTICLE I. THE institution shall be called the COLUMBIANUM, OR AMERICAN
ACADEMY OF PAINTING, SCULPTURE, ARCHITECTURE, AND ENGRAVING; and shall consist
of Amateurs and Artists: But the number of Amateurs shall not exceed one half
of the whole number of Artists in the Society.

ART. II. The Society shall meet on the first day of January (except it be on
Sunday, then on the day following) in every year, between the hours of two and
five in the afternoon at the place of their usual meetings. -- The following
Officers shall be chosen by ballot -- notice of which shall be given by
Advertisements in three or more newspapers, at least one week before the day of
election, viz. One President, One Treasurer, One Secretary, Twelve Directors, A
Master of the Academy, A Professor of Perspective, A Professor of Architecture,
A Professor of Anatomy, A Professor of Painting, A Professor of Sculpture, A
Professor of Engraving, A Professor of Chemistry, and A Committee of
Correspondence consisting of five members.


RULES For the government of the Election of Officers of the Academy shall be
as follow, viz.

Before opening the Election, the company that shall be met at half an hour
after two, shall appoint three members of those present, as Judges of the
Election; and also two Clerks for taking down the names of the voters.

And in case of an equality of votes for any officer, after casting up the
ballots, the decision shall be by lots, to be drawn by one of the Judges.

ART. III. The ordinary meetings of this society shall be on the first and
third Mondays of October, November, December, January, February, March, April
and May, at 6 o'clock in the evening, and on the first and third Mondays of the
other four months at 7 o'clock in the evenings.

No meeting shall be continued after 10 o'clock, nor any new matter be
introduced by motion or otherwise, after 9 o'clock.

ART. IV. No question shall be put on a motion unless the motion be seconded;
and the determination of any question shall be by ballot, instead of open
suffrage, if desired by any four members. In case of an equality of votes on
any question, when done by ballot, then the same shall be deferred to another
meeting -- but if the votes be taken by open suffrage and an equality of votes
appear, then the President or Chairman may give the casting vote.

ART. V. The election of new members shall be by ballot, at the first meeting
of each month -- and in order to such election at least 16 members shall be
present. Any member may at any meeting, propose such person or persons as he
thinks proper, as an Amateur, but if an Artist, his qualifications in some of
the arts embraced in this Constitution shall be made known, and a specimen
shall be produced as proof of the same -- But no person shall be balloted for,
unless his name, together with the names of the member or members who proposed
him, have been fixed up for the view of the society at the two meetings
preceding the time of election: nor shall any person be deemed duly chosen
unless three fourths of the votes of the whole number of members met, be in his
favor. For the members so elected, certificates shall be made out and
forwarded to such new members by the committee of Correspondence.

ART. VI. Every new member hereafter to be elected agreeable to the laws of
this association, shall pay into the hands of the Treasurer one dollar
admission-money -- and also the yearly payment of two dollars, to be applied by
the society to such purposes as they shall direct; and no member shall be
entitled to a vote in the annual election of officers, unless it appears that
he has paid into the hands of the Treasurer the said sums.

ART. VII. That a set of Rules for the keeping of order in the society shall be
hung up in the room where the society hold their meetings.

ART. VIII. No part of the funds of the society shall be disposed of in
premiums or otherwise, unless the same has been agreed to by two-thirds of the
16 or more members present at a subsequent meeting -- Nor shall any new law be
made until the same has been proposed at one meeting, and agreed to by a like
majority.

ART. IX. An exhibition of Paintings, Sculptures, Models and Drawings of every
kind, etc. shall be opened on the first day of May, every year, to be kept open
for the inspection of the Public every day, Sundays excepted, during the space
of 6 weeks, from seven o'clock in the morning to the setting of the sun. And no
Paintings shall have a place in this exhibition except done by the modern
Artists, and which have not been before exhibited in any public exhibition in
the United States of America, nor any copies of any kind received, except those
done in enamel. Persons not belonging to the Columbianum may exhibit their
works in this Exhibition, and shall be styled in it is catalogue Honorary
Exhibitors -- And such exhibitors, as well as those of the society and
students, may view the rooms free of expense, during the period of exhibition.
The members of the society who have their works in the exhibition may bring
their wives and children to visit the same free of expense. N. B. All pictures
to be framed. -- The price of admission to view this exhibition shall be
regulated at the last meeting of the society, previous to the opening of the
said exhibition.

ART. X. That at the ordinary meeting on the first Monday in April, annually,
seven members shall be appointed as a committee to receive such Paintings as
may be offered for the exhibition, and who shall have authority to judge
whether they come within the description as stated in the preceding article,
and to reject those which they may judge not deserving a place in the
exhibition; also another committee of three members who shall have the sole
authority of hanging the Paintings, Drawings, Prints, etc. placing the
Sculptures, Models, etc. so as to produce the best effect.

ART. XI. That a collection of plaster figures and models be provided, and
placed in a convenient room or rooms, where young artists may be permitted to
draw from them under such rules and regulations as the society may from time to
time ordain.

ART. XII. That a room be also provided and fitted up with lamps, stoves and
other conveniences for the accommodation of pupils in their drawings from
living subjects, under such rules and regulations as the society may think
necessary to ordain* and which shall be opened from November to March inclusive.

ART. XIII. That a gallery of the Paintings, etc. of the ancient masters be
opened, when the Society by donation or otherwise possess such a collection as
they may think useful to young artists, or worthy the attention of the public
-- And that a room be provided for such exhibition, to be kept open throughout
the year for the admission of visitors on such terms and at such periods as the
society may occasionlly order.

ART. XIV. In case the President should be absent at the hour of commencing
business of any stated or other meeting, a Chairman may be chosen who shall
have the same authority as the President in all cases.

ART. XV. That blank leaves may be bound up with this constitution to receive
the signatures of members at their admission headed as follows, viz.

"In testimony of our membership and willingness to conform ourselves to the
rules, laws, regulations and ordinances of the Society, from time to time
existing and that we will on all occasions use our endeavors to promote the
peace, interest, and honor of the same -- We have hereto subscribed our names.
--

ART. XVI. When the funds of the society shall be found sufficient to provide a
library, containing such books, drawings, prints, etc. as they may judge
necessary for the improvement of the students or others in the fine arts --
then a room shall be provided for that purpose.

ART. XVII. Amateurs who shall have paid to the Treasurer ten dollars or more,
shall have the privilege of visiting the gallery and exhibition of the Academy,
and attend at the lectures, and have the use of the library free of further
expense during a year from the time of such payment. Diplomas shall be made out
for them expressing their annual subscriptions, and whatever donations they
have made to the Academy.

ART. XVIII. In case of death or removal of any of the officers aforesaid, a
special meeting of the society shall be called by the President or Secretary,
and some other person or persons, are then to be elected to fill up the vacancy
occasioned by such death or removal, provided that two weeks notice in not less
than three of the Philadelphia newspapers shall have been given thereof prior
to such meeting.

ART. XIX. Whatever additional Professors may in future be found necessary to
perfect the arts embraced in this Institution, may be added by the society in
due form assembled, and if by an increase of population and wealth in the
United States, this Academy should find it necessary to make additional offices
and officers in the Institution, not heretofore described, it may be done by
the society in full Assembly convened expressly for that purpose.

ART. XX. That the society shall have one common seal.

ART. XXI. That no part of this constitution shall be altered or abrogated,
unless proposed at one of the meetings in February, and laid over for
consideration at least three months, where the concurrence of three fourths of
the society shall be necessary for such revision.

I. Duties of the President.

He is to preside at all meetings, to preserve order, regulate the debates, and
state the questions agreeable to the sense and intention of the members -- and
shall at one of the meetings in October deliver an oration before the society
and the students in the arts (on invitation to them) such as he may think
proper for promoting the views of this Institution.

II. Duties of the Treasurer.

The Treasurer shall receive the subscriptions of the members and all other
moneys that may be offered or become due to the society, and shall pay the same
agreeable to their orders, certified to him by the President or Chairman for
the time being.

The Treasurer shall keep a regular account of all moneys received and paid by
him as aforesaid; and once every year or oftener if required by the society he
shall render a full account of the particular receipts and disbursement and of
the stock in his hands, and shall deliver up to his successor, the books,
papers, and other property belonging to them, together with the balance of cash
in his hands. And for the faithful discharge of his trust, he shall, before he
enters on his office, give bond and security to the President of the society in
double the sum, which the President judges he may probable become entrusted
with during his said office.

III. Duties of the Secretary.

The Secretary shall take down in writing the transactions of the society, and
read all letters and papers that may be communicated to it. It is also the
business of the Secretary to copy into the minute book the proceedings of the
society, in order to produce the same fair to the next meeting. He is further
to copy into the proper books all such letters, papers, and essays, as the
society may think fit to preserve on record, and to have the same ready to be
laid before the society at all meetings, and shall countersign all papers
issued by the society, and he may employ assistants as occasion may require.

IV. Duties of the Directors.

That one of the directors with the master of the academy shall attend weekly
in rotation, during the months that the room for studying in and drawing from
living subjects is kept open -- and the Director is to fix the figures, etc.
and when the pupils are permitted to enter the room shall stay during the
evening to preserve order and ^ive advice to such pupils as may desire
assistance.

V. Corresponding Committee.

This committee besides the ordinary duties of Corresponding with Artists in
America or Europe, shall have the drawing up of all public addresses which on
all occasions they shall lay before the society for their approbation and
concurrence.

VI. Duties of the Master of the Academy.

The Master shall have under his care all the property of the society contained
in the Academy -- he shall place the figures which are to be drawn from in the
rooms of plaster figures and attend the pupils for the purpose of giving
instruction and keeping order. He shall keep the figures, paintings and
drawings free from dust, and do such other duties as may be thought proper by
the Directors in office.

VII. Duties of the Professor of Painting.

The Professor of Painting is yearly to give two lectures on painting at such
periods as may be convenient to himself before the society and the students of
the Academy.

VIII. Duties of the Professor of Anatomy.

The Professor of Anatomy is to deliver each year six lectures on anatomy on
such parts only as are necessary for the information of Painters and Sculptors.

IX. Duties of the Professor of Sculpture.

He is to deliver one lecture per annum on such parts of that art as may differ
from the art of painting.

X. Duty of the Professor of Engraving.

The Professor of Engraving shall deliver one lecture per annum on that branch
of the arts.

XI. Duty of the Professor of Chemistry.

He is to give one lecture on such branches of that science as may respect the
durability or formation of colors, and other compositions which may be useful
to painters.

XII. Duties of the Professor of Architecture.

He is to deliver four lectures per annum on that science.

XIII. Duty of the Professor of Perspective.

He is to deliver one lecture per annum on that subject.

Signed by J. Trenchard, Burgess Allison, Jas. Thackara, John Vallance, William
Birch, William Rush, John Foulke, J. Fred. A. Eckstein, John Eckstein, John
Stagg, jun. C. W. Peale, John Nicholson, Rembrandt Peale, Jeremiah Paul, jun.
Raphaelle Peale, Richard Claiborne, Samuel Lewis, Wm. Barton, Tench Coxe, John
Merriam, Daniel Thuun, Joshua Humphries, Jas. Smither, jun. Gilbert F. Fox,
Samuel Folwell, William Cliffton, jun. Abraham Dubois, Jacob Morgan, Those.
Bidwell, Edward Trenchard, B. Duffield.


FINIS



