Mr. Richards's Oration on Independence.

July 4th, 1795.

AN ORATION ON The Independence of the United States OF Federate America;
PRONOUNCED AT Portsmouth, New Hampshire, July 4, 1795.

By GEORGE RICHARDS.

Gens, quae cremato fortis ab llio,
Jactata Tuscis aequoribus sacra,
Natos-que, maturosque patres
Pertulit Ausonias ad urbes;
Duris ut ilex tons-a bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opus animumque feroo.
Hor. Lib. IV. Ode 4. Lin. 53 -- 60. PORTSMOUTH, PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER, And
for sale at his Office, In Market-Street. 1795.

AN ORATION.
Venerable Fathers of New Hampshire, Respected inhabitants of Portsmouth, and
Honored Fellow-Citizens of the United States! THE spirit of this auspicious
morn disdains an affected consciousness of mental inability. The Genius of
Independence frowns with contempt on the mean cant of pitiful apology. Indulge
me, therefore, as a native, free born American, to wave the fashionable modes
of address, on these public occasions. The orator of the hour, whom partial
friendship has appointed, neither deprecates censure in the language of
servility, nor seeks for applause by the arts of adulation.

This honored, thrice honored day completes the nineteenth anniversary of our
political freedom: it constitutes an august era in the annals of time, well
worthy of being held in perpetual remembrance to the latest generations: it
founds an illustrious epoch in the history of man, highly meriting most
grateful inscription, on the living tablet of the raptured heart. Momentous
indeed, were the causes which impelled America, to pronounce the sovereign fiat
of eternal separation from Great Britain: all important are the consequences
that have resulted therefrom, to the interests of United Columbia; and more
than astonishing, is the glorious revolution, which our independence has
already produced in Europe. But whilst we are preparing to contemplate those
interesting scenes that crowd on the eye of recollection, yet animated by the
light of intellectual life, is it possible for us to forget the mighty toils of
our illustrious progenitors? Progenitors ennobled by the innate dignity of
godlike virtue, and rendered immortal from heroic deeds of patriotic worth.
Shall upstart pride unfeelingly say, to their sainted forms, avaunt? Or wanton
levity forbid their hallowed gaze upon "the feast of reason and the flow of
soul?" Rather, let filial gratitude give honorable place to these ancient
worthies, and respectfully rising up, pronounce them blessed forever. The broad
top-stone on the dome of freedom is indubitably ours: the present generation
brought it forth amid the morning shout of rising millions, crying liberty,
liberty, before it: but the adamant of which it is composed, was hewn from that
rock rooted pillar, on whose base, our renowned predecessors poured libations
of philanthrophic blood. The materials for the temple were collected by the
virtuous dead. The handy work of ages past has been completed by the
meritorious living. Our fathers laid a foundation for the building, in the
wilderness of old: we their sons have finished the noblest edifice on earth,
and superadded a magnificent capital.

That philosophy which makes a rest at secondary causes, and implicatively
denies the agency of divine providence in nature, is only a refined species of
literary atheism. Every national revolution made to revolve on a similar axis,
is fashioned by the hand of political infidelity. The light within light of the
chariot by the river Chebar, withdraws from the center of its opaque body, and
in the same ratio that the self moved wheels roll rapid on, the glowing car
emits darkness visible. The first settlement of this country has been
attributed to an ardent love for civil liberty, mingled with a spirit of
restless discontent, and fostered by visions of ideal independence; but the
warmest attachment to legislative immunities, the strongest influence from
turbulent passion, and the remote prospect of future sovereignty, if combining
all their powers together, would have been totally inefficient, to accomplish
the Herculean labors of elder time. The glorious, the godlike toil of early
days demanded principles of a nobler nature, and energies of a sublimer order.
It was the violated rights of conscience, tremblingly alive unto Jehovah, which
colonized this howling, desert waste. It was religion that inspired the sons of
faith with caelestial fortitude, and caused the barren wild to blossom before
the daughters of hope. A persecuting Herod, jealous of regal power, winged the
knowledge of christianity beyond the Roman Eagle's most expanded flight. A
bigoted Laud, inebriate with pontifical pride, spread the triumphs of the
gospel to the western bourne of day; and both were made use of in the
mysterious economy of Heaven, by Him who educeth good from ill, to eventually
subserve the adorable purposes of Prince Messiah, against whom, they vainly
rose in impious arms.

Come, let us repair with solemnized step to the brow of you promontory, whose
adamantine arch hangs dreadful over ocean, and wait in retrospective idea, the
arrival of our venerable ancestors. Upborne on the bosom of the faithless deep,
their fragile skiff has ploughed the watery realm, for more than sixty days.
Amid the war of contending elements, the roar of embattled winds, and the dash
of tempestuous waves, they ride unhurt. At length, the ark of religious liberty
and of civil freedom rests before the Ararat of this late discovered world, and
fathers, mothers, babes prepare to land. What vast variety of untried
wretchedness, what painful scenes of bitterest sufferance throng inhospitable
shores, and bid to the wearied, weather beaten Argonauts an unsocial welcome!
Emerging from the forest's deep recess, see warlike hordes of savages rush on;
their quiver is an open tomb; their feathered shafts the messengers of fate;
behind them, prowls the hungry tenant of the wood, impatient for his prey;
before them, glides the crested serpent armed with deleterious fangs. Even
nature seems arrayed in robes of wrath. Stern winter mounts the pinnions of the
northern gale, and binds the vegetable tribes in iron bands. Gaunt famine
slowly creeps athwart the waste, and marks the living for her future own. Pale
sickness hovers round the wild, and shakes distemper from her feverish robe.
Grim death, relentless wields the burnished scythe and sweeps destruction's
desolating besom round. One half are numbered as the victims of these potent
foes: they sink beneath the tawny Sachem's nervous arm, bow to the chilling
rigors of the stormy clime, or faint and perish for the lack of bread. Say, can
the Israel of this western wilderness sustain such complicated ills, bravely
resolve to enter on the promised land, nor cast one longing, lingering look on
Egypt left behind? Yes! verily, they did. Collected in themselves the few
survivors stood, unmoved by approaching danger, and strong in reliance on the
arm Omnipotent, smiled at the King of terrors. Not the invenomed arrow that
smote unseen, the yell terrific of the painted warrior, nor the dread rider on
the pale horse, appalled their dauntless courage. Firmly they persevered, nobly
they conquered, greatly they triumphed, and rose from every fall, like the
fabled son of Antaeus, in renovated vigor. Soon did the dark haunts of barbaric
cruelty assume the polished tints of civilized life. Social institutions gave
confidence to hardy enterprise. Wise systems of policy secured the unalienable
rights of man. Purity of morals strengthened the family compact, and genuine
piety imparted her divinest energies. Thousands and tens of thousands heard the
goodly report: their souls, already wearied with the murders of Europe, panted
for repose: these stretched the strong pinion of the raven who returned no
more, and yet, they entered as doves, at the windows of a second ark: from
thence migratory flocks continually spread themselves abroad: the rustling of
their wings was heard in every part of this wide extended continent: on the
cloud capped summit of the lofty mound, or along the windings of the humbler
vale, they built the incubating nest secure for ages yet to come, and in the
short period of one hundred and fifty years, populated an immense territory of
one thousand five hundred miles in length, and upwards of three hundred in
breadth. Christianity is incompatible with hatred: it magnanimously forgives:
it generously forgets. The uplifted scourge of civil tyranny, the flaming sword
of religious intolerance and the torturing rack of unhallowed zeal, were
remembered no more. A father's naked inhumanity was covered by filial
affection, with the broad mantle of caelestial charity; and the meek children
of an austere step dame, preferred her genuine interests, above the chiefest
joys of independence. To that very power which had exiled our first parents
from the paradise of Europe, they fondly looked up for future protection, and
virtually pledged constitutional allegiance, so long as the cherubimic sword of
law should wave around the tree of liberty. At the same moment, greatly daring
to resolve that no laws should be made or imposed upon them, but according to
the free liberties of the free born subjects of the state and kingdom of
Great Britain. Royal charters established this declarative act, asserting the
rights of man. The seal imperial of Albion confirmed the majestic veto of
freedom, fixing a decided negative on despotic encroachments. Nearly a century
and a half elapsed in the mutual confidence of harmonious intercourse, and if a
transient cloud overshadowed the political horizon for a moment, it as
instantly vanished before the illuminating sun of rational discussion.
Reciprocal interchange of kind offices heightened common friendship into
fervent love, and sublimated fond affection, to almost, religious veneration.
How often did America jeopard her life on the high places of the field, and ward
the descending blow aimed at a father's head! While the heroes of the elder
world pressed onward to defend Britannia's favorite child, nor returned back
their glittering swords empty, from the death of fallen invaders. The treasures
of the mother country and her infant colonies, formed one family purse, ever
open to the warlike exigencies of the threatening hour, and the exports from
England, with the returns of America added more to the commerce of the former,
in sixty-eight years, than she had gained from an universe beside, in nearly
seventeen centuries. Thus tenderly connected by the most endearing sympathies
of blood, the undivided fellowship of the protestant religion, and all the
cementing bonds of one common interest, they both, at once commanded the
admiration, and excited the envy of the world: their most formidable enemies
felt the inefficacy of contending with irresistible power, and the laws of
stern necessity imposed humiliating tranquillity on jealous foes. But scarce had
the tempest of battle died gently away, or the rainbow of peace bounded the
triumphs of the desolating flood, when distant hemispheres were suddenly
involved in partial obscuration, and cloud on cloud condensing total darkness,
quenched the light of social amity. Hear, the tidings, O earth, and be
astonished! Hear it, ye nations, and tremble! The demon of avarice whispered on
the ear of a profligate and abandoned ministry, that illimited opulence
pervaded every corner of America, and the ruthless fiend of despotism armed
illegal power to seize the Hesperian fruit. From one iniquitous plan of lawless
taxation, they pressed on to another still more abhorrent of right. The honest
recompense of toiling industry was rendered precarious. The property of the
subject wrested from him without personal or virtual consent, and life itself
threatened by the Dionysian sword impendent. Eleven long years, patient
forbearance turned the cheek to the smiter, and breathed the mild language of,
"Sirs, why do ye this wrong?" In vain, did the united wisdom of America,
concentred in a general Congress, superior to the Amphictyonic council of
Greece; superior to Rome's august Senate in the meridian glories of her
republic, petition, remonstrate and appeal; plead the sacred authority of
written prescription; reason from the Magna Charta of Great Britain, or urge
the unsurrendered rights of social compact. Placemen, pensioners and hungry
court parasites turned away the royal ear abhorrent; closed the eye of the
monarch against the blaze of conviction, and steeled the heart of a Brunswick
to the cries of immutable justice. Not the eloquence of a Chatham rivetting
attention; not the lightnings of a Bar, flashing truth itself; not the
thunders of a then independent Burke, blasting the minnions of royalty, nor the
combined efforts of an illustrious band of virtuous peers and unbought
commoners, roused the sleeping nation to a sense of the dangerous precipice on
which tottering liberty stood trembling; nor convinced awide awake, venal
mojority, that the gulf of remediless ruin yawned varacious, beneath the
slippery foot of empire, sliding down the summit of imperial grandeur. Even
Franklin, who arrested the fires of heaven in mid career, who rent the scepter
from the tyrant's grasp, plead for the rights of his native country unnoticed;
and the paltry hireling of an insolent privy council, poured unmerited contempt
on the incontestable data of the political Newton. Unconditional subjection was
demanded at the point of the bayonet. The myrmidons of ministerial vengeance
swept resistless to enforce degrading submission; and on the ever memorable
nineteenth of April 1775, General Gage let slip the dogs of war, for the plains
of Lexington, and cried to the Cerberean brood of havoc, speed. The wounds
received on that day, were felt as an electric shock, vibrating through and
through America. Every nerve in the one body of the continent was feelingly
alive to sensibility of pain. The dying groans of expiring freemen woke the
offended majesty of injured fellow man, to sleep no more. As yet, averse to
imbrue the crimsoning hand in fraternal blood; as yet, actuated by principles
of filial affection; as yet, governed by sentiments of long cherished loyalty,
Congress made one last, one generous effort, to repress the future waste of
life, to hush the whirlwind of the passions kindling into rage, and smooth the
rising billows of destructive conflict, foaming to the skies.

The mild petition, bold remonstrance fail,
Two potent demons* lust of power and gold,
Whose cheeks never turned at human misery pale,
The reins of Albion's realm triumphant hold:
And mightier deeds of wrong, first penned in human blood,
Rush on the winged winds athwart the Atlantic's purpling flood.
Reluctantly goaded to magnanimous resistance, sternly impelled to adopt the
prima ratio Regum, our political fathers rallied round the altars of their
country; lodged an affecting appeal to the Righteous Judge of the whole earth,
and sounded the animating clarion of self defense: their dauntless
constituents, the free born sons of free born sires, heard the awful summons to
the field, and obeyed the awakening mandate of freedom with cheerful alacrity.
Veteran (...) the battle from afar. Rising youth felt the glow of manly valor.
The thundering of the captains, the neighing of the war steed, and the shout of
armies, were ravishing as the music of the spheres. Liberty or death, was the
impassioned cry of the moment, and wafted on the gales of heaven, it flew with
the velocity of sound, to the bourne of the continent. Bear witness to these
truths, ye glorified spirits of the patriot dead, who on the clouded heights of
mount Breed, ruled the vollied storm of fate. Attest the language of reality,
thou proto martyr in the cause of philanthrophy, immortal Warren, "who lived
like Hambden, and like Sydney died:" nor be thou absent, bold Montgomery, hero
of the north, whose verdant laurels were gathered on the plains of Abraham,
fast by the kindred tomb of conquering, dying Wolf. From this hour, pregnant
with the fate of unborn myriads, all hope of accommodation vanished. The day
was marked too deep in the red calendar of war, with conflagration and the
sword. The Rubicon was passed. Britain had seen Pharsalia. Henceforward,
Bellona lashed on her fiery coursers with redoubled swiftness. Fell discord
forged harsh thunders, loud responding to the brazen trumpet's tone. Death
smote his gorgon shield terrific, clashing on the din of rattling arms.
Brothers rose vindictive against brethren. The adverse parent and the hostile
child met frowning. The meekest charities of life enkindled into wrath. The
very milk of human kindness turned to inveterate gall. But why attempt to paint
the moral mischiefs of war? They furnish a melancholy theme, too melancholy for
this joyous day. No strength of speech describes the embittered woes of kindred
strife, for when the cause is forever suspended, the heart rending effect too
frequently remains, and even amid the choral songs of fraternized man, on this
auspicious hour, some poisonous drops by the infernal adder shed, still mantle
in the golden bowl of bliss. Here then, we give a generous (...) all the
wounded sensibilities of time; nor make a longer pause where nature's self
recoils. Rather let us press forward where the unfurled standard of liberty
points the path, and follow the varying fortunes of America through the hard
contested field of battle, until independence crowned her glorious efforts with
complete success, and peace seated freedom on the top of a rock, above the
smiles, above the frowns of kings.

Inexpert in the horrid science of systematic murder; unfurnished with the
dreadful apparatus of military death; embarrassed by the want of competent
internal resources, destitute of friendly assistance from the belligerent
powers of Europe; and deficient in silver or gold, the essential vis vitae of
war, America greatly rose to meet the advancing Goliath of nations, and hurled
the gauntlet of defiance at the most potent enemy on the terraqueous globe; an
enemy, whose garments had been rolled in blood from the days of Caesar; an
enemy whose mighty men had been clothed in the scarlet of the slain from the
morn of imperial existence; an enemy, whose unconquered armies had carried
terror beyond the pillars of Hercules; an enemy, whose invincible navies had
winged the laws of conquest to either pole; an enemy, whose credit commanded
the monied interest of an universe, pouring riches into full exchequers, and
stranger still to tell, and harder to believe, whose opulence bought whole
hecatombs of fellow men to colonize the land of death. What is there godlike
and heroic, which liberty cannot effect? Who shall set a limit to the triumphs
of freedom? What tyrant chain the energy of public virtue? If confident in the
justice of their cause, and consequently perfect in the bond of their union,
there is nothing, humanly speaking, impossible unto them. Such was the
confidence of these devoted colonies. Such was the union of a proscribed
confederation. America, in the humble character of the greatly oppressed, could
look up to the throne of the Most Highest, and reverentially wait for his
crowning blessing on the means of self defense; whilst darting her eagle eye
from the orient chambers of light, to the shrouding billows of the western
main, she saw a decided majority of her gallant sons, clothed in the whole
armor of conscious rectitude, and panting to signalize Spartan valor in
behalf of all that was dear. Servitude or death, were the bitter cups which
Great Britain had mingled in the frenzied hour of political distraction. To
have drank the deleterious draught of the envenomed bowl; to have quaffed the
dregs of slavery, in hope to ward the stroke of dissolution, would have been
the avowed commission of high treason deliberately levelled, at the present,
the future majesty of man; and finally, the nefarious deed must have been
accompanied, by a dastardly, base attempt at voluntary national suicide.
Indignant public spirit scorned to reason on either dread alternative. Self
love, "the essence of the social frame," spurned at the former, and dashed the
latter on the ground. Not the fame of British victories blazoned in the
armorial bearings of a thousand generations; not the experience of her generals
trained in the school of Frederic, falsely called the great; not the discipline
of her armies, secretly moved by some invisible automaton; not the terrors of
the Hessian name trumpeted as individual Alexander's, nor Ate hot from hell,
perched on the savage Biped's nodding plume, induced a momentary pause. The
specious language of pretended conciliation; the promises of a court grown gray
in duplicity; the seductive arts of golden bribery, and regal smiles, fair
fraught with blooming honors, led not to the hesitance of a dubious second. In
the council of the Union, on the field of glory, Columbia's guardian genius was
ever present. Liberty in person took charge of this new found world: around the
plains of Lexington she spread the covering wing; on the pale cheek of Warren
imprinted her smile caelestial; twined a chaplet of glory for the dying
Montgomery; rode onward with Lee to the burning wastes of the south; and
inspired the bosom of Moultrie with more than mortal bravery. Her eye ever
brilliant and unclouded, marked the path of wanton desolation as she passed,
and engraved on the marble of indelible infamy, as with a pen of iron, the
everlasting record of Gothic barbarity. She saw a perfidious Dunmore arm the
Ethiopian against his master's life: read the orders of Campbell, for loosing
the sons of Altamaha: kenned the mandate to Carlton, awakening the northern
Sachem: and beheld Charlestown, Falmouth and Norfolk ascend in flame, to the
pitying skies. Famine, sword, fire stood before her in all their horrors:
death, rapine, rape, frowned on her view. One hundred ships of war were
encircling her coasts, from the waves of Piscataqua, to the floods of St.
Croix. Forty thousand Britons and seventeen thousand Hessians stood on tip-toe,
to spring the mine of fate, and whelm her most favored residence, the future
asylum of persecuted man, in awful, undistinguished ruin: one interesting
moment, on the banks of the Schuylkill, deliberative, she paused: Then laying
the right hand impressive on her high beating heart, majestically raised the
left toward heaven, and slowly poizing the trump of freedom, in mid air, blew
the blast of Independence with Archangelic energy, shook the throne of tyranny
to the center of its base, and roused the nations of Europe from the Lethean
slumber of ages.

Hail to the day! First born of nature's prime!
Who bids not to the noon tide morning, hail?
Then virtue, freedom, energies sublime,
Opened the dark dungeon of that horrid jail,
Where bound for ages past, with despotism's brazen chain,
Despairing victims groaned out hated life in pain.
From north to south, from east to west was heard,
The sovereign fiat of the power beloved:
Each separate State confirmed the sacred word,
And all Columbia's millions high approved;
While gladdened time renewed his hoary age on earth,
And sealed this glorious hour, creation's renovated birth.
But scarce had the assenting voice of exulting millions ratified the high
decree of independence, or the raptured eye of patriotism gazed on her virgin
form for one extasied moment, when the bursting tempest of ten fold war poured
impetuous on. Disappointed ambition summoned unforgiving vengeance to the
contest. Who did not tremble for the holy fire so late enkindled on the altars
of Columbia? Who felt not for the safety of the priesthood ministering before
the hallowed flame, a flame more pure than Persia's purest fires, though
borrowed from the lamp of day, inscribed to the Lord of light, and fed by all
the aromatic odors of the east? These were the times that tried men's souls.
Monarchial indignation had not worn a form so furious since the proud Chaldean
maddened on the plains of Durah. Patriots and heroes were purified in a burning
fiery furnace, heat seven times hotter than ministerial wrath had ever heat it:
they came forth unhurt: no change of principle could pass upon them; and yet,
how intense were the sufferings of the torturing moment! Here, Britain's
invincible phalanx moved resistless in front. There, Brunswick's impenetrable
column closed a guarded rear. The armies of liberty were borne headlong before
the rushing torrent. Rout followed ruin wild. Disaster hung upon defeat.
Victory abandoned the eagle of America and hovered on the rampant lion's crest.
New York, York-Island, forts Washington and Lee successively fell. Rhode Island
was taken. The Achilles of Columbia made prisoner. Canada recovered, and the
Jerseys abandoned to pillage, murder, rape, and all the plagues of diabolic
warfare. The wounded, gasping on the field, imploring quarter, was denied the
boon. The captive drank the cup of poison, ministered as medicine to the
fainting soul, and breathed his last in agonies. The weeping female, yet an
infant, mourned her violated chastity, and wept for life, the vile attempt of
ruffian power. The father, shielding virgin modesty, was stabbed. The mother,
clasping virtue to her bosom, met the bayonet's keen point. Bones hearsed in
death were scattered to the winds of heaven. The tomb's dark vail that hid the
sleeping fair, was rent in twain. Temples devote to God, Lyceums dedicate to
science, and the muses still retreat, were wantonly profaned, trampled in the
dust, or changed into midnight brothels and lascivious haunts. Heavens! What a
catalogue! One half remains untold. A nation's penitence sincere for ages; an
empire's tears for centuries to come can never wash away such stains. "Accusing
spirits who flew to heaven's high chancery, wept as they delivered in the sum
of guilt. Recording angels were forbidden to drop a tear, and blot out even one
iota." Verily, verily, as ye have done unto others, it shall be recompensed
unto you again. The bolt of moral retribution may for a time be suspended on
high; but accumulating vengeance by lengthened delay, it shall eventually fall
with an increased momentum, and whelm the guilty with a sudden, with a fatal
blow. Britannia! Thou art weighed in the balance of eternal justice, and Tekel
is written upon all thy walls. The scourge of nations is found wanting of
humanity.

At this melancholy period, the deficit of an efficient, permanent Continental
army was most sensibly felt. As the term of individual enlistment expired, the
soldier sought his native home; and few could be prevailed upon to tarry beyond
the definite hour of service. Even Washington, the illustrious commander of the
conquered, conquering armies of his country, for one moment suffered the
burning shame of almost total dereliction. Resolute, he wheeled his proud
spirited courser in front of an advancing foe, and while all the generous
passions harrowed up his mighty soul, appeared to wait an honorable death from
some friendly, adverse bayonet. Is there a bosom in this assembly that does not
beat to arms, at the painful idea of a Washington's being necessitated to
immolate his precious life, before the deserted shrine of public honor? Even
female sensibility presses the delicate hand involuntary on her side, searches
in the affecting impress of the second for the manly sword, and feelingly
demands of her throbbing heart, where was I at that awful crisis? Hear it, O
America and rejoice, Washington lives. Some confidential friend, whose name
deserves the brightest niche in the pantheon of worthies, turns the obedient
war horse round, and saves the godlike charge he bore, "the soul of peace, the
conquering arm of war," from an untimely fate. Superior in every other moment
of his life, to the impressions of adverse fortune, and only stamped as man in
the passing instant of agonized feelings, the Epaminondas of the new world,
triumphs at Trenton, conquers at Princeton, and at the head of seventeen
hundred continentals, circumscribes as many thousands, within the narrow line
himself had drawn.

These brilliant actions roused the genius of Columbia from the languors of
despondence, induced by having bled at every pore; rekindled the martial ardors
of America nearly extinct throughout on inundated Continent, and prepared the
United States for the threatened severities of the spring campaign, when the
very soul of ancient chivalry, the courteous knight in Britain's wild romance,
promised to dance the ladies into gilded chains, and coaxe the gentlemen to hug
those fetters which his masters forged; or whelm the fair beneath the
tomahawk's descending weight, and pour on vile rebellion's crest the storm of
savage ire. Burgoyne! proud boasting, playful chief! Rest thou awhile on
Hudson's flowery banks, and with thee rest thy pompous proclamation, penned by
some fairy sprite of Rudar's isle. The matchless prowess of thine arm, and the
attic eloquence of thy tongue are impotent as the magic spell of Areskoui, or
the midnight incantation of the Indian auruspex. Not Frazer's gallant
intrepidity, Ackland's daring valor, nor Rhaidhaschel's impassioned bravery;
not the military boast of Albion, Hesse Cassel's strength in war, nor
Abonaquie's giant brood shall save the laurel withering on thy brow.
New-Hampshire's, hardy, honorable yeomen, breathing of that spirit which
M'Clary breathed at Warren's side, brave as those troops a Cilley and a
Dearborne led on Monmouth's plains, and dauntless as her earlier sons who fell
with gallant Wiswal, or with daring Lovewel fought, shall bound the fancied
conquests of the dying Baum, and hold a British army in the toils which Stark
first spread, till Gates and Lincoln sweep the encircling compass round, and
sternly say, no farther shall thou come.

Till this moment, every power in Europe had poized the scale of neutrality.
Burgoyne's descending weight, descending with ten thousand troops,
preponderated the balance. Howe's partial victory at the forks of Brandywine,
the subsequent loss of Philadelphia, with the final captures of Mud Island and
Red Bank, the conflagration of Esopus, and the divided honors of Germantown, no
longer shed a malignant influence on the American character at foreign courts.
These sinister events were justly regarded as the casualties of the hour, and
not as the effects of national imbecility, or the want of martial spirit; and
at the dawn of the ensuing year, France concluded a treaty of amity and
alliance with the United States, witnessing the sincerity of her professions,
by the speedy equipment of a strong squadron, with proportionable land forces,
destined for active service in America. The zealous, though unsuccessful
efforts of the Comte D'Estaing, from whose venerable temples the demon of
jealousy rent the chaplet of nautical glory; and against whom in-auspicious
elements fought in their courses; deserve to be remembered with national
gratitude to the latest period of time: while the more fortunate exertions of
the Counts de Grass and Rochambeau, in conjunction with the armies of the
Union, commanded by the one Generalissimo of America, must call forth the
warmest eulogy of kindred spirits, at present on the theater of achieved
blessings, and ensure the animated applauses of the remotest posterity, until
in the nervous language of the celebrated J. M. Sewall, "the moon veils her
rays, and the sun lose his path way in heaven." The capitulation of York-town,
and the surrender of Lord Cornwallis with his whole army, amply compensated for
every painful event, and added a brilliance to every pleasing circumstance
which preceded this glorious termination of an eight years war. A victory of so
important a nature freshened the verdure of those laurels which his Excellency
gained at Monmouth; threw a radiance round the tomb of Pulaski, who fell before
Savannah; covered the capture of Charleston, on whose untenable ramparts
Lincoln smiled at famine, restored to Gates the wreath of ancient fame, borne
away from Camden, by a flying militia; perfumed the bed of honor, where the
Baron de Kalb reposed on eleven wounds; encircled the head of Green with
brighter rays of triumph at Guildford and Eutaw; and almost obliterated the
remembrance of Fairfield, Norwalk, and Bedford burnt; with a great part of the
Jersies ravaged a second time. Virginia made a mart of military plunder; the
Carolinas overrun by systematic thieves; and the garrison at fort Griswold
inhumanly massacred by an infamous parricide, who robbed his country, murdered
her sons in cold blood, and basely deserted his friend, the all accomplished,
still regretted Andre.

Thus closed the most momentous contest, which had ever summoned warlike
legions to the field. On the part of America, it was not the lust of dominion;
a wish for the extension of commerce; or the fever of increasing, yet unsated
cupidity, which beamed as the motto of her hostile banners, or was heard in the
shrill tone of her defiant clarions: she nobly contended for liberty, the grand
birthright of human nature: she drew her unfleshed falchion in the cause of
illimited philanthropy: the threefold energies of public spirit, virtue and
perseverance were proud to follow in her train: heaven graciously rewarded her
magnanimous efforts with complete success, exceeding sanguine expectation;
established her independence by the return of an early peace; necessitated the
recognition of her sovereignty from the nations of Europe, and rendered her no
less respectable abroad, than secure at home. At this delightful period of our
transitory retrospect, on mighty labors and on countless toils, the hero's
noblest monument, the patriot's richest meed, it becomes us to make a
heartfelt pause, most gratefully to acknowledge our manifold obligations, unto
Almighty GOD, whose right (...) was so often made bare for our temporal
salvation. To him, we are indebted for that spirit of wisdom which
distinguished the supreme council of Amreica; for the remarkable union that
pervaded so immense a body as three millions of people; for the astonishing
patience, fortitude and bravery, exhibited by the troops of the continent; for
the final friendly disposition of France, Spain and Holland; and above all for
the continued preservation of one inestimable life, no less essential to the
future well being of his country in peace, than the strength of battle in the
day of war; "his head a senate, and his arm an host". And here, what praises
are due to the magnanimous commander in chief of our armies, who scarcely ever
had a permanent and effective corpse to second his designs; who frequently was
obliged to borrow money for immediate public exigence on his own personal
credit; who was often impelled to raise temporary supplies by extraordinary
impress, which his soul abhorred; who was followed to victory by a few faithful
Continentals, shivering in December for the want of a blanket, and marking the
footsteps of conquest in the dripping blood of freemen, empurpling wintry
snows! The monumental column of enduring brass; the luminous record of the
historic page and the animated pathos of eloquence, with the mellifluous
strains of poesy, are incompetent to preserve the memory of his illustrious
achievements, and fail in their attempt to deleniate his godlike character. The
human bosom forms the living archive in which his virtues are feelingly
deposited; his deathless deeds are inscribed on the tablet of the heart, by the
pencil of gratitude, and the name of Washington shall live in the memory of
man, until the stars of American glory quit the radiant sphere of heaven, and
waste their evening fires in lighting nature's final tomb. Nor are the patriot
forces of the Union less deserving of the impassioned Io paean, breathing
fervent thanks for meritorious service. Principles of honor nerved the officers
to incredible valor and unparallelled sufferings; taught them to seek the post
of danger, insensible to fear, and forbade their retreat from the embowelled
mine, charged with sudden death; a noble spirit of generous emulation governed
their conduct; the united band of Masonic brothers started together for the
self same prize of independence, and no one outstripped another in the course
of glory. All personal considerations of a selfish nature appear to have been
swallowed up in the most ardent amor patriae. The endearing charms of domestic
felicity, the sweet converse of the wedded fair, the lovely prattle of the
beauteous babe, were cheerfully resigned at their country's call; and even the
paternal feelings, the conjugal sensibilities, and the friendly affections,
exerted their attractive influence in vain, when America shouted for the
battle, and cried to arms, to arms. Animated by the glorious exemplar of their
adored chieftain, they towered above the height of human excellence, and having
risen to the achme of caelestial virtue, the fruit of immortality is their high
reward; they shall live forever.

An equal, if not superior magnanimity, distinguished the regular troops of
America, and pervaded the inferior grades of military life, whose lot forbade
the animating influence of refined sensibilities, and damped the elevating hope
of preferment above subaltern rank. A strong moral sense of duty, united with
an invincible love for their country, co-blended the character of the passive
citizen, with that of the active soldier. Even in the hour of frenzied
desperation, when poverty, nakedness and famine severely experienced in the
camps, and bitterly felt by suffering kindred charities at home, imperiously
necessitated them for a moment to shoulder their arms and wheel to the right
about, they unanimously spurned at the golden lures of Sir Henry Clinton, and
delivered up his secret emissaries to instantaneous punishment. Men actuated by
such independence of soul, so patient in the most trying scenes, so incorrupt*
in the day of temptation, are superior to all the satellites of despotism,
between the van of Nimrod on the plains of Babel, and the rear of combined
tyranny desolating Europe; their virtues are recorded by a heaven taught
Humphreys in the (...) numbers of his fraternal page: their sufferings have
been eternized by an independent Madison, in the living pathos of Demosthenian
eloquence: and the noblest panegyric of the patriot army is comprised in this
laconic sentence, these troops were worthy of a Washington's command.

Often have their limbs the frozen earth comprest,
While round their heads the watery torrent poured:
Thick clouds the curtain to their couch of rest,
When the bleak wind and midnight hail-storm roared:
Or else advancing with the solar ray,
Their spirits flamed to meet the light'ning's glare,
In hostile realms of ever burning day,
Sad haunts of death, and plagues, and putrid air.
These hallowed truths, (...) on glory's roll,
And writ in blood on (...) purple vest,
Shall future warriors born of kindred soul,
With conscious pride and martial zeal attest.
Whilst veteran forms shall often recount the tale,
Of gallant troops unclothed, unpaid, unfed,
Who stood the summer's heat, the winter's gale,
Nor turned their bosoms from destruction's blade.
Is it possible for imagination in her boldest flight, to conceive of ought on
earth, which can impress a more radiant luster on those luminous rays that
already encircle the laurelled brows of the illustrious chieftain, and his
brave compeers in fame? What virtue herself almost despaired of, Washington
greatly effected. His voluntary resignation of the momentous powers with which
his country had invested him, accompanied by a silent retreat to the
philosophic ^^^des of Mount-Vernon, and followed by his paternal legacy to the
infant States, imposed an eternal seal on the lip of detraction, and flushed
the pale cheek of envy with a deepening crimson. Every officer felt emulous to
(...) his General's example, though far removed from (...) august original.
Even the common soldiers caught the flame of patriotism, and having conquered
the foes of America, obtained the noblest triumph over themselves; whilst the
whole army, as "if to (...) forgetfulness a prey, their pleasing* anxious (...)
life resigned, left the loved precincts of the tented field, nor cast one
longing look, except on peace." Father of Columbia! friend to the human race!
(...) thou for a moment from the toils of war. Virtual like thine, are destined
to fill an ever active round. It is yet a very little while, and Madison shall
rouse the ancient confederation to contemplate their own imbecility. A new
constitution, rising as a Phaenix, from the ashes of the old, imprints the
features of youth on the aspect of decay, and gives a nervous tone to the
paralized public body, henceforward impassive of dissolution. Lo the voice of
the people, that voice which Washington himself obeys, gratefully intrudes upon
his beloved retreat: the united suffrages of accordant millions call forth his
salvatory powers a second time: he is seated supreme at the head of the federal
government, and guided by the polar star of the constitution, the momentary
variation of the political magnet shall never alter his steady course. America,
how immense are thy obligations to the first, the best of men! are the nations
of the elder world sinking in the whirlpool of war? does restless ambition urge
the United States within the vortex? he lifts aloft the balance of impartial
neutrality and forbids the suspended scale to incline. Is the trump of
rebellion blown? (...) lawless anarchy unfurled her standard? his invaluable
life is hazarded in the restoration of order. Faction feels apalled at (...)
approach. The demon of confusion hides the head, abashed. How pleasing the task
to amplify this transient sketch! but modest (...) the attempt as too arduous.

For (...) muse's grandest strain,
With patriots, heroes in her train,
Can eternize such worth:
To s^^aph forms that task is given,
And (...) tongues of elder heaven,
(...) praise of earth.
It is time that we contemplate the important consequences which have resulted
to America, from the acknowledgment and confirmation of her independence. Her
territorial property, guaranteed, by the treaty of 1783, includes a diversified
variety of climate, combining the salutiferous extremes of northern cold, with
the fructifying heats of the sultry south. Almost every (...) production which
is common to Europe, and many that are indigenous to this quarter (...) the
globe have opened an extensive field for the genius of cultivation, where
science may rove unfettered in (...) flowery researches, or virgin nature,
"snatch's gr^^e beyond the reach of art." Commerce no longer shackled by
jealous restraint, spreads her snow white pinions to every gale of heaven; now
combats with the tempest brooding round the pole, or wings her dauntless way,
amid the lightnings of the east. New resources of national opulence are daily
unfolding; and private enterprise has met an abundant reward. Even, the
spoliations of mercantile interest, have not been without their public utility.
The meritorious class of immediate sufferers, are very far from having been the
most clamorous for hostile reprisals; and the amiable spirit of pacific
accommodation, which they generally preferred to the horrors of a continental
war, will reflect the highest honor on the great body of American merchants,
when the vox et preterea nihil of uninterested passion is forever silenced.
Partial evils are inseparable from a state of warfare. The reciprocal
jealousies of belligerent powers, only intent on doing the utmost possible
mischief to each other, frequently induce both to leap the barriers of right,
and unoffending neutrality is the innocent victim of either triumphant party.
Happy, thrice happy the people, who calmly weigh their real interests in the
even scale of reason, and for a while suffer individual wrong with patience,
deeming it vastly preferable to universal ill. The population of the union
claims our next attention* America, in the language of an ancient writer, may
be styled the forge of the human race, and (...) by the continual influx of
emigrants, who are driven from their native homes, to seek repose beneath our
shadowy pinions, must finally arrive at that infinity of numbers, which will
baffle the powers of a census. The State of New York in 1756 contained 83,233
inhabitants; in 1777 no less than ^48,124; an increase of nearly two for one,
in fifteen years. Some parts of New England have exceeded this ratio, and the
peopling of Vermont, Kentucky, the Western Territory, and the government south
of the Ohio, almost surpasses credibility. The first of these States was a
pathless desert at the dawn of the late contest. It now embosoms upwards of one
hundred thousand inhabitants. The second had scarcely been explored by the
hunter in 1775. At present, it boasts more men than Georgia, Delaware or
Rhode Island; and the settlements north and south of the Ohio, have been, if
possible, more rapid in population than the two last pillars of the Federal
Dome.

What an astonishing scene presents to the philosophic eye! what a delightful
prospect opens on the philanthropic mind! already we see in beauteous vision,
the yet untrodden wilderness, penetrated by the daring sons of bold adventure;
behold the illimited morass yield to the strong arm of hardy agriculture, and
even those immense forests beyond the western plains, which are the secret
haunts of Mammoth, become the future abodes of social life; while the
humanizing arts know no boundaries but the distant horizon; and literature
closes her splendid career that commenced at the portals of day, by
illuminating the windows of the setting sun. At the same moment let us indulge
the pleasing hope, that the inestimable blessings of our federal government,
and the dignified spirit of Washington's patriotic administration, holding the
olive branch of peace in his right hand, as the most valuable offering to
surrounding nations; and grasping the untarnished sword of empire with his
left, in awful memento, that America is sovereign, independent and free, may
shed their benignest influence on every rising republic, added to the
increasing political family; and the clustering stars of the consolidated
union, eventually form one unclouded galaxy of federate glory* shining brighter
and brighter to the perfect day of universal freedom.

Neither have the effects of our independence been less perceptible in Europe,
than visible in America. It was a spark from the altar flame of liberty on this
side of the Atlantic, which alight on the pinnacle of despotism in France, and
reduced the immense fabric to ashes, in the twinkling of an eye. Then, the
guarded recesses of tyranny, which had been inviolate for one hundred and
seventy years, were penetrated by the majesty of man. The dread asylum of
clerical domination was overturned by the spirit of freedom. The impregnable
castles of a haughty noblesse were levelled in the dust of ruin. A mercenary
band of foreign Janissaries, armed against the people, was completely
annihilated. An intolerant system of oppressive taxation, lightened from the
bending shoulders of crouching subjects. Infernal lettres de cachet, the
midnight death warrant of domestic happiness, forever suspended. The armorial
trappings of ancestral pride torn in pieces: and the sanctuary of lawless power
uprooted from its sanguinary base. Happy, happy indeed should we be, to close
the portrait here, and give to ^allic animation, the best applauses of a sister
spirit. But the tragical excesses of independent (...), the vile automatons of
anarchy, arrest our praise. The iron r^in of self created clubs, controlling
law, calls forth abhorrence. The horrid despotism of the bloody Robespierre
commands our detestation. The unmerited proscription of the brave Fayette
excites the indignant thrill; and on the scaffold of Louis XVI, only known to
us, in the character of a greatly needed, much loved friend, humanity turns
pale, and friendship weeps. How solemn is the lecture read by France! How awful
the memento of our first ally! To us, to us, her millions cry with trumpet
tongue, "preserve the checks and balances of duly constituted powers: and let
not liberty verge to licentiousness." More they would say, mark other rocks,
and point to different gulfs; but tears of sensibility prevent. Her moderates
mourn ten thousand lawless murders.

The revolution in Poland, conducted by the gallant Kosciusko, the pupil of the
immortal Washington, was a consequen^^, flowing from the struggles of America,
and the abolition of African slavery, with the diminution of (...) powers, and
the suspension of the question by torture, are scyons from the parent tree of
the west. To the first of these noble efforts in behalf of man, the proud
Autocratix of accused despotism, whose throne is based on the quivering limbs
of mangled victims, has imperiously set an everlasting seal. May the latter be
eternally prospered, and Ethiopia soon stretch out her hands, filled with
blessings from heaven above, and from earth beneath; while civil tyranny and
religious bigotry shall weep deserted palaces, and mourn abandoned altars. To
(...) up all in a few words, the increasing light of knowledge, accompanied by
virtue, animated (...) freedom, and supported by fortitude, must eventually
progress, like the widely diffused rays of yen caelestial luminary, under these
whole heavens; and finally, in the vast expansion of the family of earth,
political servitude, bending of the neck obsequious; or prostrate, kneeling in
the dirt to diadems, shall be abolished by the native Majesty of the image of a
GOD, rising in defense of its insulted dignity, and known no more at all, from
age to age, world without end, henceforth, forever.

Roused by the wrongs of much forbearing man,
Some bold Montgomery yet shall dauntless rise,
Where Russian deserts hive the droning clan,
Fling Liberty's broad blaze over boreal skies;
And plant amid Siberia's frozen waste,
The living tree of freedom, sweet to human taste.
As yet, some Green more sultry realms shall tread,
With banners blazoning on the face of day;
While shouting hosts, nor clothed, nor paid, nor fed,
Rush on, where Green and virtue point the way,
Snatch from the tyger's jaw his panting food;
And trample grim oppression's fell, Hyaena brood!
As yet some Lee where flames the torrid east,
Shall as the whirling comet speed through space;
And lightning on the eagle's blood stained nest,
Save from his grasping fangs the fluttering race;
While carrols sweet as those of Eden's bower,
In notes extatic, hail the long expected hour.
Yes! Man a fellow denizen with men,
Shall know no country but the boundless world:
The globe's last bourne shall open on his ken;
And where the red gonfalon is unfurled,
That threats destruction to a single part,
The tribes of earth shall flock with death devoted heart.
Ever honored fathers of New Hampshire, respected inhabitants of Portsmouth,
and beloved fellow-citizens of the United States!

The improvement of the august subject, which has engaged the most candid
attention, rests with yourselves. As members of the federate family, be ye
persuaded, that the strength of the body politic, depends upon the harmony of
its constituent parts. The spirit of extreme equality, and of rational liberty
are diametrical opposites. Suffer not the best possible form of general
government, which has been ratified by the unanimous suffrage of millions, to
be overturned from its base, by the demon of popular jealousy, whose right hand
is armed with the sword of civil war, and whose left wields the disguised
scepter of infernal tyranny. As individuals, remember the lessons of piety,
religion and morality, impressed by the dying lips of your venerable
forefathers, and inscribe their sacred admonitions, not on the phylacteries of
a specious freedom, flowing to the loosened gales of pestiferous anarchy, but
on the inmost recesses of the grateful heart, animated by unfeigned devotion to
GOD, the giver of those inestimable blessings, which you liberally enjoy; and
warm with fervent love for fellow man, the fraternal participant in bounteous
good. Set laudable examples of frugality, economy and industry. The sons of
indolence are ever active in evil. Discountenance luxury, dissipation and
pleasure; they are enervating Genii, inimical to the interests of a pure
democracy. Athens strongly corroborates this momentous truth: her voluptuous
spirit trembled more at the annihilation of festive sports, than at the
threatened destruction of the ancient republic.: Philip was not regarded as the
enemy of liberty, but feared as the foe of pleasure; and she passed a law,
which rendered it death, to convert those moneys that were destined for the
support of a theater, to the salvation of a sinking state. The Baron
Montesquieu has justly observed that virtue in a republic is a most simple
thing: it is a love for the laws: an innate amor patriae: a sensation, and not
a consequent of acquired knowledge: a sensation that may be felt by the lowest,
as well as by the highest person in the commonwealth. Retrace the astonishing
efficacy of this principle in the late arduous contest, and again reduce its
wonder working energies to vital practice. America has passed the boundaries of
morn: the rays of her glory are almost vertical. Every effort of the union, and
of individuals ought to be combined in causing the sun of empire to stand
still, that it may not haste to go down; and nothing can effectuate this,
except the potent arm of primitive simplicity, temperance and sobriety puts on
strength as in ancient days, and retards the otherways descending chariot,
whirling from the zenith of glory, to the nadir of declension. A celebrated
writer has remarked that immoral action is the last efficient in the
dissolution of republics. Trivial carelessness, slight faults, dangerous
examples, small seeds of corruption and whatever does not openly violate, but
secretly elude the laws; whatever does not boldly subvert their power, but
insensibly weakens their force, are the unseen moles of empire, working under
cover, till the walls of beauty and the gates of praise, sapped to their
foundation, tumble headlong of themselves, and fill the opening ditch of
desolation with the mutilated fragments of ruined grandeur.

Stand, therefore, on the watch towers of virtue in the day time, nor leave the
temple of public morals unguarded for a moment. Inculcate reverence, respect
and obedience to the powers that are: they have been elected by the united
voice of incorrupt freemen; and if any one individual should prove unworthy of
future trust, remember that he is amenable to the great body of the people; and
not to a petit tribunal, composed of a few designing characters, who snatch the
balance and the rod from the only legal constituent, the sole annihilating
power. Be diffident of those restless spirits who delight in foreign war, or
foment internal commotions. America has nothing to gain, if victory followed
her standard to Europe; and every thing to lose, should her own household rise
up as homebred foes. Learn from the example of a thousand ages, confirmed by
the voice of Solomon himself, that virtue alone exalts a nation, whilst vice
uproots heroic states, and lays them low, to rise no more. Bend the whole force
of education to avert such awful change. That confidence which the union
reposed in the general government during the late war, imparted the strength of
the arm to the extremities of the foot, and braced the whole body erect against
the raging tempest. This confidence, if insensibly weakened, must affect every
part of the complicate system, and at length will induce a rapid consumption of
those vital energies that are essential to the health of the political frame.
The watchful assiduity of nursing fathers, the unwearied solicitude of public
ministers, and the invigorating aid of private citizens, are all invoked in
behalf of the best interests of the mighty whole; while the last, the
tenderest, the most pathetic appeal is lodged to female worth, the constituted
primal guardian angel of this immense confederation.

To you, my respected, honored friends, society confides the all important
charge of early discipline. The opening mind is daily fashioned by your plastic
powers. The future man is but the image of his first preceptress.
Conscientiously discharge the glorious task assigned. Religiously fulfill the
noblest duty in the sphere of life. Your animating smiles supported the
desponding spirit of the war worn hero. Your soothing accents roused the dying
confidence of patriots yielding to the storm. America well pleased with the
past, resigns her present, future hope to the gentle influence of your refined
examples; to the instructive lore of virtue's fairest precepts; and on this
day, the birth day of empire, commits the children of the federal republic in
solemn trust to the lovely daughters of Columbia. May heaven and earth united,
give that plaudit to your meritorious toils, which woman has deserved in every
age; and both pronounce, without one voice dissenting from the eulogy divine,
"faithful and good, well done."

FINIS.

