AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT GREENVILLE, HEADQUARTERS OF THE WESTERN ARMY, NORTH
WEST OF THE OHIO, July 4th, 1795.

By the Rev. Morgan J. Rhees, A LATE EMIGRANT FROM WALES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY LANG and USTICK. 1795.

[From the PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE.]
Mr. BROWN,
A COPY of the enclosed ORATION delivered on the late Anniversary of American
Independence, was presented to a citizen of Philadelphia. That citizen, wishing
to make a good use of it, forwards it to your press for publication -- sensible
that the perusal of it will afford pleasure to all the sincere Lovers of
LIBERTY! -- The author is greatly and deservedly esteemed by all who know him.

W. R.
PHILADELPHIA, Sep. 7, 1795.
AN ORATION.
ILLUSTRIOUS AMERICANS! NOBLE PATRIOTS! You commemorate a glorious day -- the
birthday of Freedom in the New World. Yes, Columbia, thou art free. The
twentieth year of thy independence commences this day. Thou have taken the lead
in regenerating the world! Look back -- look forward. Think of the past --
anticipate the future, and behold with astonishment, the transactions of the
present time! The globe revolves on the axis of Liberty! The new world has put
the old in motion. The light of truth, running rapid, like lightning, flashes
convictions in the heart of every civilized nation. Yes, the thunder of
American remonstrances, has fallen so heavy on the head of the Tyrant, that
other nations, encouraged by her example, will extirpate all despots from the
earth.

O FRANCE: although I do not justify thy excesses, I venerate thy magnanimity.
If the sun of thy liberty has been eclipsed by a blood-thirsty Marat and a
saturnine Robespierre; if their accomplices, the sons of faction, still darken
thy horizon! -- the energy of the nation, the unparalleled successes of thy
armies, like a mighty rushing wind, will scatter the clouds, and drive them
from thy hemisphere. The sun of liberty will return with healing in its wings!
-- yes, its genial rays will restore the drooping spirit of the distressed, and
give new energy to the champions of freedom.

INVINCIBLE FRENCHMEN! go on. Having laid your hands to the plough, look not
back, until the soil of Europe is made a proper fallow, to receive the seeds of
emancipation.

The Popish beast has nearly numbered his days. The vassal kings, emperors, and
princes, who have deluged the earth with blood, under his malign influence,
shall soon take their exit with him, to the same PIT of destruction -- Nor
shall those potentates who have thrown off his yoke, to ape his authority,
escape the punishment due for their crimes. They have, under the mask of
manumission, riveted the chains of slavery twofold faster, than Charlemagne or
Louis le Grand had it in their power. However, when the sons of liberty will
make a strong pull, a long pull, and a pull all together, the brass bars, the
iron gates, the gold and silver chains of despotism, must be broken.

Combined Sons of Freedom! go on, until every bastile on earth, with the
infernal dungeons of the ocean The British men of war.
are destroyed like the Parisian prison.

Batavians and Belgians! rally to the standard of your deliverers -- assist
them to carry their conquests to the citadel of Rome, that the Tree of Liberty
may be planted, once more, on the banks of the Tiber.

If the court of Byzantum should be inimical to your progress, tell the monster
Mahomed, that the flag of freedom shall soon fly on the ramparts of
Constantinople.

Neither the Ottoman Port, nor the infamous Catharine, can long withstand the
energy of freemen. Let them meet the haughty tyrant of the north, in the
fertile fields of Poland, and the vassals of that unhappy country shall be
restored to liberty and equality. The Greeks and the Romans will then know,
that the fire of freedom is not to be extinguished.

Whilst I behold it kindling in every quarter of the globe! where shall I turn
my eyes first?

O my country! Great Britain.
my country! My heart bleeds -- my eyes become a fountain of waters, when I
think of thy fate. ICHABOD, may be written upon all thy borders, for the glory
is departed! How is thy bright gold become dim? how are the sons of liberty,
the pearls of the nation, cast into prisons and banished over the seas! O my
countrymen! my countrymen! how long will you be duped by a dogmatical
administration, which seems determined to destroy not only their own nation,
but to mark their footsteps, with devastation and blood, wherever they go!

Infatuated Britons! I feel for your insanity, although four thousand miles
from your coasts. Twenty years have elapsed since your American brethren, have
given you a practical example to resist despotism. Have they not emphatically
told you that no government has a right to taxation without a free and equal
representation.

Ancient Britons! The Welsh people.
awake out of sleep! open your eyes! why are your tyrants great? because you
kneel down and cringe to them. Rise up. You are their equals! If you cannot
rise, creep to the ocean, and the friendly waves will waft you over the
Atlantic, to the hospitable shores of America. If you cannot obtain liberty in
your native country, "where liberty dwells, call that your country." Embark,
then, for the western world (which wants nothing, but millions of good
citizens, to make it the glory of all the earth.) Quit the little despotic
island which gave you birth, and leave the tyrants and slaves of your country
to live and die together.

Citizens of the United States, be not frightened in beholding so many
emigrants flocking to your territory! If all the inhabitants of the world were
to pay you a visit, you can compliment each of them with half an acre of land.
i. e. within the limits of the United States, Indian territory included.
But sirs, look forward and behold with transports of joy, this vast continent,
from the gulf of St. Laurence to the gulf of Mexico, from the Pacific to the
Atlantic, forming one grand republic of brethren.

At present it is impossible to calculate on the rapidity of revolutions! what
formerly took a century to accomplish is brought to pass in a day! If the
snow-ball as it rolls, multiplies its magnitude; the torrent being checked, for
a season, runs with greater rapidity! So the cause of truth and liberty being
opposed by despots, will gain greater energy; and will, eventually, like a
mighty deluge, sweep every refuge of lies from the earth.

The little stone which Nebuchadnezzar saw, -- smote the image on its feet --
ground it to powder -- became a great mountain -- and filled the whole earth.
So be it speedily! May the perfect law of liberty, sway its scepter of love,
from the rising to the setting sun -- from the center of the globe to the
extremities of the poles.

Citizens of United America! Whilst you commemorate a glorious revolution: call
to mind your first principles of action: never forget them; nor, those who
assisted you to put your principles in practice. May the curse of Meroz, Judges
v.
never fall upon America, for not joining the heralds of freedom, whilst
combating the tyrants of Europe.

Citizens of America! guard with jealousy, the temple of liberty. Protect her
altar, from being polluted with the offerings of force or fraud.

Citizens and Soldiers of America! Sons of liberty: it is you I address. Banish
from your land the remains of slavery! Be consistent with your congressional
declaration of rights, and you will be happy. Remember there never was, nor
will be, a period when justice should not be done. Do what is just, and leave
the event with God. "Justice is the pillar that upholds the whole fabric of
human society; and mercy is the genial ray which cheers and warms the
habitations of men. The perfection of our social character consists in properly
tempering the two with one another; in holding that middle course which admits
of our being just, without being rigid; and allows us to be generous without
being unjust."

May all the citizens of America be found in the performance of such social
virtues as will secure them peace and happiness in this world, and in the world
to come, life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord!


