Lovelace forces Clarissa to leave her Father's House.


CLARISSA; OR THE HISTORY OF A YOUNG LADY. COMPREHENDING THE MOST IMPORTANT
CONCERNS OF PRIVATE LIFE. Abridged from the WORKS of SAMUEL RICHARDSON, Esquire.
AUTHOR OF PAMELA, and Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.

The First BOSTON EDITION, adorned with CUTS.

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill. 1795.

THE HISTORY OF CLARISSA HARLOWE.
MISS Clarissa Harlowe, the subject of this History, was the youngest daughter
of James Harlowe, Esquire. and was adorned with great personal charms, and such
perfections, as rendered her the subject of general admiration. Her father was
a gentleman of a rigorous, inflexible temper, and extremely tenacious of his
authority as a husband and a parent. Her mother was a lady of a mild and gentle
disposition; but too much overruled by her lordly husband and imperious son,
who left her little power of exerting the fine qualities she possessed. This
son was of a proud untractable, unforgiving temper* his sister Arabella greatly
resembled him in her disposition, and as she was not distinguished either by
her beauty or accomplishments, it is no wonder that her sister Clarissa, who
was universally beloved, should be the object of her secret jealousy and
dislike: but she had another reason for her aversion* her grandfather had left
Miss Clarissa a handsome estate, with a very elegant building (...) the
Dairy-house, and enjoined his sons not to dispute it with her. This estate,
however, raised ill blood in the family; though the mild and charitable, humble
and unambitious Clarissa, resigned it to her father's management, which for a
time prevented those heart-burnings from breaking out, which her brother and
after were unable to stifle.

While Mr. James Harlowe, Clarissa's brothers was gone to Scotland, Lord M --
informed their uncle, Mr. Anthony Harlowe, that Mr. Lovelace, his nephew, was
desirous of entering into an alliance with the family, and that gentleman, who
was a gay young rake, was admitted to pay his respects to Miss Arabella, while
Clarissa was from home at the Dairy-house. The next day Miss Arabella paid her
a visit, and let her know that she was highly pleased with this event; though
she lamented that he was wild, and fond of intrigues; but took notice that he
was young, and a man of sense. At the next visit she liked him still better;
but though he afterward made her several others, he avoided all particular
declarations; a conduct which Miss Bella attributed to bashfulness, and grew
extremely fond of a modest man: (...), on his still continuing silent on a
subjec^^ that lay near her heart, she at length grew offended. Mr. Lovelace,
who in every thing behaved with the utmost art, took the opportunity of his
seeing her angry to urge his suit; when she told him that she had no
inclination to change her condition, and was quite happy as she was. This Mr.
Lovelace resolved to take for a final answer, and expressing great concern at
her resolution, took his leave, and never more renewed his suit. Mean while
Miss Bella, who was greatly disappointed, made a virtue of necessity, and
pretended to be extremely glad that she had rejected him.

Mr. Lovelace, sometime after returning into the country, paid a visit to the
family, professing that he was very desirous of cultivating a friendship with
it, though he had been so unhappy as to be deprived of the hope of the
wished-for alliance; and the lovely and accomplished Clarissa being now
present, his attention was observed to be entirely fixed on her; and the next
day Lord M -- making a formal proposal in behalf of his nephew, Mr. Lovelace
was permitted to continue his visits; though Clarissa's father had received a
letter from his son, wherein he charged Mr. Lovelace with gross immoralities,
which induced him to suspend the declaration of his own mind till his son's
return; on which account Clarissa would give him no opportunity of conversing
with her in private.

Mr. Lovelace now became very intimate in the family, though Miss Clarissa
never appeared to think his visits paid more to her than to the rest. Mean
while a young gentleman under the care of Mrs. Harlowe's brother-in-law, being
soon to make the tour of Europe, and Mr. Lovelace, who had already made is,
being able to give a good account of what was most necessary for a young
traveller to observe, he was asked to oblige them with a description of each
country and court he had visited; to which he consented, on condition Miss
Clarissa would direct his subjects.

In this situation was Mr. Lovelace with the family, when Mr. James Harlowe
returned from Scotland, and being told of his visits, loudly expressed his
disapprobation. He had an inveterate hatred of Mr. Lovelace, that had arisen
from their frequent quarrels at college, where that gentleman had sometimes
ridiculed the haughty airs he assumed; and as Mr. James Harlowe never forgave
what he thought an injury, he readily seized this opportunity of showing his
resentment. Miss Bella joined her brother from very different motives: she
boasted her having discarded Lovelace, for which she received the praises of
her brother; and when they could not avoid seeing him, their behavior was cold
and disobliging, and soon degenerated into rudeness. One day, on Mr. Lovelace's
coming, young Mr. Harlowe abruptly asked, what business he had with his sister;
on which the other said haughtily, he would answer a gentleman any way; but
wished he would not assume such high airs, as he was not at college. Both their
hands were on their swords; but a gentleman interposing, the affair passed off
for that time: but as Mr. Harlowe seized every opportunity to insult Mr.
Lovelace, they fought, and the former was wounded, and afterward attacked by a
slight fever; on which the whole family ^lamed out, laying all the blame on the
innocent Clarissa.

Mr. Lovelace, who had generously given the young gentleman his life, sent
three days successively to inquire after his health, and on the fourth came to
pay him a visit, which was considered as an insult upon the whole family; and
the father, though lame with the gout, could hardly be restrained from meeting
him sword in hand; while the engaging Clarissa, terrified at this confusion,
fell into a swoon, and, on her recovery, was cruelly insulted by her insolent
sister. At length, Lovelace hearing of Clarissa's illness, retired, vowing
revenge.

As Lord M -- was less inclined to blame his nephew than to take his part, the
whole family were afraid of him, and though they believed that Clarissa
corresponded with him, their regard for their own safety prevented their
forbidding her. Mr. James Harlowe soon recovered, when both he and his sister,
the one from deep-^ooted hatred, and the other from slighted love, detested the
name of Lovelace; and resolved to prevent all possibility of his entering into
an alliance with the family, by having their sister speedily married. He
proposed several gentlemen, but she rejected them all; and yet had such
influence over her father and uncles, who had hitherto shown great affection
for her, as to be permitted to have some will of her own: but being now teazed
and treated ill at home, she entreated to be allowed to spend some time with
Miss How, her most dear and intimate friend, which, notwithstanding the
opposition of her brother, was granted.

She had been absent near a month on this most agreeable visit, when, without
the least notice, the chariot was sent to fetch her (...) home; she was greatly
surprised, but immediately obeyed. On her return, her consternation was
increased, at seeing, instead of the pleasure with which she used to be
received, a stiff formality ^it on all their countenances; and at her being
accused of being in Lovelace's company, she pleaded, that she had never
conversed with him alone, and that it did not become her to prescribe who
should visit Mrs. How. To this her father answered, that she had been too much
indulged, and had refused several gentlemen; but that it was now his turn, and
he would be obeyed, and therefore insisted on her consenting to marry Mr. Roger
Solmes.

This gentleman was deeply in love with her; but was possessed of no one good
quality; yet was immensely rich. Clarissa's generous heart rose against him,
and she loathed the wretch who was famed for his avarice and meanness. Her
opposition to this disagreeable proposal exposed her to the most mortifying
insults from her brother and sister, and the harshest treatment from her
parents and uncles. She was neither permitted to go to church, nor to pay any
visit, nor to appear before her father and mother. Her maid, who loved her, was
turned away* and Betty Barnes, a p^rt servant of her sister's, set over her. In
short, she had no other consolation, but her correspondence with Miss How; for
being permitted to feed some Bantam poultry in ^n old wood-house, at the side
of the garden, she deposited her letters under a brick in a hole in the wall,
that opened into a narrow lane; whither her friend's servant came for letters,
and deposited his young lady's answers in the same place.

In this distress she wrote several moving letters to her brother and sister;
but in return received the most bitter taunts and insults, with severe
reflections on her supposed fondness for Lovelace. She also wrote to her father
and uncles; but they all remained inflexible. In vain she urged her aversion to
Solmes, who, though he had a sister in distress, proposed to make over his
whole estate to them, in case he died without issue by Clarissa. Hence they
alleged that her aversion ought to yield to the aggrandizement of the family,
and the commands of a father, who having made no doubt of her compliance, had
gone too far to recede; and therefore she must and should be Solmes's wife.

While Clarissa was involved in this distress, she was dreadfully frighted by
the sudden appearance of Mr. Lovelace, who had entered the wood-house in
disguise. However, his respectful behavior in this lonely place soon
dissipated her fears: but she was in terror left he should be seen; she
therefore reproached him for the danger to which he exposed her, and was
hastening from him, when, throwing himself at her feet, he entreated her stay
for a few moments, declaring that he had committed this rashness only to avoid
a greater; he being no longer able to bear the insults he received from her
family, while his forbearance would be attended with no other effect, than his
losing her for ever, by her being obliged to marry the object of her aversion.
She answered, that no consideration should induce her to marry Solmes, since
she could, with great sincerity, declare for a single life. Here, interrupting
her, he expressed his concern that after so many instances of his tender and
obsequious devotion -- Clarissa stopped him by asking, Why he did not in plain
words mention her obligation to him for his unwished. for perseverance, that
set all her friends against her? She must forgive him, he said, for presuming
to hope for a greater share in her favor, when so vile a reptile as Solmes was
set up as his competitor; and that, if she was driven to extremities, his
family would be proud of giving her their protection. In short, his behavior
increased her confidence in him; and she was surprised to (...) that he seemed
as well acquainted with the cruel treatment she met with as herself.

Soon after this she received a very affectionate letter from her mamma, in
which were enclosed patterns of rich silks from London, for the choice of
several suits she was to have on her marriage with Mr. Solmes, with orders to
come and show her those she liked best* but commanding her not to come into her
father's or her presence, if she was still resolved to continue undutiful. Her
aversion to Solmes made her look on the patterns with horror, and she remained
in her chamber, though reminded by Betty, (Miss Bella's pert maid,) that her
papa and mamma waited for in her father's study. In this perplexity she sent
her entreaties to speak to her mamma alone; but in return, received an angry
letter from her father, that he would never see her more till she was Mr.
Solmes's wife.

At this time her dear friend Miss How warmly advised the resumption of her
estate; but Clarissa, from a principle of duty, was aversed to any litigation
with her father, even though by his barbarous treatment she should be reduced
to want. Mr. Lovelace paid that young lady a visit, in order to engage her
interest with her friend: he complained of the repeated insults he received
from the Harlowes, and, with an air of fierceness, told Miss How, that if
Clarissa (...) forced to give her hand to Solmes, he should (...) the world,
and the world's censures, since the menaces of the family and their triumph
over him would warrant the utmost effects of his vengeance.

Clarissa had just received an account from Miss How of this visit, when her
relations resolved to force her to a compliance, by sending her to a moated
house belonging to her uncle Anthony, where she was (...) debarred from writing
to any one, and have no other visitors but Solmes and her ^arbarous brother and
sister. On this resolution she wrote warm remonstrances to her brother, and had
the spirit to add, that she should think it hard to be compelled to go to any
one's house, when she had one of her own, to which she might retire. Soon after
this letter was sent, Miss Bella came up in a (...): O spirit, cried she, is it
come to this at last? You want to be independent, do you? My papa has lived too
long for you! -- Clarissa was going to speak, when rudely putting her
handkerchief to her mouth, You have done enough with your pen, she continued*
but your independent scheme will not be granted: prepare this moment, for
tomorrow you go, depend upon it: it is determined, child, you must go
tomorrow. Thus she ran on, till Clarissa, quite out of patience, cried, No
more of your violence; talk in this manner to your servant; and let me tell
you, I will not go tomorrow, except I am dragged away by violence. What, girl,
resumed Bella, not if your papa and mamma command you? That command shall come
from their own mouths, returned Clarissa, and not from yours; and say another
word, let the consequence be what it will, I will force myself into their
presence, and demand of them, what I have done to be thus treated* Come along,
child -- come along, meek one, cried Bella; you will find both your despised
parents -- I don't want to be led, returned Clarissa; and since I can plead
your invitation, I will go. She was hastening to the stairs, but Bella locked
the door; on which she returned and went into her closet.

In the evening a letter was brought her from her sister, in which she was
told, that her mamma had begged her off till the next week, but she had done
her business with the family; for, thanks to her stubbornness, none would
receive her but her uncle Anthony. Clarissa sent the copy of this epistle to
her mother, with a short one of her own, desiring (...) know if she was thus
used by hers or her father's order? since, if she was, she would submit. In
return, her mother wrote, that she had ordered her sister to moderate her zeal
for their authority, and concluded with bidding her try to deserve a more
agreeable treatment. In short, it was resolved, that within three days she
should go to her uncle Anthony's, which she learned from an insolent note
written by her brother.

Clarissa was in this perplexed situation, when she received a letter from
Lovelace, in which he observed, that he had something of the utmost importance
to communicate (...) her, and begged her to meet him in the garden, owning that
he had procured a key, but was afraid of disobliging her by coming without her
leave; telling her also he was very ill of a cold he had caught by waiting in
the coppice behind the garden in the midst of the rain. Miss Clarissa, (...)
was ^endered desperate by the (...) relations, and felt her pity, if not her
love, excited in his favor, let him know that she would meet him the next
night. She had no sooner deposited her letter, than her heart misgiving her,
she went to take it away; but Lovelace had been so watchful, that it was
already in his possession. -- This was Tuesday, and on Thursday she was to be
carried to the moated-house, from which there appeared no possibility of
escape. Finding that her relations were unanimously resolved (...) step, she
sent a note to her uncle Harlowe, entreating more time: a request which they
refused to grant, without the hard condition of her receiving a visit from
Solmes; when, in order to comply as far as she was able, she accepted of the
delay on their own terms, but deferred the disagreeable interview till that day
s^'^night.

Clarissa, having obtained so much time, revoked her appointment with Lovelace,
desiring him to write what he had to communicate. In his answer, he complained,
in very high terms, of her breaking her promise, and now appeared rather the
haughty than the humble lover. Clarissa, in her reply, expressed her surprise
at the freedom of his reproaches, and told him, that she was so much alarmed at
this treatment, that she desired the last letter he had written might be the
last trouble he would give himself on her account.

That unhappy lady, filled with the apprehension of her being carried to her
uncle's, now sent Miss How a small parcel of linen, with all her papers; and
that young lady promised to try to engage her mother to give her privately her
protection. Two days after she received another letter from Lovelace, who
expressed himself under mortal apprehensions from Solmes's visit, and even
proposed to fix her in a place of security, either with the ladies of his
family, or wherever she should choose, and then leave her entirely at her own
liberty, either to agree with her friends, or to approve or reject him, as his
future conduct should deserve. But she told him, in her answer, that she had
intended never more to write to a man who could reflect on her for making use
of her own judgment, censuring him for his clandestine proceedings, in order to
come at the secrets of her family; observing, that her aversion for Solmes
would not permit her to doubt her resolution; though she would not have him
interpret this aversion in his own favor.

The dreaded time of meeting (...), and Clarissa, being ordered into the
parlour, went down with trembling, reluctant steps. Solmes, who was richly
dressed, approached her, cringing to the ground, with a visible confusion on
every feature. After half a dozen ch^aked-up hems, he began, He was very sorry
-- it was his misfortune -- it was his misfortune -- and then he stopped.
Clarissa sat down, turning her face from him, and fanning herself: on which he
resumed, It was his awe, his extreme reverence for so superlative a lady, and
he hoped she would not despise him for such true tokens of love. He then added,
she might have heard things to his disadvantage; and if she would mention them,
he would either own his faults, or convince her that he was basely belied.
Clarissa acknowledged that she had (...), as he was nothing to her, nor ever
could be, it did not become her to concern herself about them. He returned,
that he was very sorry to hear it, but was sure she should not tell him of a
fault that he would not be willing to correct. Then correct this fault, said
she; don't occasion a poor young creature's being compelled, in the most
material article of her life, in behalf of a person (...) cannot value. I don't
see, Madam (...) ^eplied, how my withdrawing my ^^^^^sses would render you
happy. That is nothing to you, she cried, interrupting him; you will then not
be to blame, and will be entitled to my most sincere and hearty thanks.

Mr. Solmes now paused, and appeared irresolute; when her uncle Anthony coming
in, immediately cried out, So, niece, ^itting in state, and giving a haughty
audience! Why this distance, Mr. Solmes? I hope before we part to see you on a
more intimate footing. Clarissa, on her uncle's entrance, rose up, and humbly
besought his compassion. You, niece, he replied, will have every body's favor
when you have learned to deserve it. If I ever can deserve it, she cried, I
certainly deserve it now: I will engage never to marry without my father's
consent, and yours, Sir, and every body's. I will take the solemnest oath that
can be offered me. -- (...) returned her uncle, in a threatening voice, is the
matrimonial one to this gentleman. It shall, cousin Clary, and the more you
oppose it, the worse it shall be for you. You shall sooner, Sir, cried she,
follow me to the grave: and Mr. Solmes, added she, take notice, there is no
death I would not sooner undergo than be for ever unhappy by being yours. Her
uncle now swore she should, in spite of all opposition, be Solmes's wife,
within a week at farthest. On which she replied, I am very sorry, Sir, to see
you out of temper, and (...) too sensible all this is owing to my brother's
instigations, who would be far from giving the instance of duty so cruelly
exacted from me.

She was now going, when her brother bolted upon her, crying, Return, pretty
Miss. Your intriguing brother, shall redeem you! You shall be redeemed from
ruin, by being married to this worthy gentleman, and hereafter you will thank
him for his condescension. Then seizing her hand, he pulled her to Mr Solmes,
and endeavoued to join their hands; on which Clarissa strove to snatch hers
from him. How now, Miss Clary! he cried. And how now! she returned; what right
have you to dispose of my hand? Let me go, Sir. You design, by your unmanly
griping, to hurt me. But why am I treated thus by you? At this, he tossed (...)
hand from him with a whirl that pained her shoulder. She wept, and both Mr.
Solmes and her uncle Anthony blamed him. As soon as she could speak, she again
addressed herself to Solmes, telling him, that if he had any regard either for
her, or even his own happiness, he would prosecute his addresses no farther.
Can you think me, Sir, added she, so poor a slave, as to change my mind from
the violent usage I meet with? And you, Sir, continued she, turning to her
brother, if you think meekness always indicates tameness, and that there is no
magnanimity without bluster, for once own yourself mistaken; for you shall be
convinced that a generous mind is not to be forced: and -- No more I charge
you, interrupted the imperious brother; and then turning to his uncle, cried,
See, Sir, your faultless niece, your dear favorite!

By this time, the young lady was ready to faint, but nobody minded her: she
rang, and on Betty's coming in, ordered her to bring a glass of water; on which
her brother cried to Solmes, Art, damned art! Clarissa, having drank the water,
leaned on Betty's arm, and was withdrawing, when her uncle let her know, that
he had not yet done with her; on which she promised to return as soon as she
had recovered her spirits, and was permitted to go into the garden. In about
half an hour's time, she was again ordered into the parlour, where she
continued alone, till her uncle Anthony ushered in Mr. Solmes. For God's sake,
Madam, cried the latter, folding his hands (...) which she asked, How came
God's (...) and his to be the same? No more supplications, Sir, cried the
uncle: this perverse and foolish girl despises all I intended to do for her; I
will therefore change my measures. Clarissa, thanking him for his kind
intentions, said she would cheerfully resign all claim to any of his favors,
except kind looks and kind words; adding, that if he would be so good as to
convince her brother and sister, that he had altered his former intentions with
respect to her, it might procure her better treatment from both. At this
instant, in burst her meanly listening brother, in a violent rage, calling her
names. Was this, he asked, he constructions of his care and concern for her? As
to your care and concern for me, she replied, my papa and mamma are happily
both living; and were they not, you are the last person I could wish to have
any concern for me. I am entirely independent of you, though I don't wish to be
so of my father.

At this instant Betty entered to desire her young master to attend his father.
He went, and poor Clarissa heard her once indulgent parent say, in a thundering
voice, James, instantly carry this rebel to my brother Anthony's. She shall not
stay another hour under my roof. Upon this she flew to the door, and on her
knes begged for admittance, entreating her father not to cast off his kneeling
child. Her uncle and Mr. Solmes were both moved, but her hard-hearted brother
held the ^oor, to prevent her seeing her father, and, at last, letting it go.
Clarissa fell flat on her face into the room (...) but all her friends were
departed. Soon after her brother came to demand her (...), and to tell her that
she must go directly to her uncle's. She refused to send them till she knew
that he had her father's authority for what he did; but they were soon sent for
by another messenger, to whom she delivered them. However, her mother with
great difficulty prevailed on her father to defer sending her to her uncle's
for a few days! but for this she was to endure another visit from Mr. Solmes,
who would now have (...) to her an anonymous letter, in which Lovelace's
character was very surely treated: but she insisted on not hearing it, as the
person accused was absent, and the accuse^ unknown. This her uncle Anthony
termed prepossession. Mean while her implacable brother entering with looks of
resentment, (...) Solmes, that when she was his, (...) make her as sensible of
his power, as she now did him of her insolence. Clarissa, looking at Mr.
Solmes, bid him observe (...) her brother courted for him (...) returned, that
he disclaimed Mr. (...) violence, and would never remind her -- when she
interrupting him, thanked him: but added (...) should never have the
opportunity. (...) uncle and brother being now called out of the room, she went
up to her own apartment.

While the lovely Clarissa was thus agitated by continual apprehensions of her
being united to a man for whom she had the greatest aversion, she was informed
by a letter from Miss How that she had tried in vain to persuade her mamma to
give her protection, if she was forced to leave her father's house. At the same
time she found by a letter from Lovelace, that he was acquainted with all the
severe treatment she met with, and his earnest entreaties to accept of the
protection of the ladies of his family. But while she was hesitating how to
act, she was told that all she feared from her uncle's chapel, would be
performed in her own chamber. This news was confirmed by her aunt Harvey, who
informed her that Mr. Lovelace's menaces occasioned this hasty resolution; and
that the whole family were resolved to have her married the following week:
that her father himself would bring her the settlements for her to sign: and as
she had complained of harsh usage, he had resolved on making use of all the
mild and gentle arts of persuasion, to induce her to yield. But whether she
consented with a good grace or not, it was absolutely resolved that she should
(...) married to Solmes. Clarissa only answered. Indeed I never will. This was
not originally my father's scheme -- indeed I never will. All I shall say,
replied Mrs. Harvey, is, that as Mr. Lovelace has resolved to force you out of
their hands, I cannot help saying they art in the right, in resolving not to be
bullied out of their child. Clarissa soon after sent to desire a week's
respite, when the answer was, did she want to give the vilest of men an
opportunity to put his murderous schemes in execution? She new called (...)
Mrs. Harvey, who was present, to witness, that she was guiltless of the
consequences of this barbarous compulsion. She soon grew in a manner frantic,
and insisted on seeing her father; observing, that her dreadful situation (...)
her above all fear, and that she should rejoice to owe her death, as she did
her life, to him. She even went half way down stairs, in order to rush into his
presence, and to throw herself at his feet; but hearing her brother's voice,
she stopped* he was talking to Miss ^^lla, and she heard him say, It works
char^ly, sister; let us keep it up, and then the villain will be caught in his
own trap. She must now do what we would have her. Do you, replied (...), keep
my father to it, and I will take care of my mamma. Never fear, replied he, with
a laugh of exultation.

This malicious dialogue gave a new turn to Clarissa's passions; her aunt led
her back to her chamber, and strove to soothe her mind, but she was sullenly
silent and as soon as she was gone, took the resolution to disappoint her
brother of hi^ ^^macly triumph. She wrote to Mr. Lovelace, that (...) she had
no other means of escaping her brother's tyranny, she would meet him the next
Monday at the garden gate, and put herself under his protection. But soon after
she had taken this (...), step, she ran to take back the letter, when she found
that Mr. Lovelace had taken it away, and another was left full of the most
tender expressions. This she answered, and informed him, that as there were yet
three days to come before the dreaded time arrived, her (...) might relent, in
which case she reserved (...) herself the liberty of acting as she thought
proper; and in ^his be respectfully acquiesced.

Clarissa immediately wrote to inform Miss How of what she had done, when that
young lady, in the ardour of her friendship, offered, rather than she should be
forced into Lovelace protection, to become the companion of (...) flight. To
this Clarissa could not consent; but as her dear friend was averse to her
having recourse to him, she resolved to stay and brave the worst, and
accordingly wrote to inform Lovelace that this was her resolution: but this
letter he would not take away, lest it should contradict her former promise.

Lovelace came at the appointed hour; but instead of listening to her reasons,
artfully drew her to the outside of the garden door, beseeching her to haste to
a chariot which waited for her. She in rain urged, that she had considered of
it, and was determined not to venture: he continued pulling her after him
toward the chariot, saying, that he had been watched, and that it she lost
this opportunity, she could never have another. She struggled to get her hand
from him, telling him she would sooner die than go; but he still drew her
further from the door. Whither, Mr. Lovelace, do you pull me? cried she in
anger: Do you seek to keep me till it is impossible for me to return? If you
would have me think tolerably of you, let me go this moment. My happiness,
Madam, both here and hereafter, he cried, and the safety of your implacable
brother, depend on this moment. To Providence and the law, Mr. Lovelace, said
she, will I leave the safety of my friends. I will not be threatened into a
rashness which my heart condemns. May I perish, exclaimed Lovelace, if your
will shall not, in every thing, be a law to me! Your own promise (...) on you;
all my relations expect you. Next Wednesday, dearest creature -- think on next
Wednesday! The step to which I urge you will soon reconcile you to all of your
family whom you have the most reason to value. Let me judge for myself, she
replied. Do not you, who blame my friends for endeavoring to compel me, compel
me yourself? Let me go -- unhand me this moment, or I will call out for help.
Dearest creature, said Lovelace, with a (...) look, I will obey you. Stay one
(...); but one moment. Stay, best beloved of my soul! stay; your retreat is
secure. (...) will go, the key lies at the door. (...) Madam, next Wednesday,
and you (...) Solmes's! Fly me not so eagerly. (...) ready to call for help,
and to (...) down on (...) the vengeance of your whole family, I will run all
risques; I will a (...) you into the garden, and if I am not prevented, into
the house. Be not surprised, Madam* I will face them all. You shall see what I
will farther bear for your sake. Let us both try if expostulation and the
behavior of a gentleman will not procure me from them the treatment of a
gentleman.

The very idea of Lovelace's accompanying her to her friends filled poor
Clarissa with terror. What do you mean, Mr. Lovelace, said she? Leave, I
beseech you, leave me. Indeed, Madam, you must excuse me. You shall see Madam,
what I will bear; my sword shall be put sheathed into your hands; my heart, if
you please, shall be a sheath for theirs. What can you mean, Mr. Lovelace? Is
this your generosity? She ^ept. He threw himself at her feet, crying, If you
command me with you, or from you, I am all obedience. She stooped (...) up the
key, in order to let herself (...) the garden. He started and clapped his hand
to his sword; Clarissa, though frighted, offered the key to the lock; he then
loudly whispered, My beloved creature, they are at the door; and taking the key
from her, made a motion as if to double-lock it; when instantly somebody
bursting against the door, as if to break it open, cried out, Are you there? --
Come up this moment -- this moment -- they are here both together -- your gun,
your pistol this moment! -- Then followed repeated pushes. Lovelace drawing his
sword, and putting it naked under his arm, seized both Clarissa's trembling
hands in his, crying, Fly! fly! my charmer, fly! if you would not be more
cruelly used than ever -- if you would not see several murders committed at
your feet. The affrighted lady cried, Help! help! yet ran as fast as he. What
added to her terror, and hastened her flight, was, on turning back her head,
she saw a man who must have come from her father's garden, beckoning and
calling, as if others were in sight, (...) made her imagine they were her (...)
brother, or the servants. Thus (...) they were soon out of ^ight of the door,
he hurrying her on till they came to the chariot, when he lifted her in, and
the horses, which seemed to fly rather than to gallop, did not stop till they
reached St. Alban's.

Thus the lovely Clarissa was forced by her relation^, and the specious arts of
the designing Lovelace, into his protection. He was a take (...) abandoned
principles, who, with all the advantages of a handsome person, and a happy
(...), was proud, artful, and fond (...) plots and stratagem^, in which he
would some neither pains nor (...) to obtain the gratification of a favorite
passion. (...), the lovely maid knew no (...) of him (...) report, which also
proclaimed (...) being a man of great bravery and generosity; she had therefore
flattered herself, that a brave and generous man could not be a villain. But a
great part of what she had suffered was occasioned by the reports he had caused
to be carried into the family.

(...)* who deeply sympathised i^ the distress and confusion into which this
step must have through the family (...) the (...) opportunity of sending to her
(...) friend Miss How all the particulars of her (...) flight; and at lady
answered (...) being now unhappy (...) of her father's house, all punctilios
(...) and her honor and reputation received that she should marry him
directly. But, alas! this was out of her power. In the letter which she
appointed to meet Lovelace, she (...) him under an injunction not to mention
marriage till she had reason to believe that his information was real; and he
now but too well obeyed her orders. To (...) her d^stress, she had but seven
guineas in her pocket when afforded her a prospect of speedy want.

Mr. Lovelace now proposed her going to a seat belonging to his uncle, lord M
--; but this she declined that she had heard from her sister, to whom she had
written for her clothes, some books, and fifty guineas she had left in her
escrutore. Mr. Lovelace therefore put up at an inn in the neighbour^^^^ of his
(...) seat where he was attend^^^ (...) his friendship's housekeepers, who was
(...) to a sister of hers, that kept a seen house at the distance of about
eight miles. The good woman conducted her thither, where she should have
thought herself tolerably happy, could she have been left to herself. Lovelace,
however, seemed in no haste to leave her, and her brother gave him a pretense
for stay^^^^, by his openly professing that he intended to force her from him.

While she was here, she received a most cruel letter from her sister, who
informed her, that her father, on hearing of her slight, cursed her on his
knees, wishing that her disobedience might be attended with ruin here and
hereafter, and that the author of her crimes might be her punishment. This
wicked and horrid imprecation, Clarissa, who tenderly loved her parents,
considered as a most dreadful calamity. In this dismal situation, Lovelace
earnestly pressed her to honor him with her hand, (...) she was then very ill,
and extremely dejected; yet mindful of her dear friend's advice, she rather
waved than denied his suit; but the artful rake interpreted her confusion on
this occasion into resentment* at his having presumed to press her, co^^^ary to
her injunction. In one of their conversations, she asked him several questions
about the noise she heard on the ^^side of the garden-door, and his answer gave
her too much reason to believe, that it was all done by his contrivance, which
made her consider him as a very artful man, and gave her a dreadful prospect,
even should her affairs take the happiest turn. To quit her scruples on his
being in the same house with her, he pretended to go to Windsor, to provide an
apartment, (...) which she might be (...) from her brother* but saying, on his
(...), that he could and none there, she proposed going to London, as the best
place of concealment, but insisted that he should never lodge in the same house
with her, and that as soon as she was out of danger, he (...) leave her. This
he promised, and wrote to a friend in London to look out for a proper lodging,
and in answer received a description of several, among which (...) ^^count of
one of them was so artfully drawn up, that it was hoped Clarissa would (...)
upon it without suspicion. This was said to be a genteel b^^k-house in
Dover-street, handsomely furnished, belonging to Mrs. Sinclair the widow of an
officer in the Guards. This letter Mr. Lovelace showed to Clarissa, who gave
her the choice of which she would have, and that in Dover-street being most
convenient, she chose, that, an^ they set out for London.

Upon their arrival at this house, Mrs. Sinclair offered Clarissa a girl named
Dorcas for her servant, it being pretended that she had many good qualities,
but good neither write nor read. To Clarissa this was no objection, and though
she dislik^^ ^er look, she admitted of her service. She had also some dislike
to the widow, whose air appeared coarse and masculine; but she thought her two
nieces, Miss Sally Martin and Miss Polly Horton, ^^^^eable women. That very
night Clarissa (...) on Mr. Lovelace's lodging elsewhere* But ^^^^^ding to have
a slight opinion of the widow, he told her he could not think of leaving her,
and that for fear of her brother's plots: he had give^ out that they were
already married but that he had made a most solemn vow to be contented with a
separate apartment till she was reconciled to will her friends.

Clarissa was greatly offended at this deceit, and in vain attempted to
persuade him to contradict what he had said. For Heaven's sake, said he, let
the happy day be tomorrow, yet, before (...) had time to answer, changed the
subject, ^^^ugh she was now so situated, that, had he urged her again, she
would have attended him to church the next morning. At supper-time he begged,
before the people of the house, to stay all night, promising to leave London
the next day, which, being out of her power to hinder, she gave an unwilling
consent to.

Mr. Lovelace took leave of his lady, as he called Clarissa, the next morning,
but first pressed her to accept of a bank note, which she resolutely refused;
but he left it on the table. However, the next day he returned, pleading the
ardour of his love, and his fear of her brother's projects. He now amused her
with looking for a house, and told her he had fixed on one inhabited by Mrs.
Fretchville, a widow lady, that would soon be empty. He, however, still lodged
in the house with Clarissa, who was too much in his power to hinder him. His
vanity made him now resolve to show her to four gentlemen his most intimate
friends, for whom he provided an entertainment in the same house; but it was
with the utmost difficulty that he and Mrs. Sinclair prevailed on Miss Clarissa
to give them her company. These gentlemen became her great admirers, but their
behavior was far from being agreeable to Clarissa, who, as soon as she was
able, retired to her own apartment.

A few days after, the unhappy lady received her clothes; but her inexorable
relations sent with them neither the money she wrote ^^r, nor her jewels, nor
any book but a Practice of Piety, a D (...) on Eternity, and a Francis Spira.
This, said she, is my brother's wit, who points out to me death and despair: I
wish for the one, and am every now and then on the brink of the other. As she
had now her clothes, Mr. Lovelace very importunately persuaded her to let him
and some of the young women of the house accompany her to public places; but
this she prudently refused.

One day when Lovelace was abroad, she was sitting in the dining room, looking
^ver some of Miss Howe's letters, when she accidentally dropping one of them,
it was seen by her maid Dorcas, who meeting Lovelace on the stairs, told him,
that if ever he hoped to see any of her letters, he had now as opportunity of
getting one of them; for she was sure her lady did not know that she had
dropped it. Lovelace entered the room with an air of transport, clasping his
arms about her as she sat, while she hastily put up the papers in her
handkerchief. My dear life, he cried, I have thought on a lucky expedient to
hasten Mrs. Fretchville to quit the house. My friends will soon be with you,
who will not permit you to suspend my happy day. And that all your scruples may
be granted, I will then consent to stay here, while you reside at your new
house. My dearest creature, will not this be agreeable to you? It will -- it
must. Then clasping her closer, he gave her a more fervent kiss than ever he
had done before; at the same time setting his foot on the letter, he scraped it
further from her. Clarissa appearing offended at the liberty he took, he bowed
low, begging her (...) with the same motion (...) which he slipped into his
bosom; but (...) unfolded, it could not be done without alarming her. She
instantly rose. Traitor! Judas! what have you taken up? cried she, seizing the
letter. Lovelace begged pardon, and clasped her (...), which had hold of her
paper. O my dearest life, cried he, can you think (...) curiosity? Let go my
hand, she returned. How dare you, Sir -- I see -- I too plainly to -- Loath to
let go his prize, he still (...) he crumpled letter. Imspudent man! (...)
stamping with her foot -- for God's sake -- He then let go, when having it ^n
her possession, she ^lew to the door* he shut it, and besought her to forgive
him: but pushing him from it, she, slew to her own apartment, where she
double-locked and bolted herself in. She now resolved to apply to her parents
for their pardon, (...) condition of living a single life and resigning her
grandfather's estate; and for this purpose wrote to Miss How. This made it
necessary to avoid every occasion of seeing and speaking to Lovelace.

Clarissa was at length informed by Miss How, that all submission to her
inexorable relations would be in vain, and that she ought to marry Lovelace as
soon as possible: but this was not now in her power; for though Lovelace, to
amuse her, sometimes pleaded his passion, and in the strongest terms reproached
her for her indifference, yet whenever he pressed her to name the happy day, he
mentioned several, and without allowing her time to speak, raised objections
for her, and changed the subject. Thus in one of these conversations he told
her, that he hoped his uncle lord M -- would be her father; to which she
replied, that the word father had a sweet and venerable sound, and she should
be glad to have a father that would own her; but instead of (...) this indirect
consent, which was expressions in an engaging sweetness, with which he found
himself greatly affected, he repulsed the rising tenderness, objecting, that
his uncle being lame of the gout would scarcely permit him to enjoy the honor,
and then turned the discourse to settlements and writings, that would take up
(...).

Vexed at his indelicate delays, Clarissa had some thoughts of escaping from
him, though she knew her relations would neither relieve nor own her. These
thoughts she communicated to her friend, who endeavored to find her a
convenient and secure retreat, and at length informed her that (...) had found
one; but Lovelace's behavior now gave her hopes, though these were of short
continuance.

The artful Lovelace, at length, prevailed on her to allow him to attend her to
a play; and during their absence, several of the women were directed to search
for Miss Howe's letters. These were found, and all were busily employed in
transcribing the severe reflections that virtuous lady cast on the cruel, base,
and ungenerous conduct of Mr. Lovelace; and the schemes she had formed for
Clarissa's escape. To give them an opportunity to finish these (...). Lovelace
with great difficulty (...) the unhappy lady in the dining room (...) was far
spent.

Stung to the quick at the many reflections cast upon him in these letters,
(...) Lovelace now formed projects of revenge, and resolved to use every art to
bring the lovely Clarissa to live with him on his own terms. Hence his
tenderness became mingled with a savage fierceness, which affrighted and
alarmed her, Provoked by this ungenerous treatment, she tore almost in two an
answer she had written to some proposals he had given her in relation to the
marriage articles; an answer that in the strongest manner equally showed the
nobleness and delicacy of her mind, her virtue and prudence, and her duty and
affection to her relations. Finding that she was deeply offended, Lovelace, in
order to impose on her credulity, formed new stratagems, in which he was
supported and assisted by wretches taught to act the part he directed. The
house he pretended to have taken had hitherto answered his purpose, as it had
made Clarissa contented to stay with Mrs. Sinclair, whom she disliked; and he
now put an end to those expectations, by pretending that the imaginary widow
Fretchville was seized with the smallpox. In order to gain upon the tender
heart of Clarissa, who ardently longed to be reconciled to her parents, it was
pretended that a reconciliation was set on foot by an old villain, who called
himself Captain Tomlinson. This fellow was directed to form a plausible story
of his having lately purchased an estate in her uncle's neighborhood, with a
view to spend the last years of his life in the enjoyment of peace and
retirement, where having contracted an intimate friendship with her uncle Mr.
John Harlowe, he was informed of the whole unhappy affair, and told that
overtures had been made for a reconciliation, and that her uncle, having calmly
considered every thing that had passed, had resolved, in case Clarissa and Mr.
Lovelace were actually married, to endeavor to procure a reconciliation
between them and her relations.

Lovelace used the utmost art to prevail on her to own before this man that
they were married; but in vain. She observed, that she was sensible of her
folly, in permitting the people of the family to remain in an error and as her
appearing in that character (...) his friends; and therefore the success even
of her dearest hopes should not again engage her to countenance his falsehoods.
Upon this he altered his plan. The supposed captain appeared; and, by
Lovelace's desire, she overheard the discourse that passed between them. In
fine, she was invited to breakfast with them; when, after a long conversation,
in which he acted his part with such art, as to impose on Clarissa, and engage
her esteem, he took his leave; and on Mr. Lovelace's return from attending him
to the outward door, she met him with a visible complacency in her looks. You
don't know, Mr. Lovelace, said she, how near my heart this long-hoped-for
reconciliation is. You don't know, Sir, how much you have obliged me. How happy
shall I be, when my heart is freed from the weight of a father's curse; when my
dear, my excellent mamma shall once more fold me to her indulgent bosom! --
when I shall again have uncles all striving who shall show most kindness to the
poor outcast! -- then no more an outcast -- and you, Mr. Lovelace, to be the
pleased spectator of all this, and to be welcomed into a family so dear to me!
-- what, though they should be a little cold at first, when they come to know
you better, and you, as I hope, are entered upon a new course, all will be
warmer and warmer love on both sides, till they will wonder, perhaps, how they
came to be at enmity with you. Then applying her h^^^kerchief to her eyes,
after pausing a few m^^^nts, as if suddenly recollecting that she had expressed
her joy in a manner which she had not intended he should see, the hastily
retired to her chamber, leaving Lovelace with his heart too full for utterance.
His compunction was, however, but of short continuance; for his pride, his
aversion to marriage, and his hatred of her family, made him stifle the
dictates of conscience, and continue to pursue his infamous projects. The
pretended reconciliation was carried on; but when all her doubts and fears were
cleared up, he only attempted to gain upon her affections, and by taking hold
of the most favorable moments, to make way, by little freedoms, for the
accomplishment of the greatest: and when in these encroaching steps, he boldly
took such liberties as shocked the delicacy of her virtue, a visit or a letter
from Captain Tomlinson, to inform her of the measures he and her uncle had
taken to accomplish this reconciliation, was contrived to remove her
resentment, and restore him to favor. The marriage settlements were in the
mean time engrossed, a license applied for, and every method was pursued that
could prevent her harboring the least doubt of his intentions being
honorable. Mean while Clarissa's assiduity and vigilance (...) not suffering
any initiatory freedoms, rendered all the attempts of his ens^^^^g fondness
ineffectual: but these victories had no other effect than to stimulate him to
endeavor to conquer her virtue by surprise.

One evening he suffered her to leave him sooner than usual, on her promising
to retire directly to rest. But a little after two in the morning, the alarm of
fire was given, by her maid running to the door, and raping loudly at it,
crying, Fire! fire! the house is on fire! -- rise, Madam, if you would not be
burnt in your bed! The lady's door was instantly unbolted, unlocked, and
opened, when Lovelace flying to it, beheld the lovely Clarissa leaning on the
arm of Dorcas, trembling, and ready to faint: she was dressed only in her
under-petticoat, and her feet just slipped into her shoes. On seeing him, she
panted and struggled to speak, but could only say, O Mr. Lovelace! and was
ready to sink. Lovelace clasping her in his arms, cried, my dearest life, fear
nothing, the danger is over -- the fire is got under -- and turning to Dorcas,
added, how could you thus alarm and frighten my angel? Then lifting her to her
bed, he sat down by the side of it, endeavoring with the utmost tenderness to
dissipate (...) terrors. Clarissa instantly forgot the (...), dreadful as it
was, and appealed t^ Hea^^^ against his treachery; while he, with the (...)
solemn protestations, pleaded his own equal fright, and the reality at the
danger with which they had both been alarmed. She entreated him, in the most
affecting manner, to quit her apartment, and permit her to hide herself from
every human eye. He begged her pardon, and repeatedly vowed that the next
morning's sun should witness their espousals. She refused to listen to his
protestations, and redoubling her struggles to escape from (...), in broken
accents, and the most vehement exclamations, declared she Clarissa prevails on
Lovelace to spare her Honor.
would not survive a treatment so villainous and so disgraceful; and looking
wildly round her, as if for some instrument of mischief, she perceived a pair
of sharp-pointed scissars on a chair by the bedside, and endeavored to seize
them.

Lovelace entreated her to be pacified, and hear him speak, protesting that he
had not the least intention inconsistent with her honor, and then having
seized the scissars, threw them into the chimney; but she still earnestly
insisting on his keeping at a distance, he permitted her to take a chair. While
her eyes overflowed, he clasped her once more to his bosom. Her strength,
considering the delicacy of her frame, was at this instant amazing and showed
the sincerity of her indignation and resentment; for he was scarce able to hole
her; not could he prevent her sliding through his arms to fall upon her knees
at his feet, and there, in the anguish of her soul, she lift up her streaming
eyes to his face with supplicating fondness; her hands were folded, and her
hair dishevelled; for her nightcap falling off in the struggle, her fine locks
fell down in natural shining ringlets, as if officious to conceal the dazzling
beauties of her neck and shoulders, while her lovely bosom heaved with sighs,
as if (...) aid her trembling lips, in pleading for compassion. Consider me,
dear Lovelace, cried she, on my bending knees I beg you will consider me, as a
poor creature who has no protector but you, who had no defense but your honor.
But that honor! by your humanity! by all you have vowed! I entreat -- I
conjure you not to make me abhor myself! not to make me vile in mine own eyes!
-- He mentioned the morrow as the happiest day of his life. Tell me not, said
she, of tomorrow. If ^^u mean me honorably now, you must this instant show
it, and be gone. The cruel Lovelace the rudely kissing her neck as she kneeled,
while he set before her, wicked wretch -- insolent villain! cried she -- am I
then a villain do you say? -- O no! and yet you are, she cried. Kill me! kill
me! if I am so hateful in your eyes as to deserve this treatment -- or give me
but the means added she, looking wildly round her, and I will convince you that
any honor is dearer to me than my life. For your own sake, if not for mine, as
you desire that God should have mercy upon you (...) your last moments, spare
me! He then attempted to raise her from her knees! but she would not rise till
his releating heart bid her (...) to be innocent. Rise thee, my angel, cried
Lovelace, and be what you are, and all you wish; only pronounce your
forgiveness of what is past, and I will retire. May God Almighty, said she hear
your prayers in your most arduous ^^^ents, as you have heard mine! but this
instant leave me to my own recollections; in that you will leave me to a load of
shame and misery, more than you ought to wish (...) your greatest enemy.

Lovelace had no sooner entered his apartment, than recollecting the
opportunity he had lost, and repenting that he had let it slip, he hasted back
with the hopes, that through the distress of her mind, she had not yet fastened
the door, and was now fully resolved to execute all his purposes, let the
consequences be what they would. But the door was locked and bolted, and all
his persuasions could not prevail on her to open it, though he pretended he
only wanted to say three words, which she would think the most acceptable she
had ever heard him utter.

The next morning he rapt at the door, and called to her several times without
obtaining the least answer; when looking through the keyhole, he observed her
(...) her knees, with her back toward him, and her face and hands lifted up,
deprecating, as he supposed, her cruel father's curse: he was moved, and in
tender language begged her to (...) him to her presence. I cannot see you,
cried she, rising; would to God I never had! If I write, that is all I can do.
He then desired she would (...) him with a line, which she soon did in (...)
affecting terms; and several other letters passed between them on this
occasion, in which Clarissa maintain her resolution of not seeing him.

Lovelace had no sooner left the house than Dorcas came to Clarissa, and urged
her to take some refreshment. That lady was in tears, and her eyes swelled with
weeping; she sighed as if her heart would break, and refused either to eat or
drink; but soon after ordered her to bring her three of four French rolls, a
little butter, and a decanter of water; telling her, she should not want her
attendance. Dorcas consulted Mrs. Sinclair about obeying her, who readily
consented that she should, but that a bottle of Sherry should be added.
Clarissa was so obliged by this cheerful compliance, that she was prevailed to
on to go and look at the damage done by the fire; when, the better to deceive
them, she seemed to be convinced it was no trick.

This injured beauty then desired Will, Mr. Lovelace's servant, to carry a
letter to the post for Miss How, with orders to inquire if none were left for
her: but putting her letter into his pocket to give it (...) his (...), he
pretended to go, and then return brought word there was none. She gave him
another letter, which she (...) him to carry to Mr. Lovelace; and (...) he was
gone, stopped down stairs, and ^^ceived got into the street, where, ^^small
bundle in her hand, she ran (...) along without stopping till she came ^^and of
coaches, the tears all the way string from her eyes, while all the spec^^ were
surprised at the hurry, confusion distress shown by this weeping beauty
coachman plied her, was accepted, (...) serving her face, suddenly alighted,
(...) the coach door; when hasting in cried, drive fast! very fast! where (...)
said the coachman. To Holborn-bar^ answered; drive very fast; and pus^^ the
window, was soon out of sight (...) spectators. Being let soon at H^^bars, she
went to the Hampstead stage there being only two passengers ready took all the
vacant places, and mad coachman set off immediately. The passengers giving
directions to be set at the Upper Flask, she desired t^^^ down at the same
place; and on her (...), asked if she could not have a dish and a room to
herself for half an hour. She seemed spiritless and fatigued; and the ^^^man of
the house choosing to attend on so lovely and genteel a guest, Clarissa made
her sit by her, and asked her abundance of questions relating to the
neighboring villages and roads. On her leaving this house, she walked toward
Hampstead, where she soon after ^^ck a lodging at one Mrs. Moor's whose
character she had inquired at a shop in the neighborhood.

Mr. Lovelace, on his being informed of her escape, flew into a most violent
^age against the woman of the house and his servant was sent to search for her
with orders not to see his face till he had found where she was. This rage was
increased by a long (...) from Miss How to Clarissa, which he received and
basely broke open. It was filled with execrations against him, as a most
abandoned ^o^ster, founded on sufficient e^idence of his guilt. "Miss Lardner,"
said she, saw you at St. James's church no Sunday was ^^rtnight, and kept you
in her eye during the whole time. Every body's looks were fixed upon you and
you slipped out before she could pay her compliment^ (...) ^ou; but she ordered
her (...) to follow (...). This servant saw you (...) into a (...) waited for
you and you ordered the men (...) you to the place where they took you up. The
next day Mis^ Lardner, ^art of men's curiosity, serve the same servant to make
private inquiries whether Mr. Lovelace was or (...) not with you the^^ and he
learned from different people that the (...) had a very infamous characters;
(...) woman who kept it was not named (...) ^or was it in Doverest (...). (...)
were two houses; the back-house in which the greatest tendency seemed to be
observed; and two other (...) of those who had been obliged to ^^^mit to the
vile spoke of prostitution, (...) How also observed that she had formed (...)
reconciliation pretended to be (...) on by Captain (...) with her uncle was a
base imposition, and that this (...) was a specious villain, the cool of
Lovelace.

Though Lovelace was (...) exasperated at this letter, he rejoices (...) had
been able to (...) it, and began to form schemes (...) against Miss How; (...)
servant informed him, that he (...) Clarissa step (...) step, and that she was
(...) at Hampstead, where he had taken such measures that it was (...) for her
to remove from thence (...) his notice. Transported with joy (...) news, he set
out the next morning richly dressed, in a chariot and four, for the Upper Flask
at Hampstead, attended by a footman whom Clarissa had never seen, and the
pretended Captain Tomlinson, whom he left at the foot of the hill, in order to
make use of him, if his presence should be necessary to produce a
reconciliation.

Before he came, his servant told the people of the house, that his lady was
lately married to one of the finest gentlemen in the world; but he being
naturally gay and lively, she was extremely jealous of him, and in this fit had
eloped; and that she had played his master such tricks three or four times, but
with all the virtue and innocence in the world; she flying to an intimate
friend of hers, who, though a young lady of honor, was too, indulg^ (...) to
her in this her only failing. But, notwithstanding her thu^ leaving his master,
^e ^as extremely fond of him, and he doa^^ upon her, and was now half
distracted at using her.

By these stories, in which he had been instructed by his master, the fellow so
far gained the good opinion or this people, that they helped him to a change of
clothes for himself, and privately inquired, (...) the lady was still at Mrs.
Moore's; and for how long a time she had taken the lodgings, which was (...) no
more than a week certain.

Lovelace no sooner arrived, than every body appeared ready to oblige him; and
he acted the part of a tender husband so well as to gain their pity. He told
them, that should his spouse see him at a distance, he should find it very
difficult to get to the speech of her, and therefore prevailed on the landlord
to lend him a great coat; when buttoning the cape over his chin, he asked for a
little powder, and lightly shook the puff over his hat, slapping one side of it
over his eyes; and then put on a pair of coarse stirrup stockings, that gave
his legs a gouty appearance. Being thus equipped, he left the publick-hous^,
and stopping at Mrs. Moore's alighted (...) of his chariot, stooping in the
shoulder^, leaning very hard on his cane with one hand, and on his servant with
the other. He pretended to want lodgings for his old wife, who lay under a
complication of disorders, and acted the gouty old man so naturally, that Mrs.
Moore was deceived. He hobbled up stairs, and saw all the apartments, except
Clarissa's and at last, with some difficulty, was admitted into that, while she
retired into a closet. He resolved, if possible, to make her come out, and
pretending to be going, You con't agree as to any time. Mrs. Moore, said he^
when we can have this third room, can you? Not that I would incommode the lady,
but I would tell my wife whenaboute. Clarissa then broke silence: Pray, Mrs.
Moore, said she, inform the gentleman, that I shall not stay above two or three
days at most, by which time I expect to receive an answer to a letter I have
written into the country; but rather than be your hindrance, I would take up
with an apartment a pair of stairs higher. Not for the world -- not for the
world, young lady, cried he; as well as I love my wife, she should he in (...)
garret, rather than put such a considerate lady, as you seem to be, to the
least inconveniency. She did not yet open the door; he therefore added: But
since you have so much goodness, Madam, if I could but just look into the
closet, as I stand, I could tell whither it be large enough to hold a cabinet,
for which my wife has a great value, and always takes with her.

At this instant Clarissa opened the door, when he was so struck with her
presence, that he could hardly forbear drooping at once his dissimulation, and
folding her in his arms; but in great disorder, he said, looking round the
closet, There Is room, I see, for my wife's cabinet, which contains many
valuable jewels, but, upon my soul, nothing so valuable (...) the lady I see.
The truth of the compliments having, in a manner, obliged Lovelace discovers
himself to Clarissa at Mrs. Moore's.
him to use his natural voice, Clarissa started; when Lovelace finding it
impossible either to conceal himself longer, or to stifle the impulse of his
own passions, pulled off his slouched but, unbuttoned the cape, and threw open
his great coat. She instantly knew him, and giving three violent shrieks, sunk
down at his feet in a fit, before he could catch her in his arms.

Mrs. Moore, observing such a strange alteration in his person, features, voice
and dress, cried out several times, Murder! help! which alarming the house, up
ran two servant-maids, and after them Lovelace's servant. Lovelace called for
water and hartshorn, and every one flew a different way; while Mrs. Moore ran
out of one room into another, and up and down the apartment they were in,
wringing her hands, without knowing what she did. Then come running a gentleman
and his sister, brought in by the maid, who told them that she had let in an
old wretch, hobbling with the go^t, and mumbling with his hoarse voice, who was
all of a sudden changed into a lively, gay young gentleman, who she verily
believed to be the devil.

All this while Lovelace was so busy in recovering Clarissa, that he minded
nobody else; and atleast, she stirring, and beginning to utter the most bitter
sighs, he in the tenderest accents called upon her, as he kneeled by her, with
his arm supporting her head, My Clarissa, my angel, my dearest life, look upon
me -- I am not angry with you! -- My ^est beloved, I will freely forgive you.
The gent^eman and his sister knew not what to make of all this, and the less,
when Clarissa recovering her sight, snatched another look at Lovelace, and
groaning again, fainted away. Lovelace then threw up the closet sash for air,
and left her to the care of the young gentlewoman who came in with her brother,
whose name was Rawlins, and of Mrs. Moore who had by this time recovered from
her surprise.

On his retiring he made his servant (...) his hat, loop it up in the (...) and
pull off his gouty stockings. Then stepping up to Mr. Rawlins, whom he had not
minded before, You have had (...) said he, an uncommon scene before (...) the
lady (...) my wife, and no gentleman's presence is necessary here but my own. I
beg pardon, Sir, said he, if the lady is your ^^fe, I have no business here.
But, Sir, by her concern at seeing you -- Pray, Sir, cried Lovelace,
interrupting him, none of your ifs and buts, I beseech you. You are a very
unqualified judge in this cause; and, Sir, I beg you to oblige me with your
absence. On this Mr. Rawlins retired, and Lovelace perceiving that she was
beginning to recover, left the closet, left her seeing him too soon should
throw her into another fit.

Clarissa at last looking round her with great emotion cried, O hide me! hide
me! Is he gone' -- Sir, said Miss Rawlins, coming to him, this is some
surprising case; the lady cannot bear the sight of you. What you have done to
her is best known in yourself, but another such fit would probably be her last.
It would therefore be but kind in you to retire. -- The dear creature, said he,
may well be concerned at seeing me. If you, Madam, had a husband who loved you,
(...) love her, you would not, I am persuaded, fly from him, and expose
yourself to hazards as she does, when she had not every thing in her own way.
But she is motherspoiled! This is indeed her only fault; but it is the more
inexcusable, as I am the man of her choice, and have reason to believe she has
a greater affection for me, than all the men in the world. I have three times
already forgiven the dear creature -- but this jealousy -- there is spice of
that in it, and of ph^^nzy too: But out story is too long. -- He then desired
them not to suffer her to talk, for she was accustomed to fits, and when in
this way would say any thing that came uppermost. They promised to keep her
quiet, and Lovelace instantly withdrew into the next room.

The unhappy Clarissa no sooner recovered her senses, than she burst into the
bitterest complaints, that she was ruined and undone, and earnestly entreated
them to assist her to escape the dreadful evils in which she should otherwise
be involved. They preached patience to her, and persuaded her to lie down; but
she refused and trembling so as to be unable to stand, seek into am easy chair.
Lovelace now hoped that she was so well recovered as to bear his presence; but,
on seeing him, she redoubled her exclamations, and besought him to leave her.
He answered in the tenderest language, and told her, that he had a letter from
Captain Tomlinson; but used such expressions as he knew would set her in such a
passion before the women, as might confirm the intimation he had given of her
mind being disordered. This artifice succeeded; she exclaimed against his
baseness, and then bursting into tears, begged pardon of the woman for her
passionate excess. Indeed, ladies, said he, this violence is not natural to my
beloved's temper. Misapprehension -- Misapprehension, wretch! cried she, while
each love^ (...) was agitated with scorn. Then (...) her f^ce from him, she
added, I have not patience to look upon thee; begone, begone, O 'bo^ guileful
betrayer!

Lovelace now considering that his ass^^ed character of a husband rendered it
necessary for him to appear angry, raised his voice, saying, You may one day.
Madam, repent this treatment -- by my soul you may, you know I have not
deserved it of you -- you know I have not. Never did man of my figure and
consideration meet with such treatment. She lifted up her hands, and while
indignation kept her silent, he accused her of severity and injustice, in
treating him thus before two gentlewomen; telling her, since she would have it
so, he would leave her to her fate, and, if she would inform him to what place
he should send her apparel, and every thing belonging to her, he would send it.
Send it hither, said she, and assure me that you will never more molest me, and
that i^ all I ask^ He now pretended to leave her in a pet; but when he had got
to the door, seeming to recollect himself, he turned back, crying, My dearest
creature^ one word more; charming even in your anger! O my soul, added he,
turning half round, and ^ulling out his handkerchief; only one word: Madam, I
have represented to Captain Tomlinson our present misunderstanding in the most
favorable light. The letter in my hand will acquaint you with what you have to
apprehend from your brother's malice. The Captain has repo^^ed our marriage to
two different persons. It is come to your brother's ears. My (...) have also
heard of it, and this morning letters were brought me from Lady Betty Lawrence
and Miss Montague. Here they are -- on which he pulled them out of his pocket,
and offered them to her, with that of the Captain's; but she held back her
hand. Reflect, Madam, he continued, I beseech you reflect upon the fatal
consequences that may attend this high resentment. From my first knowing you,
said she, I have been in a labyrinth of doubt and error; but I bless God, I am
now out of your hands, and will transact what relates to myself. Am I not my
own mistress? Am I not -- he was afraid to let her proceed, and raising his
voice to drown hers, cried, You used, my dearest creature, to have a tender and
apprehensive heart, and never surely had such reason for it as now. Let me
judge for it myself, she returned: Do you think I shall ever -- He dreaded her
going on, raised his voice still higher, and cried, I must be heard, Madam. If
you will not read this letter yourself, you must let me read one paragraph or
two -- Begone from me, man! said she, begone from me, with thy letters! What
pretense have thou for th^^ tormenting me: Dearest creature, returned he, what
questions you ask! questions that you can as well answer yourself. I can, I
will, she returned, and thus I answer them. Again, raising his voice, he
overbore her words; but when he found her silent, softened his accent, and
entreated her to see Captain Tomlinson with temper, begging that for the peace
of her own mind, she would not frustrate the Captain's negociations. She was
going to speak, when he proceeded in a strong and solemn voice, If we are to be
separate for ever, this island shall not long be troubled with me. Mean while,
only be pleased to give these letters a perusal, and consider what is to be
said to your uncle's friend, and what you would have him say to your uncle.
Then putting the letters into her lap, he, with a low bow, retired into the
next room, and was soon followed by Miss Rawlins and Mrs. Moore.

Lovelace, on being joined by these women, endeavored to engage them in his
interest, by giving them the history of his own and Clarissa's family; her
extraordinary aversion for Mr. Solmes, and putting herself under his
protection. He said, they had been privately married, though she had made him
swear to keep separate beds, and that she obliged him to comply, in order to
prevail on him to become reconciled to her relations. As Miss How had detected
the bawd, to whose house he had carried Clarissa, and might still find some way
to acquaint that lady with her discoveries, he thought proper to prepossess
them in favor of Mrs. Sinclair, and her two pretended nieces, by representing
them as very good people, and to paint Miss How as a perfect virago, who had
no equal in contriving and executing mischief. He even told them the occasion
of their present difference; insisted on the reality of the fire, but
acknowledged, that, having a husband's right on his side, he would not have
scrupled to break the strange unnatural oath by which she had bound him, on her
being so accidentally frightened into his arms; and as she thought fit to carry
her resentment so high, he blamed himself that he had not done it. He then read
them a part of a copy of Captain Tomlinson's letter, and afterward put into
their hands the copies of the two letters he pretended to have just received
from his ^^nt Lady Betty Lawrence, and his cousin Miss Montague; in which they
blamed (...) for not informing them of his marriage, congratulated him on his
prospect of happiness, and expressed their desire to visit the lady, in (...)
to show their esteem for her. They having (...) these letters, he added, But
with what heart can I encourage such a visit to my spouse from Lady Betty and
Miss Montague? I am tired out with her strange behavior. She is not what she
was; and, as I told you, ladies, in her hearing, I will leave this plaguey
island, though it is my native country; and though the estate I have in it is
very considerable, I will spend my life in France or Italy, and never consider
myself as a married man.

In fine, Lovelace gained both Miss Rawlins and the widow Moore over to his
interest, and was even so successful as to prevail on the latter to accept him
for her boarder and lodger; but Clarissa steadily refusing to lie in the same
house with him, he hired an apartment in the neighborhood, and obtained leave
for his servant to lie there, who had private orders to prevent Clarissa's
receiving a letter from Miss How, or making her escape.

Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins, on their return to Clarissa, pleaded with that
lady in behalf of Mr. Lovelace; while she, in the most distressful terms,
besought them to favor her escape. Lovelace, who overheard what was said, and
feared she would remove the false impressions he had made on the minds of these
sober and modest women, interrupted their conversation; on which Clarissa
complained of his intrusion, and asked him* if he would say before that lady
and Mrs. Moore, that they were really married; adding, Lay your hand on your
heart, and answer me, Am I your wedded wife? Lovelace, who would not have had
the least scruple about asserting this, or even confirming it by the strongest
asseverations, could it have answered his purpose, was by this question thrown
into confusion, from his being well convinced, that, should he assert such a
falsehood to her face, she would never more believe any thing he could say.
Hence he avoided giving her a direct answer; and though she still pressed the
question, she could obtain nothing from him but quibbles and prevarications:
she therefore resolved instantly to leave the house: but he detained her by
setting his back against the door, and then dropping on his knees, besought her
pardon, and entreated her to stay and receive the visit of Lady Betty and his
cousin Montague, with the news brought by Captain Tomlinson, of her uncle's
having complied with both their wishes. In vain were all her endeavors to
escape from him: she grew perfectly distressed, was ready to faint, and forced
to lean against the wainscot, as he kneeled at her feet. At last a stream of
tears gushing from her eyes, Good Heaven, said she, what will be my fate?
Deliver me from this dangerous man! -- I know not what I do, nor what I ought
to do! Then turning from him, she threw herself into a chair. He rose, and
approached her with reverence, crying, My dearest life! -- when, with a face
glowing with conscious dignity, she interrupted him by crying, Ungenerous,
ungrateful Lovelace! you know not the value of the heart you have insulted! Nor
can you imagine how much my soul despises your meanness: but meanness must ever
be the portion of the vicious.

The women, thinking they were now likely to be on better terms, retired,
though she warmly opposed their going. Lovelace then, bending his knee, begged
her forgiveness, promising to behave for the future with the most exact
circumspection; but she could not trust his promises, and refused either to
dine with him, or to taste any refreshment.

There dined with Mr. Lovelace and Mrs. Moore, a young widow, named Bevis, who
was very forward, extremely lively, and soon showed herself a great admirer of
Mr. Lovelace. As she was to stay a month with Mrs. Moore, who was her aunt, he
took great pains to prevail on her to side with him against Clarissa, and
represented her affectionate friend Miss How as the cause of all their
misunderstandings. In the mean time, the pretended Captain Tomlinson coming in,
a conversation passed between them, which was so managed, as to make every one
present believe that he was really married to Clarissa, and that Miss How,
from her rage and jealousy at his having slighted her, took every opportunity
to widen the difference between them. Lovelace now observed, that he thought it
high time to acquaint his spouse that Captain Tomlinson was arrived; on which
Mrs. Moore went up, and desired in his name that she would permit him to see
her; but she begged to be excused, on account of her being very ill; when the
pretended captain, professing that he had much business on his hands, appeared
greatly vexed, and took his leave.

The captain was but just gone, when Lovelace's servant brought him a letter
from Miss How, in answer to one she had received from Clarissa, in which she
mentioned the agreeable news of her escape to Mrs. Moore's, with an account of
the low plot of firing the house to force her into Lovelace's arms, when she
had sufficient proof of its being an infamous house, since, though she heard
the women in the next room, they took no notice of her cries. Lovelace's
servant, being ordered to intercept Miss Howe's answer, had stopped the
messenger, made him drunk, picked the letter out of his pocket, and carried it
to his master, who finding means to read it without breaking the seal, the
servant took it back, and put it again into the fellow's pocket, who soon after
left the alehouse, and mounting his horse, gave it into Clarissa's own hand.
Miss How, in this letter, congratulated her dear friend on her escape, and
informed her of her being under a great deal of concern about a letter of the
utmost importance, which she had before sent, and would not have had fall into
the hands of that abandoned rake, Lovelace, for the whole world. Clarissa
instantly applying to Mrs. Moore, told her that ^he did not value the price,
could a man and horse be engaged to go for a letter left for her at one Mr.
Wilson's in Pall Mall. On which a poor neighbor was sent, who returned the
same evening with the letter; but it was not the same sent by Miss How. The
important letter was that in which she had laid open the plots of the
treacherous Lovelace, and which he had in his possession. He had copied those
parts of it that were most in his favor, omitting every circumstance that
might induce her to think Sinclair a bawd, and Tomlinson an impostor; and, at
the same time, had so artfully imitated Miss Howe's hand, that it was not easy
to know the difference. The next day Clarissa wrote an answer, to let Miss How
know that she had received her letter, but deferred giving a farther account of
her affairs till she had a more composed mind and less trembling fingers. This
she delivered to Mrs. Moore's maid, who being courted by Lovelace's servant,
she delivered it to him, to put into the post office, and he carried it to his
master, who immediately forged another, which he supposed was what she would
have written, had she really received the intelligence sent her by her dearest
friend.

In the mean time, Lovelace behaved to her with the utmost tenderness,
pretending to be deeply concerned at his having offended her. That specious
villain Tomlinson was introduced, and several interesting conversations passed
between him, Lovelace, and Clarissa, wherein no arguments were spared to engage
her confidence, and banish every apprehension of the designs he secretly formed
against her. In the mean time, the dictates of his heart and of his conscience
frequently prompted him to endeavor to merit her favor, by laying aside all
his wicked plots; but his libertine principles prevailed, and his pride and
revenge getting the ascendant, he resolved to humble her virtue, and, before he
married her, to bring her down nearer to his own level. By his insidious arts
he again prevailed upon her to allow him her company, and to show him some
compassion for his well-dissembled distress; but he could not engage her to
come to any determination till she had received another letter from her dear
and only friend; and this he was determined to prevent, if possible, and which
indeed he effected without any great difficulty. One day, after his having a
very tender and affecting conversation with her alone, a messenger arrived from
Miss How with a letter, which he insisted on delivering into Miss Clarissa's
own hand; but she being gone to church with Mrs. Moore, Lovelace prevailed on
Mrs. Bevis to personate her, and reclining on a couch, with her face muffled
up, she received the letter, and delivered it to Lovelace, who now found fresh
cause to rejoice that he had prevented her receiving it, for Miss How here
confirmed her of what she had before written of the infamous house, and her
reasons for distrusting the specious Tomlinson; and, in short, had laid a plan
for her escape.

Lovelace, now finding himself under a necessity of hastening his designs,
procured two genteel women of the town to personate Lady Betty and his cousin
Montague, and having instructed them in their parts, had them brought to Mrs.
Moore's in a hired coach and four, it being pretended that Lady Betty's was new
lining and repairing. Both of them were richly dressed, and adorned with
jewels, hired for this purpose; and being attended by servants nearly in the
same livery as Lady Betty's, it was impossible for Clarissa, who had never seen
either of them, to suspect their being other than what they appeared. The more
these pretended ladies conversed with her, the more fond they appeared to grow;
they loaded her with caresses, censured Lovelace, and congratulated themselves
on the happiness they should receive from his being allied to her, could they
prevail on her to forgive him. Clarissa was far from having the vanity to
believe all the flattering speeches they made her; yet having no suspicion, she
was not displeased at so favorable a beginning of an acquaintance, with ladies
of whom she had always heard honorable mention.

Mr. Lovelace treated his pretended aunt with great respect, and allowed her to
have the advantage over him in the many lively repartees that passed between
them; though Clarissa easily perceived he purposely forebore that smartness
which he never spared showing to Miss Montague. The last-mentioned lady behaved
with still more reverence to her aunt; while she kept up the dignity of the
character she assumed, rallying both, of them with the air of a person
conscious of the superiority which her years and fortune gave over those who
might be obliged to her either while living or at her death. The conversation,
for some time, turned on their own family and the happiness they should receive
on Clarissa's admission into it. They discoursed on Lady M -- 's and Lady
Sarah's earnest desire to see her; the many friends and admirers she would have
among them, and the happiness of Lovelace. They launched out in praise of Miss
How, and talked of a reconciliation and intimacy with all Clarissa's friends,
particularly with her mother; giving that lady all those praises that were
universally allowed to be her due; while Clarissa, delighted with hearing so
many agreeable things, almost forgot her resentment against Lovelace.

As there were accommodations in the house for Lady Betty and Miss Montague, it
was agreed that they should ^^e there that night; but the Lady Betty
recollecting that she must go to town, ordered her coach to the door, telling
Clarissa that they would all go together, and that she would leave her woman to
set her apartment in order. All her objections were over ruled: she was led to
the coach, and Lady Betty ordered Mrs. Moore to get supper ready against their
return. All the way nothing passed but the height of affectionate complaisance.
But what dreadful terrors seized Clarissa's mind, when she came within sight of
the odious house from which she had made her escape! The coach stopped at the
door, and Clarissa cried out; -- but Lovelace, begging she would be under no
apprehensions, asked if there were any letters for him. Dreadfully did
Clarissa's heart misgive her; she was ready to faint. O my life, said Lovelace,
why this terror? You shall not stir out of the coach. Your lady will faint,
said the vile Lady Betty, turning to him. My dearest niece, added she, taking
her hand, you are so ill, we must alight -- let us alight only for a glass of
water and hartshorn -- indeed we must alight. No, no, cried Clarissa, no -- I
am well -- quite well. Then putting her head out of the coach, she called out,
Man, drive on! drive on! Dorcas then came to the door. My dearest creature,
said Lovelace, you shall not alight. Any letters for me, Dorcas? There are two,
Sir, she replied, and here is a gentleman waiting for your honor. I Will just
speak to him, he returned, open the door -- you shall not step out, my dear. --
But we must step out, nephew, said his aunt, your lady will faint. Maid, a
glass of hartshorn and water! My dear, you must step out -- You Will faint, child
-- We must cut your laces -- Indeed you must step out, my dear. I know, said
Lovelace, that she will be well the moment the coach drives from the door. She
shall not alight, by my soul she shall not. Lord, Lord, nephew! Lord, cousin!
cried both of the women in a breath, what ado you make about nothing! You
persuade the lady to be afraid of alighting. Don't you see she is fainting?
Indeed, Madam, said he, my dearest love must not be teazed to come out against
her will. Fiddle faddle, foolish; what a pother is here! said Lady Betty. I
suppose you are ashamed to let us see what sort of people you carried your lady
among. But do you go, take your letters, and speak to your friend. He then went
out, and Clarissa entreated the coach might go on^^ while the execrable Lady
Betty insisted on their alighting, asking her whom she could be afraid of in
her and her niece's company; observing that she must have been treated there in
a very shocking manner, and that she was determined to inquire into it. The old
creature, at this instant, came to the door, begging a thousand pardons if she
had any way offended her, and entreating the other ladies to alight. In fine, a
glass of hartshorn and water, mixed with some dreadful ingredients, were
brought; the pretended Lady Betty obliged her to drink it up, and the poor
unhappy Clarissa, in spite of all her opposition, was prevailed on to alight,
and on the promise of being detained only a few minutes, with faultering steps,
and the utmost reluctance, entered the house. Tea was called for, and instantly
brought, of which, disliking the taste, she drank only two dishes.

The distressed Clarissa was ill before, but she now perceived herself more and
more disordered in her head; a heavy torpid pain increasing fast upon her,
which she then imputed only to her terror. By the Lady Betty's persuasions, she
was induced to go up stairs, attended by Dorcas, to take such of her clothes as
she immediately wanted. She instantly set about it, ordering what should be put
up, and what sent a While she was thus employed, (...) Betty running up in a
^urry, (...) dear, you will not be long before you ^^dy. I Will just whip away
change and call upon you in an instant. (...) said Clarissa, I am ready! I am
no You must not leave me here. This this instant I Will return, said she, (...)
have packed up your things; and hurried, accompanied by her pre^en^ before
Clarissa could say another (...).

The distressed Clarissa now sunl^^ed into a chair; but soon recovered herself
for her fears and suspici^^^ the improbability that those ladies guilty of such
treachery against creature, to whom they had bel^^ such kindness. Thus,
endeavor cover her spirits, she pursued (...) ^^^ment, rubbing her eyes, and
ta^^ after pinch of Dorcas's snuff: Bu^^^ as over, an^ she had full liberty on
her finding they did not return almost distracted. She shut her (...) her
former chamber* kneeled an^ then ran out again, calling for who cursed the
ladies for their (...) sent his servant with orders to bring if any thing had
prevented the The unhappy Clarissa, almost wild with distraction, once or twice
complained of thirst, when, instead of giving her water, which they all kn^w
was her common drink, they brought her small-(...) She drank it, and
immediately became much worse. At length one of the pretended Lady Betty's
servants brought a letter to Mr. Lovelace, to excuse her return to Hampstead
that night, on account of Miss Montague's being seized with violent fits. This
letter he sent up to Clarissa, who now giving herself up for lost, in a sit of
phrenzy, tore off her head clothes, inquired for Mr. Lovelace, and with her
(...) looks falling in cur^s on her neck and her torn ruffles hanging in (...)
about her (...) arms, entered the room where he was, sunk down at his feet, and
clasping her arms about his knees, cried, If ever -- if ever -- if ever -- and
unable to speak another word, quitting her hold, sunk on the floor, (...) and
speechless.

Lovelace was filled with amazement, and, for a few moments, all his infamous
purposes were suspended; but having proceeded thus far, he was resolved not to
stop. He lifted her into a chair, and in words of disordered passion, told her
that all her fears were groundless, endeavoring to persuade her to rely on his
says (...) honor. At last, with an heart breaking sob, she cried, in broken
sentences, I see, I see, Mr. Lovelace -- I see that I am ruined! -- ruined, if
your pity -- let me implore your pity! -- and down her head sunk on her bosom,
with a sigh that would have pierced any heart that was not destitute of all
humanity. As soon as she recovered, she asked, Why he did not send for the
coach? and desired to go directly to Lady Betty^ if she was really that lady.
Then assuming a more resolute air, exclaimed, I will go -- I will inquire the
way -- I will go by myself. She then attempted to rush by him; but he held her
fast, pleading ^he bad way Miss Montague was in, and the dangers of robbers.
But she would believe nothing he said, unless he would immediately order a
coach, and let her go in it to Hampstead: She feared not robbers. He was all
her fear, and that house her terror: Repeating, If you mean me honorably, let
me leave this hated place.

At this instant entered Mrs. Sinclair in a violent ferment, crying, Pray,
Madam, what has this house done to you? And setting her huge arms a-kimbo,
added, Hoh! Madam! let me tell you, I am astonished at the freedoms you take
with my character! The poor Clarissa, to whom this woman had always behaved
with the most obsequious respect, was frighted at her fierce look, and
masculine air. God help me! cried she; what will become of me? Then turning her
head in a wild kind of amazement, added, Whom have I for a protector? What will
become of me now! My dearest life, I will be your protector, he cried; but
indeed you are uncharitably severe on poor Mrs. Sinclair: She was born a
gentlewoman, and would scorn to be guilty of a wilful baseness. I hope so, said
she -- it may be so -- I may be mistaken; but there is no crime, I presume, nor
treason, in saying, I don't like her house. The old dragon again stalked up to
her with her arms a-kimbo, while her erect and scouling eyebrows half hid her
ferret eyes, and with two Hoh! Madams! accosted the frighted beauty, who was so
terrified that she caught hold of Lovelace's sleeve. He, fearing lest she
should fall into fits, told Mrs. Sinclair that those apartments were his; and
he could not conceive what she meant either by listening to what passed between
him and his spouse, or by her coming in unasked, and giving herself those
violent airs. At this, the old Beldam threw herself into a chair, and fell a
blubbering. Mean while, the pacifying her, and endeavoring to reconcile the
lady to her, took up till near one o'clock. What followed was the most vile and
inhuman acts of violence. The distressed lady, roused from the dreadful
lethargy into which she was sinking, pleaded for mercy, and cried, I will be
yours -- indeed, to obtain mercy, I will be yours! But no mercy could she find.
Her strength, her intellects failed her. Fits upon fits followed, which
procured her no compassion; and death was withheld from her, which she would
have received as the greatest blessing.

On the second day after this vile and horrid action, the abandoned Lovelace
had a specimen of what he might expect from the lady's resentment, should she
ever recover her senses: For, following Dorcas into her apartment, and
attempting to pacify-her, in the midst of all his blandishments, she in
speechless agony held up to (...) a license he had procured and given her, and
seemed about to call down vengeance upon him, when all her senses were locked
up in sleep, before she could get half through with her intended imprecation.
The next day the unhappy lady fell into a contrary extreme, and became as much
too lively as she had been before too stupid; and, except in some lucid
intervals, was raving mad.

The barbarous Lovelace was shocked at the reflection of the villainy of the
attempt, and the madness with which it was followed: And whenever he gave
himself leave to think, was filled with remorse: But the lovely Clarissa no
sooner began to recover her senses, than listening to the solicitations of the
abandoned Sinclair, he resumed his project of breaking her spirit, so as to
make her glad to live with him as his mistress. Hearing that she was coming to
speak to him, he grew pleased with the thought that he should stare her into
confusion, and exulted in the advantage which the confidence of his sex would
give him over the bashful modesty of (...). But she no sooner appeared, than
the dignity of her air, the sedate firmness of her countenance, and the
superiority of her mind, expressed in the awful language of injured innocence,
(...) his whole frame, and gave him the faultering hesitation of a trembling
criminal. His guilt, and her innocence, merit and rank, all stared him in the
face, in so formidable a manner, that his present account to which she now
unexpectedly called him, seemed to resemble the general one to which we must
all be summoned. In this solemn conversation she boldly asked him, what she was
farther to suffer from his barbarity, and whether she was still to be kept a
prisoner? He was so confounded by the majestic composure, and the dignity of
her just reproaches, that he could only in broken incoherent sentences stammer
out an offer of making her amends by marriage. But do thou think, replied
she, that marriage will atone for a guilt like thine? Destitute as thou have
made me, both of friends and fortune, I too much despise the wretch who could
^ob himself of his wife's virtue, ever more to endure the thought of marrying
thee.

In fine, several other affecting conversations passed between them, wherein
she boldly claimed her right to be left to her own liberty to go where she
pleased; and indeed made several attempts to escape. But though, while in her
presence, he was awed by her virtues, yet he would not permit her to leave the
house; and she still found herself a prisoner, surrounded by none but those who
were the objects of her detestation, and were ready to prompt and assist him in
all his base designs. Often did he plead for pardon, and offer marriage; but
all his solicitations were without effect, and she told him, she was firmly
resolved never to bind her soul in covenant to a man so nearly allied to
perdition.

While the unhappy Clarissa was in this distressful state, and every hour in
dread of suffering some fresh act of violence, she fancied she observed some
marks of compassion in Dorcas, who by Lovelace's order artfully insinuated
herself into her favor. Clarissa, imagining her sincere, thought this a happy
opportunity of engaging her in her interest, and gave her a note, in which she
promised her, on condition of procuring her escape, a valuable diamond ^ing,
and an annuity of twenty pounds a year during life. From this circumstance,
Lovelace resolved to terrify the friendless Clarissa into a compliance with his
wishes; and therefore one night, soon after she had retired to her chamber, he
pretended to find this promissory note, and instantly ringing the bell with the
greatest violence, the whole house became in an uproar, and his servant ^unning
into the room, he bid him in a rage bring that to^d Dorcas. She instantly
appeared before him, when drawing his sword, he cried, Cursed, confounded,
villainous bribery! She ran up to her lady's door, screaming for safety and
protection, while two or three of the other women ran, crying, what is the
matter! What Is the matter! But Clarissa, instead of opening the door, drew
another bolt. This abominable Dorcas! he exclaimed; call up her aunt: let her
see what a traitoress she has placed about me, and let her bring the ^oad to
answer for herself. She has taken a bribe, a provision for life, to betray her
trust, basely to perpetuate a quarrel between a man and his wife, and for ever
destroy all hopes of reconciliation between us. At this Sinclair came up
puffing and blowing, crying, as she hoped for mercy, she was not privy to it.
Well might servants be at such a pass, when such ladies as Mrs. Lovelace made
no conscience of corrupting them. For her part, she did not desire that he
should show her the least mercy. But where was the proof? The note was shown;
cursed then proceeded from every mouth, while all inveighed against the
vileness of the corrupted, and the unworthiness of the corruptress. Dorcas was
dragged along, whimpering between two women, both bawling out, You must come --
you shall come and answer for yourself; you are a discredit to all worthy
servants. She whining, I cannot look so good and generous a gentleman in the
face! Come along, cried Lovelace, it is detection, not the crime, that
confounds you. Tell me, ungrateful devil, tell me, who made the first advances?
Aye, disgrace to my family! cried Sinclair, tell his honor -- tell the truth;
Who made the first advances? I have already betrayed one trust, said Dorcas --
oh don't make me betray another! my lady is a good lady! Oh don't let her
suffer! Suppose, Sir, said Sally, you have my lady and the wench brought face
to face? You see she does not care to confess. Oh my carelessness! cried
Dorcas! Don't let my poor lady suffer! Indeed if you all knew what I know, you
would say her ladyship has been cruelly treated. -- See, see, see, they all
cried at once, only sorry for being detected. Your lady will not, she dare not
come to save you, though it is more his honor's mercy, than your desert, if he
does not this instant cut your vile throat. Say, was it your lady, or was it
you, creature, that made the first advances -- If the lady had so much honor
as we supposed, bawled the vile Sinclair, she will appear to vindicate a poor
servant, misled by such large promises! But, I hope, Sir, you will do them both
justice -- I hope you will. -- Good lack! clapping her hands, to grant her
every thing her heart could wish -- to indulge her in her hatred to my poor
innocent house -- O Sir, I hope, if your lady will not come out, you will find
a way to try this cause in her presence. On such an occasion as this, I will not
value my doors. Justice I ever loved. I hope you will come to the bottom of it.
I Will be sworn I had no concern in this black affair.

At this instant they heard the lady's door unlock and unbolt. The doors and
windowshutters where fastened, and Will was placed below to prevent her escape,
and that no noise or screaming might be heard. But confiding in her innocence,
Clarissa entered the room with a majesty in her person and manners that was
natural to her, but then shone out in all its glory. Every tongue was silent;
every eye awed. She walked up and down the room two or three times, before her
indignation would permit her to speak. But at last recovering her voice, O thou
abandoned and contemptible Lovelace, cried she, think thou that I don't see
through this poor villainous plot of thine, and these thine abandoned
accomplices? Thou, woman, looking at the bawd, once my terror, always my
dislike, but now my detestation, should once more have robbed me of my senses
by intoxicating potions; then thou, wretch, added she, turning again to
Lovelace, might have securely depended on such a low, such a wretched
contrivance. And yet, vile woman, who, perhaps, have been the ruin of the body
and soul of hundreds, know that I am not married to this miscreant, and that I
have friends who will demand my honor at your hands: Take care then what
farther insults you offer me. Though thus vilely betrayed, I am a person of
rank and fortune. I never will be his; and now I have full proof of your
detestable wickedness, I will pursue you to your utter ruin.

Here all the women, struck by their consciences, trembled. As for the^^ thou
vile Dorcas, added she, thou double deceive^* artfully whining (...) thy
pretended love for me, begone! nobody will (...) ^hee! Begone, I say; thou
(...) thy part to be blamed by any (...) but myself, in this house: thy guilt
(...) thy security. Steal away into darkness. After this, no inquiry will be
made whose were the first advances.

The wretch, confounded and affrighted, here slun^ (...), as did Mabe^^^,
another of the wom^n (...) who had been se^ over her, though Lovelace called
her back. He, vexed and ashamed, with a fierce look, then advanced toward
Clarissa. When turning to him, Stop where thou art, O thou vilest and most
abandoned of men! -- Stop where thou art, she cried; nor with that determined
face offer to touch me, if thou would not see me (...) dead at thy feet! To
his astonishment, she then grasped a penknife in her hand, with the point to
her bosom. You^ Sir, and ye women are safe, added she. The law shall be all my
resource, the law alone shall be my refuge.

This struck them into a p^nick, and the infamous wretch Sinclair whispered to
Lovelace, that it was better to come to terms with that strange lady, and let
her go. Sally, in spite of the impudent bravery she had shown at other times,
observed, If Mr. Lovelace had told them what was not true of her being his wife
-- and Polly Horton added, that she must needs say, if the lady were not his
wife, she had been very much injured. -- That is not now, cried Lovelace, a
matter to be disputed. You and I know, Madam. -- We do so, said she, and I
thank God I am not thine -- once more I thank God for it! I have no doubt of
the farther baseness thou had intended me, by this vile and low trick. But I
have my senses, Lovelace, and from my heart I despise thee, thou very poor
Lovelace! How can thou stand in my presence? Thou, that -- Madam, Madam,
Madam, cried Lovelace, these insults are not to be borne, and was approaching
her, when she stepping to the door, and setting her back against it, held the
pointed knife to her heaving bosom, while the women held him, beseeching him,
for their house's sake, not to provoke the lady. Approach me, Lovelace, if thou will, said she. I dare die. It is in defense of my honor. God will extend his
mercy to my poor soul, and I expect none from thee! I have gained this
distance, and two steps nearer me* will show thee what I dare do! Leave me,
woman, to myself and to my angel, said Lovelace. They retired at a distance,
and he proceeded, holding out his arms, and putting one knee to the floor. O my
beloved, cried he, how you terrify me! Say you will sheath your knife in the
injurer's, not the injured's heart; and then, and not till then, will I
approach you. He moved a little forward; And do thou, do thou, added she,
with her arms extended, do thou still insidiously move toward me? I dare --
I dare -- not rashly neither -- My heart, from principle, abhors the act which
thou make necessary. God, in thy mercy! lifting up her eyes and hands -- God,
in thy mercy! -- Lovelace threw himself to the farther and of the room, a
silent ejaculation that moment employing her thoughts. On casting her eye
toward him, she beheld him at the utmost distance the room would allow, when
her lovely cheeks, that were before in a glow, as if terrified at her own
purpose, turned pale; and lifting up her eyes, Thank God! -- Thank God! said
she, I am for the present delivered from myself. Keep, Sir, keep Lovelace
intimidated by Clarissa's threatening to kill herself.
that distance; for it has saved a life; to what purpose reserved, the Almighty
only knows! To be happy, Madam, said he, and to make happy -- and O let me but
hope for your favor tomorrow -- I will put off my journey till then. And may
God -- Swear not, Sir, cried she, with an awful and piercing look; you have too
often swore! God's eye is upon us, his more immediate eye! and looked wildly.
But the woman looked up to the cieling and trembled, as if afraid of the eye of
God.

If not tomorrow, Madam, said he, say but next Thursday! -- say but next
Thursday! This I say, replied she, and of this thou may assure thyself, I
never, never will be thine. And let me hope that I may be entitled to the
performance of thy promise, to allow me to leave this innocent house, as one
called it, as soon as the day breaks. Did my perdition depend upon it. Madam,
replied he, you cannot, but upon terms: And I hope you will not terrify me. --
Nothing less, she returned, than an attempt upon my honor, shall make me
desparate. I have no views but to defend my honor: Solely with this view I
entered into treaty with your infamous agent below. The resolution you have
seen, God will give me upon the same occasion: but for a less, I wish not for
it. Only take notice, woman, that I am not this man's wife; he has no authority
over me. If you, by his command, detain me, look to it. Then taking one of the
candles, she turned from them, and, while Lovelace and the women stood stupidly
gazing at each other, went away, not a soul being able to molest her. In a
hurry she pulled her key out of her pocket, unlocked her chamber door, and
instantly entering her apartment, locked herself in.

Early the next morning Lovelace set out for M -- Hall, from whence he sent
several letters to Clarissa, apologizing for the despicable figure he made in
the last interview, and entreating her to render him happy the next Thursday.
Four of these letters were sent by special messengers, who returned without an
answer. He now wrote to Mr. Belford, one of his companions, and to the
pretended Captain Tomlinson, to pay her a visit, and prevail on her to give her
consent. Mean while, Clarissa's thoughts were employed on the means of her
escape; and having given Mabell a brown lutestring gown, while the mantua-maker
was trying it on in another room, she slipped over her own the one the girl had
pulled off, and putting on the wench's apron and short cloak, walked out of the
house without being observed. No sooner was she gone than the whole house was
in confusion; but all endeavors to find her were in vain. She had taken
lodgings at Mr. Smith's, a glover, in King Street, Covent Garden, where she had
two rooms on the first floor; and, while she was praising God for her happy
escape, Lovelace was raving, cursing, and ^ending orders to search for her in
all the villages round London.

Clarissa instantly wrote to inform Miss How of the loss of her honor, and
her escape; and also to Lady Betty Lawrence and Miss Montague, to know whether
they were at Hampstead, and had brought her in a coach and four to town. These
ladies informed her, that they had not been at Hampstead, and expressed their
earnest desire to see her happily married, as on that event they founded all
their hopes of Mr. Lovelace's reformation: but Clarissa, in her reply, told
them of his villainous forgeries and perjuries; of his procuring two women,
richly dressed, to personate them, who took her to a vile house, from which she
had before escaped; where she was first robbed of her senses, and then of her
honor; and concluded with observing, that nothing should ever induce her to
marry so treacherous and profligate a villain.

The letter she had sent to Miss How fell into the hands of that young lady's
mother, who returned a very severe answer, which the still unhappy Clarissa
received, while her mind was sinking under the distressing tho'ts of the
cruelty of relations, whom she had never ceased to love, and the dreadful idea
of her father's curse; but this giving a turn to her thoughts, helped to remove
her despondency. At last she received a letter from Miss How; but it was only
such a one as aggravated her distress, and made her think she had lost her only
friend. That lady reflected on her for voluntarily returning to the wicked
Sinclair's, after her informing her in two letters of the infamous character of
the house, (...) that Captain Tomlinson was an impostor: mentioned her
receiving the last in a disordered manner, lying on a couch, with her face red
and bloated; and told her that she had sent a person, who went to Mrs. (...)
with a strong guard to take her into her protection.

Grieved and surprised at the contents of this letter, Clarissa, in her reply,
vindicated her own conduct from the charge of imprudence, sending back the long
letter forged by Lovelace* and then writing to Hampstead, was informed that
Mrs. Bevis, by Lovelace's desire, had personated her, in order to obtain her
friend's second letter. (...) How was extremely suprised at seeing (...) exact
an imitation of her hand, and instantly acquitting her much loved friend, wrote
to inform her of this vile forgery, enclosing the rough draught of the long
letter she ought to have received, and the substance of that given Mrs. Bevis.
Her resentment was now levelled against Lovelace alone; and both her mother and
she joined in persuading Clarissa to prosecute that abandoned villain; but all
their arguments had no effect.

In the mean time, the Lady Betty Lawrence, and Miss Montague went to Lord M --
's, and in that nobleman's presence read to Lovelace the letters they had
received from the injured Clarissa, and in very severe terms reproached him for
his villainy. He patiently heard their accusations, acknowledged his baseness,
and talked in such high terms of the lady's perfections, and his earnest desire
to make her all the satisfaction in his power, that they at length resolved to
use their utmost endeavors to prevail on her to forgive him. Accordingly Miss
Montague and Lady Sad^^ir, her sister, went in Lord M -- 's coach and six, to
pay Miss How a visit, to entreat her to engage her unhappy friend to put
herself under Lady Betty Lawrence's protection, promising that she should not
part with her, till she saw all the justice done her it was possible for her to
receive.

Miss How, influenced by their reasons, pressed her dear friend to marry him,
as the only means of procuring her own happiness. This letter she sent by the
post, desiring an immediate answer; but receiving none, she wrote again to
chide her for keeping her in suspense, and sent the letter by a messenger, who
traveled all night, and carried it ^o Mr. Smith's; where he was told that she
had been missing several days; for, going about six in the morning to prayers
at Covent Garden church, very poorly in health, they had not heard of her
since. Miss Howe's messenger returned post-haste with the dreadful
intelligence. That young lady was almost distracted at the news, and, in the
bitterness of her soul^ instantly dispatched a special messenger to Miss
Montague, with a most affecting letter, to demand her dearest friend.

Dorcas had that morning seen Clarissa step out of Mr. Smith's shop, and
watching her, observed her enter Covent Garden church, to hear morning prayers;
and having placed Lovelace's man to prevent her escape, had Clarissa is
arrested by Covent Garden Church.
her arrested, at her leaving the church, for one hundred and fifty pounds for
board and lodging, though her clothes and effects were in Sinclair's house.

Clarissa, on being stopped by the officers, who whispered her, that they had a
writ against her, and that she must go with them, was terrified, trembled, and
turned pale. They desired her to step into a chair, which stood with the head
up to receive her. She for some time expostulated with them to know what they
meant; but, at last, seeing Lovelace's servant, she called out for help. A
crowd instantly gathered round her, and while some were struck with compassion
at seeing a fine young creature in such distress, others threw out shocking
reflections. A gentleman now interposed, and asking to see the fellow's
authority, desired, after he had looked at it, to know if her name was Clarissa
Harlow; and being told that it was, expressed his pity, and telling her she
must go with them, retired. Another gentleman inquiring if nobody could be
applied to, who would see that she was not ill used, Lovelace's servant
answered, that orders were particularly given for that. She had rich relations,
and would only be carried to the officer's house till her affairs could be made
up. Well, if I must go, cried she, I must ^ I cannot resist -- but I will not be
carried to the woman's! -- I will rather die at your feet than be carried to
the woman's! They told (...) she should not be carried there: when, observing
the crowd, she started: and cried, Any where -- any where, but to the woman's!
and stepping into the chair, in the utmost distress and confusion, threw
herself on the seat, crying, Carry me, carry me out of sight! Cover me, cover
me up for ever! She was taken to the officer's house in a mean court in High
Holborn; but, on her being taken out of the chair, fainted away. Sally, one of
Mrs. Sinclair's nieces, was there, and, as a favor, proposed her going to her
former lodgings; but this she absolutely refused.

No sooner was the distressed Clarissa thus arrested, than the execrable
Sinclair dispatched a man and horse with the joyful news to Lovelace, and the
messenger was flattered with the hopes of his receiving a considerable reward;
and therefore, as he found on his arrival that Lovelace was taking a tour with
Lord M -- and his two nieces for two or three days, he staid till his return;
but, instead of a reward, he received nothing but curses. Lovelace, who now
found it impossible to bring her to be his mistress, thought he could not live
without her, and resolved to make her his wife. A shamed of the low villainy of
this proceeding, and distracted with rage, he instantly wrote to Mr. Belford,
his most intimate friend; and sending a messenger, as if on life and death,
desired him to hasten (...) Clarissa, and clear him of having any share in the
vile contrivance; to set her free from confinement without conditions; to give
her the strongest assurances that she was entirely at liberty; that without her
leave, he would neither molest no^ visit her* and, as a proof of his sincerity,
to cause all her clothes and effects to be sent to her.

This gentleman, who had often been an advocate for Clarissa, and had
frequently endeavored to persuade him to do her justice, instantly hasted to
the vile Sinclair's, and not finding the lady there, posted to the officers,
but, as it was Sunday, could not obtain the ^ight of her, she being resolved to
have the remainder of the day to herself. However, the next morning, he was
introduced into the room by the officer's wife, when he was immediately shocked
at the dreadful place in which he found her, and its wretched furniture. She
was kneeling in a corner, near a dismal broken window, secured with iron bars,
her arms crossed upon a crazy table, and the fore finger of her right hand in a
Bible. Her dress was a neat white damask; her head-cloaths were a little
discomposed; her fine hair hanging in natural ringlets, but a little tangled,
shaded one side of her neck, as her rumpled handkerchief did the other; and her
face, yet lovely, amidst all her sufferings, rested on her arms.

While Mr. Belford took a view of the room, and the kneeling lady in her white
flowing dress, he thought his concern would have choked him; and stammering
out a curse at the officer and his wife, asked if that was an apartment for
such a lady? They replied, in excuse, that they had offered her their own
bedchamber, but she refused it. The charming sufferer then raising her lovely
face, overspread with the most significant woe, waved her hand toward the
door, as if desi^ing him to withdraw: he begged she would do him the favor to
hear him for one moment, but this she absolutely refused. Mr. Belford did not
dare to approach her, but on his knee entreated her to allow him to release he^
from that wretched house, and out of the power of the vile woman who had caused
her to be brought there: when once more lifting up her face, she said, Sir, are
not you Mr. Belford? I think your name is Belford. It is, Madam, he returned; I
was always an admirer of your virtues, and am come to release you from the
hands you are in. And into whose to place me? cried she. Leave me! leave me!
Let me never rise from this spot! Let me never, never more believe in man! This
moment, dearest Madam, said he, this very moment, if you please, you may depart
whithersoever you think fit; you are absolutely free, and your own mistress. I
had now, she returned, as lieve die here as any where, and will owe no
obligation to the friend of him in whose company you have seen me; therefore,
pray Sir, leave me. Then turning to the officer, she said, that she was better
reconciled to his house than at first, and if he could but engage that none but
his wife should come near her, she should die with him, and they should be well
satisfied for their trouble; and then turning to Mr. Belford, again entreated
him to leave her, repeating, she would owe no obligation to the friend of her
destroyer; but offering to rise, she, through weakness, sunk down and fainted
away.

Mr. Belford and the officer retiring, left her to the care of the woman of the
house and her maid; and after her recovery, being informed she was so weak and
low that she could hardly speak, Mr. Belford took this opportunity to go to her
lodgings, in order to fetch Mrs. Smith* but she being from home, he told her
husband what had happened, which he pretended was owing to a mistake of orders;
and finding that two letters had been left for her, he called a chair, and
hasted back with them.

On his return, an apothecary who had been sent for, had just gone up stairs;
and the officer's wife being above with him, Mr. Belford made no scruple of
following them. The unhappy lady was seated on the side of a broken couch, and
did not care to speak to the apothecary, who made a very disagreeable
appearance. On her seeing Mr. Belford, she said, her not being left to her own
sex was not the least of her present misfortunes. He begged her excuse, and
making a sign to the apothecary to withdraw, observed that he had been at her
new lodgings to get every thing ready for her reception. That Mr. Smith and his
wife had been ful^ of apprehensions for her safety, and that he had brought two
letters, which had been left there for her. Those, she said, were from the only
friend she had in the world; when kissing them, and looking at the seals, she
put them in her bosom. He again entreated her to think of quitting that
wretched place, assuring her, in the solemnest manner, that nobody should
disturb her at Mr. Smith's; and that he would particularly engage his honor,
that he who had most offended her, should not come near her without her own
consent. Your honor, Sir! said she, are you not that man's friend? I am not a
friend, Madam, returned he, to his vile actions to the most excellent of women.
Do you flatter me, Sir? said she. O Sir, your friend, your barbarous friend,
what has he to answer for! Her heart was too full to proceed; and putting her
hand over her eyes, he saw the tears trickle through her fingers. He then
mentioned Lovelace's innocence of this base outrage, and told her, that he was
resolved not to molest her; beseeching her to give directions about sending her
apparel to her new lodgings. Clarissa then immediately gave him her keys,
asking if Mrs. Smith might not attend him; to which he having readily assented,
she agreed to go in the chair he had brought.

Mr. Belford then left the room, and took that opportunity to make a small
present to the officer and his maid; and sending for the apothecary, he paid
him beyond his expecta^ions. Mean while, the lady giving the ^^aid half a
guinea, which was all ^e gold she (...), told the officer's wife, she would
speedi^ly ^cknowledge their civilities, and satisfy the apothecary, who might
send his bill to Mr. Smith's; and then leaning on the officer's wife, with
trembling limbs walked down stairs, and was conducted by Mr. Belford to the
chair.

As Clarissa had not been undressed during her confinement* she, on her arrival
at Mr. Smith's, went to bed, and soon after, Mr. Belford, taking Mrs. Smith
with him to the abandoned Sinclair's, saw every thing ^ut into the trunk and
box^s they were first brought in; and caused them to be carried away in two
coaches, though it was with the utmost difficulty he prevented the woman of
that infamous house having a share in the lady's clothes, which were of
considerable value.

Clarissa was next day so ill, that Mrs. Smith provided for her a very good
nurse; and she had also the voluntary attendance of Mrs. Lovick, a decayed
widow gentlewoman of great piety, who lodged over ^er apartment, and of whom
Clarissa soon became extremely fond. In the evening was called in a skilful and
eminent apotheca^y; and a few days after, Mr. Belford prevailed on her to
accept of the visits of Doctor H -- ^^ physician no less eminent for his
humanity and affectionate behavior, than for his kill in physic.

On the first visit Mr. Belford was permitted to pay her, he vindicated
Lovelace from having any hand in the shameful arrest; but she would not allow
him to use any arguments to engage her to be his, or even to see him. The whole
of this gentleman's conduct was, however, so unexceptionable, that she could
not refuse his visits; and her conversation had so happy an effect on his mind,
as made him detest himself for his former vices, and resolved, for the future,
to regulate his conduct, as much as possible, by the unerring standard of
virtue and religion.

The sufferings of Clarissa had been more than her tender frame could bear; she
gradually d^clined, and her illness daily ^ncreased. In this melancholy
situation, deprived of the comfort and assistance of her relations, she found
consolation in the tenderness of the worthy Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith, which
she termed maternal; and in the affectionate visits both of her doctor and
apothecary, who being in years, and having children of their own grown up,
behaved to her with an affection which she was pleased to call paternal. Death
now making its gradual approaches, she subdued her resentments, and offered up
some of her petitions for him who had caused her most dreadful sufferings; and
as she had constantly preserved a tender affection for her relations, whom she
could not suffer, in her hearing, to be charged with cruelty on her account,
she w^^te a very moving letter to her sister Arab^ i^ to intercede with her
father (...) that heavy part of the curse he had said upon her, which related
to hereafter. To this she received a most cruel answer; but after the bitterest
reproaches, her sister observed that her father, as far as it was in his power^
withdrew the curse he had laid upon her^ and hoped that her present punishment
would be all she would meet with; but would never own nor forgive her; and
grieved that he had such a daughter. She received the unjust reproaches in
every line of this letter without repining; and though her nearest relations
seemed to take a pleasure in increasing her distress, she wrote again to her
siste^ ^o inform them that she was ^^awing (...) the close of life, and to
entreat that one or both of her parents would ^^nd her their last blessing; but
she received a cruel denial, expressed in the most barbarous term^. Thu^
treated by an unfeeling sister, she wrote a tender (...) to the same purpose,
to her mam^a, and to each of her uncles, but without effect; that good lady,
who would joyfully have received her to her bosom, being overruled, was
constrained to refuse the kindly blessing.

The humanity of Mr. Belford's behavior to the unhappy Clarissa, the
obligation ^e had ^^^ferred upon her in delivering her from a wretched
confinement, in giving his honor (...) Lovelace should not molest her, and in
kindly recommending a physician whom she highly esteemed, had such an effect on
that lady's mind, that she desired (...), for her private satisfaction, to give
her an abstract of his letter on the pretended fire, and what afterward passed
at Hampstead, promising to make no use of this communication, either to his or
Lovelace's disadvantage. With this request Mr. Belford readily complied; when
Clarissa, finding that Lovelace had done her justice, she, to Belford's
astonishment, desired, that when she was dead, he would be the protector of her
hono^^ and her executor; observing, that it would do credit to her memory; that
wanting time to write her own story, she had entrusted it to the account given
by the destroyer of her fame and fortune. Mr. Belford answered, he hoped she
would live to see many happy years, and to perform what lay nearest her heart;
but, in case of survivorship, he would accept of the sacred office.

Clarissa's relations being, in the mean time, willing to know her manner of
life, and, if she was really so ill as she pretended, commissioned a
pragmatical young pedant, who had just taken orders, and was going to London,
to make proper inquiries; the result of which was, that, though she was very
ill, she was visited by one of Mr. Lovelace's intimate friends, and often went
out in a chair, as it was said, to hear morning prayers; but he had been told,
that nothing was more common than to make the hearing of morning prayers a
cover for private assignations. Having collected this conjectural scandal, he
^ent it down to her relations; and such was the spirit by which they were
governed, that they readily believed the worst insinuation, and it was agreed
to send her out of the reach of both Lovelace and Belford. Her sister was
therefore directed to write to Clarissa, to propose her taking a voyage to one
of the colonies.

About this time arrived Colonel Morden, the trustee for her grandfather's
estate, who was received by the family with great marks of respect; but having
a sincere regard for Clarissa, whom he had not seen for some years, he resolved
to take his own m^asures, to oblige Lovelace to marry her, and to put her in
possession of her grandfather's estate. With this view he rode to M -- hall,
where he had a very warm contest with Lord M -- and Lovelace; but after several
sallies of passion, they grew more calm and composed, and Lovelace doing
justice to Clarissa's merit, and very freely censuring his own conduct, while
he concealed the blackest instance of his villainy, and professing his ardent
desire to make her all the reparation in his power by marrying her, as soon as
she should permit him that (...), they came to a good understanding; on which
Lovelace laid before the Colonel several of the letters that had passed between
them, and informed him of some noble proposals made by the Lord M --, and the
lad^es of his family* (...) favor of Clarissa, even after his being entirely
rejected by that lady. Colonel Morden was charmed with this instance of
generosity; and being perfectly satisfied with Lovelace, took his leave.

This gentleman now wrote a very affecting letter to Clarissa, to prevail on
her to accept of Lovelace; to comfort her under her present illness; and to
inform her that he would be her constant friend; and was then exerting all his
endeavors to produce a happy reconciliation between her and her relations;
which, as soon as ^e had accomplished, he himself would has^e to bring her the
joyful tidings.

The Colonel being now firmly convinced of his niece's innocence, ^ent a person
of discretion to inquire into the manner in which she was supported, and the
state of her health. This messenger filled him with the greatest concern and
astonishment; for he found that she was reduced to the necessity of selling her
clothes for support; that she was very ill, and that her piety and resignation
rendered her the admiration of all who were admitted to converse with her. He
then paid a visit to Miss How, who showed him several of Clarissa's letters,
by which it evidently appeared that she was extremely ill; and he rea^ ^ne in
particular, in which, in a very tender and affectionate manner, she described
her weakness, and her being obliged several times to break off, in order to
prevent her fainting.

Mr. Morden having transcribed these passages, he the next day procured a
general meeting with all the family, and renewed his solicitations in favor of
Clarissa: He then expatiated on her penitence, virtue, and ill health; read a
very contrite letter written by Lovelace to Clarissa, with her high-soul'd
answer; and afterward mentioning his visit to Miss How, read some of the
passages he had transcribed from Clarissa's letters to that lady; particularly
one, in which she asked what could be done for her now, should her friends be
ever so favorable? And wished, more for their sakes than for her own, that
they would still relent; and then complained that she was very ill, and must
drop her pen. At this, Mrs. Harlowe, weeping and wringing her hands, cried, O
my child! my child! They all seemed affected, except Clarissa's brother, who,
addressing himself to the good lady, cried, Dear Madam, pray recollect that you
have more children than this ungrateful one. Mr. Morden was at length permitted
to proceed with his extracts; and again moved every one to pity the unhappy
Clarissa; but her brother going to each, strove to harden their hearts, and in
particular again reminded his mother, that she had other children; asking, what
was there in all that was read, but the result of his sister's talent at moving
the passions? Mrs. Harlowe talked of going to town to see and comfort her poor
unhappy daughter, and Mr. Morden offered his service to escort her; but this
too was overruled by the imperious brother, who rendered ineffectual all his
endeavors to restore the dying Clarissa to their favor. At this the Colonel
exclaimed against his inhumanity, reproached him for his obduracy; and high
words arising between them, their resentments were carried to a very great
height; and every one siding with the brother, Mr. Morden, lifting up his hands
and eyes, cried, To what hearts of flint am I related? O cousin Harlo^^, are
you resolved to have but one daughter? Are you, Madam, to be taught by a son,
who has no bowels, to forget that you are a mother? I will never more open my
lips to you on this subject; but will instantly make my will, and in me shall
the dear creature have the father, uncle, and brother she has lost. On saying
this, he hurried out of the room, notwithstanding their using their utmost
endeavors to detain him; and, calling for his horse, rode away.

In the mean time Clarissa was busily employed in taking all such measures as
she thought would render the office of her executor as little troublesome as
possible. That lady had not only rendered the view of death familiar to her
mind, but longed for its approach, and every preparation for it was attended
with pleasure. She took a chair, and went to an undertaker's in Fleetstreet,
where she bespoke her coffin; and, with the greatest composure, gave directions
about some emblems, of which she had made drawings, and chose to have placed on
the lid.

Some days after she had taken this extraordinary step, Mr. Belford paid her a
visit, and was but just seated, when he was startled at hearing a rumbling
noise upon the stairs, as if a large trunk had been bringing up between two
people. Clarissa blushed, and entreating him not to be surprised, said they
were bringing her something before the time. In an instant Mrs. Smith and Mrs.
Lovick entered, crying, O Madam, what have you done? and Mr. Belford starting
up and going to the door, to his great surprise, they told him it was a coffin.
With the utmost intrepidity and calmness Clarissa arose, and directed the men
to carry it into her bedchamber: and then returning, said, Pray excuse me, Mr.
Belford; and don't you, Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, be concerned; there is
nothing more in it than the uncommonness of the thing. May we not be as
reasonably shocked at going to church, where are the monuments of our
ancestors, with whose dust we hope ours will one day be mingled, as to be
affected at such a sight as this? They all remaining silent, the women holding
their aprons to their eyes* Why this concern? she resumed. If I am to be
blamed* it is for showing too much solicitude for this poor earthly part of me.
I love to do every thing I can do for myself; and I have here no mother* no
sister, (...) Miss How, near me. And pray what is the difference of a few days
to you, when by (...) I am gratified rather than discomposed? -- My dear
friends, added she to the women, I have considered these things; don't give me
reason to think that you have not. They were all of them still silent, the
women in grief, and Mr. Belford, in a manner, stunned. She then asked the women
to walk in and look upon it; and Mr. Belford took his leave, observing to her
that she had done wrong, very wrong, and ought not to be allowed by any means
to have before her such an object.

The coffin was covered with fine black cloth, and lined with white satin; and
the burial dress was brought in with it. Mrs. Lo^ick took the liberty to blame
her, and wished the removal of such an object, at least from her bedchamber.
But Clarissa replied, To people in health, this sight may seem, too solemn, and
my unconcern may appear affected; but to me, who have been so gradually weaned
from the world, and have so much reason to rejoice that I am leaving it, it is
far otherwise: and I cannot help saying, that I dwell on, I indulge and enjoy
the thoughts of death; for, added she, looking steadfastly at the awful
receptacle, there is such a vast superiority of weight and importance in the
thought of death, and its hoped-for happy consequences, that it annihilates all
other concerns. Believe me, my good friends, it does what nothing else can;
(...) teaches me, by strengthening me, to inf^rce that divinest example, to
forgive all the injuries I have received, and shuts out from my soul the
remembrance of past evils.

Clarissa's mind still continued calm and (...) but she was now satisfied with
^he duties of the closet* and the visits of the minister of the parish; and
would no more leave the house. Mea^ while, though her weakness daily increased
and her sight began to fail, all her noble intellects were strong and lively.
She laid before Mr. Belford a particular account of what she would have done
immediately after her decease; showed him where she had deposited her will, and
where she had put her letters and copies of letters; and then caused him to
seal up all with his own seal in her presence. This was done with an air so
composed and cheerful, as equally surprised and affected both him and the women
who were present. Then rubbing her eyes, which she said were misty, and looking
intently upon them, God bless you all! cried she. How kindly are you concerned
for me! Who says I am friendless? Who says I am abandoned, and amongst
strangers? -- Good Mr. Belford, don't be so generously humane! Indeed, added
she, putting her handkerchief to her eyes, you will make me less happy than I
am sure you wish me to be.

That gentleman soon after retired, and immediately wrote to Colonel Morden,
that if he expected to see his beloved cousin alive, he must lose no time; and
by the same post Dr. H -- wrote to her father, to acquaint him, that he had yet
an opportunity to save himself and family great future regret, by dispatching
one of it, with his and his lady's last blessing, to the most excellent lady of
her sex; and after giving the highest encomiums on her conduct, which, he said,
was that in which a dying saint might glory, he observed, that whatever was
done, must be done speedily; for he did not think she could live above a week;
and how long of that time she might enjoy her senses, so as to receive comfort
from the favors he might think proper to confer upon her, he could not pretend
to say.

Mr. Belford had communicated to Lovelace every particular as it passed, and
that gentleman now seeing the effects of the villainous treatment he had given
the excellent lady, whom he had forced into his protection, was now stung by
the reproaches of his own conscience. Sick of himself, sick of the remembrance
of his vile plots, which had brought upon him such heavy, such durable remorse,
he, in unavailing anguish, uttered his complaints to Mr. Belford, bidding aim
tell the doctor, that if he could recover her, he would make him a present of a
thousand guineas; but desiring him, that if she really left the world, he would
not bluntly tell hi^ so, but only that he would do well to (...) tour to Paris.

The Colonel no sooner received Mr. Belford's letter, than abandoning all
thoughts of procuring a reconciliation, he rode post to London, and alighted at
Mrs. Smiths, where, with great impatience, he immediately asked how Miss
Harlowe did. Mrs. Smith let him know she was alive, but she feared her death
wa^ drawing on apace. Good God! cried he, can I see her? My name is Morden. I
have the honor to be nearly related to her; step up, pray, and if she be
sensible, tell her that I am here. Who is with her? She replied, there was
nobody but her nurse and Mrs. Lovick, except Mr. Belford was with her. He then
desired to speak with Mr. Belford, who came down to him; when being informed
that she was sitting in a sound sleep, the Colonel begged that he might see
her, though sleeping; for his impatience was too great to permit his staying
till she awaked, and he would not have her disturbed. Mrs. Smith, therefore,
stepping up before them, desired Mrs. Lovick and the nurse not to stir when
they entered. Colonel Morden, on his being introduced by Mr. Belford, found her
dressed in white, with her left arm round Mrs. Lovick's neck, who set close by
her. One faded cheek rested upon the good woman's breast, the kindly warmth of
which had overspread it with a faint but charming flush; the other paler and
hollow. Her hands, which were extremely white, hung lifeless, one before her,
the other was held by the affectionate widow, whose tears bedewed the face
which her motherly bosom supported. Her countenance had an air of the sweetest
calmness and serenity, and her sleep seemed easy; her breath was indeed quick
and short, but tolerably free, and did not appear like that of a person on the
verge of life. In this affecting attitude she appeared before her cousin
Morden, who sighing often, gazed upon her with folded arms, and the most
affectionate attention; till, at last, on her starting, and fetching her breath
with greater difficulty than before, he retired to a screen that was drawn
before her coffin, which stood under the window. This screen was placed there
as soon as Clarissa was obliged to take to her chamber; though Mr. Belford, in
the short conversation he had with the Colonel, had forgot to inform him of
what he would probably see.

On his retiring thither, he drew out his handkerchief, and, drowned in grief,
seemed unable to speak; but on casting his eyes downwards, he perceived the
shape of a coffin; and lifting up a purple cloth that was spread over it, he
started back, crying, Good God! what is here? Mrs. Smith stepped up softly to
him; but while he was, in a low voice, blaming her for suffering his cousin to
indulge her gloomy reflections with such an object, and she vindicating
herself, Clarissa heaved a profound sigh, started, and awaked. She observed,
that she had slept without being refreshed, and that her fingers ends seemed
numbed. Mr. Belford told her, that her cousin Morden had called there, and
would return in half an hour; but he feared to surprise her. Nothing in this
world can now surprise me, said she, except my dear mamma was to come, and
favor me with her last blessing. That would even yet be a welcome surprise.
But if he comes, what shall I do about that screen? He will probably chide me,
and I cannot bear chiding now.

Mr. Belford now favored Mr. Morden's retreat, and the screen was placed as
near the window as possible, to prevent his seeing what was behind it; while
he, hearing all she said, resolved to take no notice of it. He soon after sent
in his name, and being instantly admitted, folded the lady in his arms as she
sat, dropping down on one knee; for placing her hands on the elbows of the
chair, she attempted to rise, but could not. Excuse me, my dear cousin, said
she, excuse my not standing up. I did not expect such a favor now; but I am
glad of this opportunity of thanking you for all your kind and generous
goodness. I never, my best beloved and dearest cousin, said he, the tears
gushing from his eyes, shall forgive myself that I did not attend you sooner.
Little did I think you were so ill; nor do any of your friends believe it. If
they did -- If they did, repeated she, interrupting him, I should have more
compassion for them -- I am sure I should. But pray, Sir, how did you leave
them? Are you reconciled to them? If you are not, I beg, if you love your poor
Clarissa, that you will; for every widened difference serves to augment my
fault, since that is the foundation of all. He then told her, that he had
brought her the accounts of her grandfather's estate, with bills and draughts
upon their banker* lest she should be in want of money; and that this was such
an earnest of an approaching reconciliation, that he dared to answer for every
thing else. Ah, Sir! cried she. -- with frequent breaks and pauses. -- I wish,
I wish this does not rather show, that, were I to live, they would have nothing
more to say to me. I never had any pride in being independent: all my actions,
when I might have made myself more so, show this. She then apologized for
having troubled Mr. Belford with the office of being her executor, from her not
having seen him sooner, and not knowing that he still honored her with his
regard; and entreated him not to revenge her on Lovelace. After this,
complaining of her being very faint and low, and expressing her sorrow that she
could not better deserve the honor of that visit, she sunk back into her
chair, and was silent; on which the colonel and Mr. Belford instantly withdrew.

Clarissa had before remarked, that all would be most conveniently over in bed:
the solemn, the important moment approached; but her soul ardently aspiring
after immortality, she imagined the time moved slowly; and with great presence
of mind, she gave orders in relation to her body, directing her nurse and the
maid of the house, as soon as she was cold, to put her into her coffin. The
colonel, after paying her another visit, wrote to her uncle Mr. John Harlowe,
that they might save themselves the trouble of having any farther debates about
reconciliation; for before they could resolve, his dear cousin would probably
be no more.

A day or two after, Mr. Belford was sent for, and immediately came: at his
entrance he saw the colonel kneeling by her bedside with the lady's right hand
in both his, which his face covered, bathing it with his tears, though she had
just been endeavoring to comfort him, in noble and elevated strains. On the
opposite side of the bed was seated Mrs. Lovick, who leaning against the bed's
head in a most disconsolate manner, turned to him, as soon as she saw him,
crying, O Mr. Belford, the dear lady! -- a heavy sigh not permitting her to say
more. Mrs. Smith was kneeling at the bed's feet, with clasped fingers and
uplifted eyes, with the tears trickling in large drops down her cheeks, as if
imploring help from the Source of life and every comfort.

The excellent lady had been ^ent a few minutes, and was thought speechless,
she moving her lips without uttering a word; but when Mrs. Lovick, on Mr.
Belford's approach, pronounced his name, O Mr. Belford! cried she, in a faint
inward voice, Now! -- now! -- I bless God, all will soon be over -- a few -- a
very few moments will end this strife -- and I shall be happy! -- Comfort, Sir,
-- comfort, my cousin -- See! -- the blameable kindness! -- He does not wish me
to be happy so soon! -- Then pausing for two or three minutes, during which her
looks were earnestly fixed on the colonel, My dearest cousin, she resumed, be
comforted! -- What is dying but the common lot? -- The mortal frame may seem to
labor -- but that is all: it is not so hard to die as I thought -- The
preparation is the difficulty, and I bless God I have had time for that! -- the
rest is worse to beholders than to me! -- I am all blessed hope -- hope itself!
Here her looks expressed this truth; for a sweet smile overspread her
countenance. After a short silence, Once more, my dear cousin, said she,
commend me most dutifully to my father and mother, to my sister, to my brother,
to my uncles -- Tell them I bless them with my departing breath -- for all
their displeasure, I bless them -- Most happy has been my punishment here,
happy -- indeed.

She was again silent for a few moments, lifting up her eyes, and the hand her
cousin did not hold between his, and then cried, "O death! where is thy sting?"
-- "It is good for me that I was afflicted." Then turning to the colonel and
Mr. Belford, who were lost in speechless sorrow, O dear, dear gentlemen, said
she, you don't know what foretastes -- what assurances -- Here she again
stopped, and looked upward, sweetly smiling, as if in a thankful rapture.

She then turned her head toward Mr. Belford, and said, Do you, Sir, tell your
friend, that I forgive him! And I pray God forgive him! again pausing, and
lifting up her eyes, as if praying for his forgiveness. Let him know, added
she, how happily I die, and that I wish his last hour may be like mine.

Again she was silent for a few moments, and then resuming -- My sight fails
me! -- your voices only -- but the voice of grief is alike in all. Is not this
Mr. Morden's hand, pressing one of his with her hand, which she had just let
go? Which is Mr. Belford's? added she, holding out the other. He gave her his.
God Almighty bless you both, and make you both in your last hour -- for you
must come to this -- as happy as I am.

Again she paused, her breath growing shorter; and after a few minutes, And
now, my dearest cousin, give me your hand -- nearer -- nearer still, added she,
drawing it toward her, and pressing it to her dying lips -- God protect you,
dear, dear Sir! and once more receive my best and most grateful thanks -- and
tell my dear Miss How -- she will one day, I fear not, be a saint in heaven.

After again continuing for a short time silent, she resumed, in a more faint
and broken accent, And you, Mr. Belford, pressing his hand, may God preserve
you, and make you sensible of all your errors! -- may you be -- She then sunk
her head upon her pillow, and fainting away, drew from them her hands. They all
thoughts she was gone, and each gave way to a violent burst of grief. But soon
showing signs of returning life, their attention was again engaged; and when a
little recovered, Mr. Belford, entreated her to complete in his favor her
half-pronounced blessing; when waving her hand to him and her coffin, and
bowing her head to every one present, not omitting the nurse and the
maidservant, with a faultering and inward voice, she added, Bless -- bless --
bless -- you all! -- And now -- and now -- for the last time, holding up her
almost lifeless hands, -- Come, O come -- blessed Lord Jesus! -- And with these
words she expired, with such a smile, such a sweet serenity, at that instant
overspreading her face, as seemed to express her eternal happiness already
begun.

Mr. Belford and the colonel pressed her still warm though lifeless hand with
their lips, and then retired into the next room, where they looked at each
other as if going to speak; but, as if one motion governed, as one cause
affected both, they turned away silent. Mr. Morden sighed as if his heart would
burst; and at last, lifting up his hands and face, Good Heaven! said he,
support me! And is it thus, O flower of nature! -- Must we no more -- never
more -- my blessed, blessed cousin -- And then, as if recollecting himself,
Forgive me, Sir! he added -- O excuse me, Mr. Belford, and hastily passing by
him, walked down stairs and left the house; Mr. Belford remaining silent and
motionless as a statue: but, at last, recovering himself as well as he was
able, he wrote to two of his companions to hasten to Lovelace, to prevent his
performing some act of desperation; and then sent to the latter a short note,
in which were only these words, I have only to say at present, thou will do
well to take a tour to Paris, or wherever thy destiny shall lead thee.

The very day after Clarissa's death, a servant in livery brought for her a
letter from her brother, and another from her sister, to comfort and assure her
of her father's and mother's blessing, which she had so ardently longed for,
and which, had they come in time, she would have received with great joy.

Mr. Belford, on looking over her papers, found she had written letters to be
sent after her decease, to every one of her family; also to Miss How and
Lovelace; and one to himself. These were all written in a tender, pious, and
generous strain, in order to give comfort, rather than distress; her duty,
affection, and piety, appeared in every line; and all of them expressed the
ecstatic assurance, that when those letters came to their hands, she should be
enjoying eternal felicity.

Mr. Belford, now in the character of her executor, sent one of his servants
with the posthumous letters to the family, and to Miss How, and also a letter
from Colonel. Morden, to acquaint Mr. James Harlowe with his sister's death,
and her desire to be interred near her grandfather. This messenger found the
whole family assembled, on occasion of the letter the Colonel had before sent,
and flattering themselves with the hopes, that to hasten their resolutions,
their cousin had represented her worse than she really was; but the servant had
no sooner delivered the letter that contained the fatal news, than the whole
house was in the utmost confusion, the servants running different ways,
lamenting and wringing their hands; Mrs. Harlowe was in fits, and all in such
disorder, that he could get no commands, nor obtain any notice of himself.

He therefore proceeded to Mrs. Howe's, where he had the precaution to desire
to speak with Miss's maid, to whom he communicated the fatal news, that she
might break it to her mistress. The maid herself was so affected, that the old
lady came to see what ailed her, and was herself so struck with the
communication, that she was obliged to sit down. O the sweet creature! said
she, And is it come to this? -- O my poor Nancy -- How shall I be able to break
the matter to my Nancy! When Mrs. How was a little recovered, she went up, in
order to let her daughter know the dreadful tidings, taking the letter and
salts in her hand. Instantly the housekeeper, with her face overspread with
tears, came hurrying down into the kitchen, crying, her young mistress had
fainted away; nor did she wonder at it -- There never lived a lady more worthy
of general admiration than Miss Clarissa Harlowe! and never was their a
stronger friendship dissolved by death, than between her young lady and her.
She then hurried away with a lighted wax candle, and feathers to burn under the
nose of her young mistress.

Mr. Morden resolved to accompany the hearse to Harlowe-Place. The coffin was
filled with flowers and aromatic herbs; and proper care taken to prevent the
corpse from being moved by the jolting of the hearse. He arrived at
Harlowe-Place, some time before the body. At his entrance into the court, all
were in motion, every servant he saw had swelled eyes, and seemed deeply
concerned. But a perfect concert of grief broke out the moment they saw him
enter the parlour. Mr. Harlowe, the father, no sooner cast his eyes upon him,
than he cried, O cousin, cousin, you are the only person of all our family, who
have nothing to reproach yourself with! The poor mother, bowing her head to
him, in speechless grief, sat with her handkerchief held to her eyes with one
hand, while her sister Harvey held the other between both hers, weeping upon
it. Mr. Anthony Harlowe, who conducted Colonel Morden into the room, went
toward Mrs. Harlowe, crying, Don't -- don't -- dear sister! then toward the
afflicted father, Don't -- don't, dear brother, don't thus give way -- and
without being able to say another word, went to a corner of the room, and,
wanting himself the comfort he strove to give, sunk into a chair, and sobbed
aloud.

The colonel then approaching the inconsolable mother, said, Let us not, Madam,
give way to a grief, which however just, can be of no avail. We hurt ourselves,
and cannot recall the dear creature for whom we mourn. Nor indeed would you wish
it, did you but know with what assurances of eternal happiness she left the
world. She is happy, Madam! -- depend upon it, she is happy! and let this be
your comfort. O cousin, cousin! cried the unhappy mother, withdrawing her hand
from her sister Harvey's and pressing the colonel's with it. You know not what
a child I have lost! -- and how lost! That it is that makes my loss
insupportable.

They now all joined in the melancholy chorus, each accusing him and herself,
and some one another. But the eyes of all were in turn fixed upon James
Harlowe, as the person who had kept up the general resentment, while he seemed
hardly able to bear his own remorse, nor Miss Harlowe hers, she breaking out,
How tauntingly did I write to her! How barbarously did I insult her! Yet how
patiently did she bear it! O brother, brother! -- but for you! -- but for you!
-- Double not upon me, cried he, interrupting her, my own woes! I only though it to
reclaim a dear creature that had erred! I did not intend to break her heart!
but it was the villainous Lovelace who did that -- not any of us! We must
forever lament, cried the unhappy mother, our unkindness to so sweet a child!
-- Indeed, indeed, added she softly to her sister Harvey, I have been too
passive, much too passive. The temporary quiet I have, all my life, been so
studious to preserve, will cost me everlasting disquiet! -- Dear sister! was
all the answer Mrs. Harvey could make. -- I have done but half my duty to the
dearest and most deserving of my children, resumed the afflicted mother; --
nay, not half -- How have we hardened our hearts against her! Again her tears
choked up the passage of her words, and, Dearest, dearest sister! was all the
reply Mrs. Harvey could make. Would to heaven, proceeded the mother, I had but
once seen her! Then lifting up her eyes to her son and daughter, she added, O
James! O Arabella! were we to receive as little mercy!

The hearse at length came to the gate, and a servant entered to let them know
what its lumbering heavy noise up the paved innercourt-yard had before apprized
them of; unable to speak, he looked, bowed, and withdrew. Clarissa, having been
universally beloved, on account of her being the common patroness of all the
honest poor in the neighborhood, about fifty men, women, and children, had, at
the solemn tolling of the bell of the parish church, assembled; this was a
respect paid to the memory of the deceased, out of officious love, as the
hearse passed near the church. Several of these people made a good appearance,
but not one of them had a dry eye, each lamenting the death of the admirable
lady, who never stirred out but somebody was the better for it. When the coffin
was taken out of the hearse, th^se crowding about it, for a few moments,
hindered its being carried in, the young people striving who should bear it. At
length, six maidens were permitted to carry it by the six handles, into a
parlour adjoining to the hall, which Clarissa used to call her parlour, and
placed it on a table in the middle of the room; but when the father and mother,
her aunt Harvey, the two uncles, and her sister came in, joining her brother
and Mr. Morden, the scene became still more affecting. Their sorrow was,
doubtless, heightened by the idea of their cruelty; and now seeing before them
the receptacle that contained the glory of their family, who was so lately
driven thence by their indiscreet and cruel violence, no wonder their grief was
more than they knew how to bear. They would have withheld the mother (...)
entering the parlour; but when they could not, though undetermined before, led
by an irresistible impulse, they all bore her company. The poor lady did but
just cast her eye upon the coffin, and then snatching it away, retired with
passionate grief toward the window, addressing herself to her beloved
daughter, O my child! my child! cried she, thou pride of my hope! why, oh why
was not I permitted to speak pardon and peace to thee? O forgive thy cruel
mother! The father's grief was too deep for utterance, till he saw his son
coming in, when giving a groan, Never, said he, was sorrow like mine! O son,
son! added he in a reproaching accent. Her uncles and her sister frequently
looked and turned away on the emblems, in silent sorrow. Mrs. Harvey would have
read to them the inscription: these words she did read: "Here the wicked cease
from troubling;" but could proceed no farther, her tears falling in large drops
upon the plate she was contemplating.

These mourners were no sooner retired, than Mr. Morden ordered the lid of the
coffin to be unscrewed, and caused some fresh aromatics and flowers to be put
into it. The maids who brought the flowers were ambi^^^^ of strewing them about
the body, and (...) poured fresh lamentations over it, (...). The mourning
family being told that ^he lid was unscrewed, they all pressed in again, except
the unhappy father and mother: then it was that the grief of each found fluent
utterance. Afterward the afflicted parents proposed to take one last view of
their once darling daughter, but having reached the door, neither of them were
able to enter the room.

Miss How came the next morning in her chariot, for the last time, to behold
her beloved friend. Mr. Morden handed her out, when addressing him, Never did I
think, said she, to enter more these doors, but my Clarissa brings (...) after
her -- He ^ed her into the parlour; where seeing the coffin, she withdrew her
hand from his, impatiently pushed aside the lid^ and removed the facecloth.
Then in a wild air, clasped her uplifted hands together, now looking upon the
Miss How lamenting over the (...) Clarissa.
corpse, now up to heaven: at last, breaking silence, O Sir! cried she, see you
not here! -- see you not here the glory of her sex! -- thus by the most
villainous of yours -- thus laid low? -- O my blessed friend! my sweet
companion! my lovely monitress! -- kissing her lips at every tender (...). And
is this all -- is it all of (...) Clarissa's story? Then pausing, One (...) my
beloved friend, cried she, did thou (...) low me! -- but this dumb sorrow! --
O for a tear to ease my full-swoln heart that is just bursting -- But why, Sir,
why, Mr. Morden, was she sent hither? -- why not to me? -- She had no father,
no mother, no relations! -- They had all renounced her. I wa^ her sympathizing
friend, and had not I the best right to the dear creature's remains? Must names
without nature be preserved to such love as mine? Again she kissed her lips,
her forehead, and (...) cheek, sighing, as if her heart would break. But, why,
why, said she, was I withheld from seeing my dearest friend, before she
commenced angel? -- delaying still, and too easily persuaded to delay the
friendly visit, after which my heart parted! -- What pain will this reflection
give me! -- O my blessed friend! who knows, had I come in time, what my cordial
comforting might have done for thee! -- But one kiss more, my angel, my friend,
my ever-to-be-regretted, lost companion! Adieu, my dearest Clarissa! -- thou
art happy. -- O may we meet, and rejoice together, where no villainous (...),
no hard-hearted relations will ever (...) our innocence, or ruffle our
felicity! -- (...) was again silent, seeming to intend to (...) though unable
to leave the place, at the (...) time struggling with her grief, and her bosom
heaving with anguish. At length a flood of tears happily gushing from her eyes,
Now! now! cried she, I shall be easier; but for this kindly relief, my heart
would have burst -- More, many more tears than these are my Clarissa's due! --
But why do I thus lament thee happy? And that thou art so is my comfort. It is,
it is, dear creature! again kissing her. Excuse me, Sir, added she, (...) to
Mr. Morden; I loved the dear Clarissa as never woman loved another. Excuse my
frantic grief. How has the glory of her sex fallen a victim to cruelty and
hard-heartedness! Madam, said the Colonel, they all have it! -- now indeed they
have it! And let them have it! she returned, I should b^lye my love for the
friend of my heart, were I to pity them! -- But how unhappy am I that I saw her
not before these eyes were shut, before these lips were for ever closed! -- O
Sir, you know not the wisdom that continually flowed from those lips, nor what
a friend I have lost! -- Once more, added she, a solemn and everlasting adieu!
-- Alas for me, a solemn and everlasting adieu! Then again (...) her, she, with
precipitation, hasted (...) the room, rushed into her chariot, and (...) way to
a fresh burst of tears, depart^*

After this the afflicted parents made (...) other effort to see the corpse;
but at the sight of the coffin, Mrs. Harlowe was ready to faint, and being
unable to stay, they were conducted out of the room, and the lid again screwed
down.

The last office was performed with great decency, the body being attended by
numbers of people of all ranks. The minister made a very pathetic (...) sermon:
in repeating her praises, he frequently wiped his eyes, and every one present
(...) ^ftener wiped theirs. She had a set of (...) people whom she had chosen
for their remarkable honesty, and ineffectual industry: (...) a voluntary
attendance on their kind benefactress; and mingling in the church, as they
could crowd (...) ^he aisle where the corpse was placed, it was the less wonder
that the (...) met with such general and grateful whispers of approbation.

Thus died, and thus was sincerely lamented, the pious, the virtuous, and the
lovely Clarissa. About the same time died the vile and wicked Sinclair, who had
prompted the intriguing Lovelace to perpetrate his villainies against that most
accomplished lady; (...) like an infernal spirit, had hardened (...) against
remorse, and basely assisted (...) by horrid potions, to violate her honor,
(...) reduced to a state of the most dreadful ^^etchedness. This infamous
woman, in a fit of drunkenness, fell down stairs, broke her leg, and a
mortification ensued. The approach of death, and the frightful idea of her
guilty life, filled her mind with all the horrors of despair; and after
lingering for several days in a state of the most extreme impatience of spirit,
expired, filled with terror, and uttering the most dreadful execrations.

Lovelace no sooner received the fatal note from Mr. Belford, which let him
know that Clarissa was dead, than the agitations of his mind made him behave
with all the marks of distraction^. He was soon actually deprived of his
senses, and was obliged to be confined to his room. He had, at first, no ideas
but of dark and confused misery: his mind was distracted with inward horror;
and the stings of conscience, thoughts of laying violent hands on himself, then
rage, mischief, and despair, ruled by turns. His lucid intervals were even
still worse; they being attended with the reflection of what he was the hour
before, and what he was likely to be the next, and perhaps for life: depri^^d
of reason, the sport of his enemies, (...) laughter of fools. But soon recover^
(...) use of his rational faculties, he endeavour^ (...) to blunt the stings of
conscience, by (...) an affected gaiety, and rushing into scenes (...) mirth
and dissipation. His friends persuaded him to travel for the recovery of his
health; and Mr. Belford being afraid of Colonel Morden, who had received some
particulars of Lovelace's baseness, which he did not expect, hastened his
departure. Mr. Morden, about the same time, set out for Italy; when Mr.
Harlo^^'s gardener, whom Lovelace had made use of to inflame the family against
Clarissa* (...) who, by the noise he made at the (...), had forced her away
from her friend^ (...) to inform Lovelace that Colonel (...) threatened his
life. On this (...) Lovelace sent a letter to (...) acquaint him with what he
had (...) he might find him. Upon this Mr. Morden, who had before laid aside
all thoughts of revenging his excellent cousin, thinking his honor concerned,
instantly obeyed the summons: they met and fought; and Lovelace, who vainly
depending on his skill, imagined himself sure of victory, received two wounds,
of which he died the next morning. (...) news of Mr. Lovelace's unhappy (...)
received with as much grief by his (...) relations, as it was with joy by the
(...) family, and particularly by Miss How. (...) family were indeed worthy of
pity, as they had sincerely admired the inimitable Clarissa, and had now the
mortification of losing the only male of it by a violent death. Mr. Belford was
also far from being unconcerned at this event. He seriously reflected on the
(...) remorse and unhappy end of that gay (...) sprightly rake, and the horrid
exit of (...) infamous woman who had hardened his (...) against the dictates of
humanity and conscience; and, on the other hand, contemplated the example he
had received from (...) and virtue of the most excellent (...); her noble
preparation, and (...): hence he looked with contempt and (...) his former
vices, and firmly (...), by the divine assistance, to walk in the path of
virtue and religion, which, however rugged it may appear at its entrance, ends
in glory and everlasting felicity.

Miss How, the faithful friend of the excellent Clarissa, and a lady of fine
sense and understanding, is now married to Mr. Hickman, a gentleman
distinguished by his virtue and his good temper, with whom she lives in the
greatest harmony.

With respect to the persons most (...) related to the excellent Clarissa, it
(...) proper to add, that Mrs. Harlowe (...) her excellent daughter only about
two (...) and a half, and Mr. Harlowe lived (...) about half a year after his
lady; both in their last hours rejoicing in the thought that they should again
see and join their happy daughter. They, however, lived to see their son and
daughter married: but their nuptials gave them no comfort (...) for the son
married a lady whom both his father and mother and uncles disapproved* she is a
woman of family, and an orphan; and is obliged, at a very great expense, to
(...) her claim to estates, which were his principal inducement to make his
addresses to her; (...) which, as he has very powerful* (...) contend with, he
is never (...) Mean while his ungenerous (...) his wife, for what is as much
(...) his, has rendered them both unhappy. He spends his life in misery and
remorse, and when he opens his mind to the few whom he can call his friends, he
attributes all his misfortunes to his inhuman treatment of the angelic
Clarissa. His sister is his bitterest enemy; and if either know a joy, it is
being told of some new* misfortune happening to the other: (...), being united
to a libertine, spends (...) in jealousy, vexation, and (...) ^he still regrets
her cruel treatment of (...) admirable Clarissa, and (as well as her (...)) is
ready to attribute to that (...) her own unhappiness.

FINIS.
A great Variety of BOOKS, designed for Instruction and Amusement, and suited
to Youth of different Ages and Capacities, are constantly kept for Sale by S.
HALL, (...), Cornhill, Boston; among (...) the following, viz.
ADAMS's Flowers of anci^^^ History. Assembly's larger Catechism. 7 d.
Bingham's American Preceptor, being a new Selection of Lessons for Reading and
Speaking. 2 s single, and 20 s a dozen. Bennet's Letters to a young Lady.
Catechism, containing the first principles of religious and social duties. By
Arminius Calvinus. 7 cents single, 3 s a (...). Chesterfield's Principles of
Politeness, and of knowing the World. To which is annexed, A Father's Legacy to
his Daughters: by the late Dr. Gregory. Chapone's (Mrs.) Letters on the
Improvement of the Mind. Children's Friend, 4 vols. 4 s6 each vol. [Either
Volume to be sold (...).] Entertaining Stories. 11 d. Fordyce's Sermons to
young Women. Fordyce's Addresses to young Men. French Convert, or happy
Conversion of a noble French Lady from Popery. 1 s single, and 9 s6 a dozen,
half bound; or 9 d. single, and 6 s8 a duzen, sewed in blue. Gulliver's
Adventures. 11 d. History of Sandford and Merton. History of Sinbad the Sailor.
History of Sir Charles Grandison, (...). 1 s4 single, 12 s doz. (...) Bible
abridged, or the History (...) the Old and New Testament; illustrated with
upwards of 60 Cuts. 1 s4 single, 12 s doz. Hervey's Treatise on the Religious
Education of Daughters. Italian Convert, or second Moses. 20 cents single. and
10 s6 a dozen, half bound; or 11 d. single, and 8 s3 a dozen, sewed in blue.
Life and Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, abridged. 1 s4 single, 12 s doz. Lady's
Advice to her Children. 2vols. Looking-Glass for the Mind; an elegant
collection of delightful stories for children. 4 s6 Lady's Pocket Library,
containing Miss Moore's Essays, Gregory's Legacy, Lady Pennington's unfortunate
Mother's Advice to her Daughters, Marchioness of Lambert's Advice of a Mother
to her Daughter Mrs. Chapone's Letter on the Government of the (...), Swift's
Letter to a young Lady newly married, and Moore's Fables for the Female Sex.
(...) Memoirs of Marie Antoinette, (...) Queen of France. 20 Cents. More's
sacred Dramas, chiefly intended for young persons. Moralist; or, young
Gentleman and Lady's Entertaining Companion, etc. being a Collection of moral
Tales and Stories. Selected from the best modern Authors. New Robinson Crusoe;
an entertaining and instructive History, for the Use of Children of both Sexes.
Narrative of the Captivity, Suffer (...) and Removes of Mary Rowlandson. 1 s
(...) 9 s a dozen, half bound; or 9 d. single, and 7 s (...) sewed in blue.
Pictures of Beasts and Birds, (...) familiar Description of each, in verse and
(...) 1 s single, 9 s6 doz. Percival's Father's Instructions, designed to
promote the love of virtue, a taste for knowledge, and an early acquaintance
with the works of nature. Priestley's Catechism. 4 cents. Pleasing Instructor.
5 s3 Present for an Apprentice; or, A sure Guide to gain both Esteem and
Estate: With Rules for his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. -- By a
la^e LORD MAYOR OF LONDON. 1 s Royal Convert; or the Force of Truth. 11 d.
single, and 8 s3 a dozen, half bound; or 9 d. single, and 6 s8 a dozen, sewed
in blue. Scott's Lessons in Elocution. Thoughts upon female Education. By
Benjamin Rush, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania.
9 d. Trimmer's Introduction to the knowledge of the holy Scriptures. Adapted to
the capacities of Children. Watts's Catechisms, the several Se^^ complete.
Watts's Preservative from the Sins and Follies of Childhood and Youth. To which
are added, some religious and moral Instructions, in Verse. Watts's plain and
easy Catechisms. 11 d. single, and(...) s doz. covered in marble. Watts's first
Catechism for young Children. 2 cents single, and 11d. a dozen. (...) Gentleman
and Lady's Monitor. (...) Misses' Magazine. 4 vols. (...) in 2. 7 s6 (...) a
great Variety of Children's Picture Books, neatly covered with gilt paper.

