A DISCOURSE DELIVERED IN ST. JAMES' CHURCH, IN NEW LONDON, On Tuesday the 23d
of December, 1794; BEFORE AN ASSEMBLY OF FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS, CONVENED FOR
THE PURPOSE OF INSTALLING A LODGE IN THAT CITY.

BY SAMUEL SEABURY, D. D. BISHOP OF CONNECTICUT AND RHODE ISLAND.

NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY BROTHER SAMUEL GREEN, M,DCC,XCV.

UNION-LODGE, New London, Dec. 23, 1794.
VOTED unanimously, That Brothers William Richards, Elias Perkins, and Robert
Allyn, be appointed a Committee to wait on our Right Rev. Brother BISHOP
SEABURY, with the Thanks of this Lodge for his Sermon delivered to the Brethren
this day; and to request a copy of the same for the Press.

Extract from the Records, Attest. S. GREEN, Sec'y.

TO THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE FRATERNITY OF FREE AND ACCEPTED MASONS, THE
FOLLOWING DISCOURSE IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR AFFECTIONATE BROTHER
AND HUMBLE SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

NEW LONDON, Jan. 3, 1795.
A DISCOURSE, etc.
Worthy and honored Friends and Brothers,
GREAT is the pleasure with which I embrace the opportunity that your kind
invitation has given me of addressing myself to you this day -- a day which, I
trust, will ever be joyfully remembered by you all; -- a day in which, by the
Installation of the Master and other Officers of a Lodge of Masons in this
city, the influence of that venerable fraternity will be extended, and the
bands of mutual love and good will strengthened among them; -- A day in which
the presence of so many Brothers from the neighboring Lodges met together to
cultivate the principles of mutual love, and spread its happy influence, must
cheer the heart and exhilarate the spirits of every humane man.

BOTH as a Minister of that Gospel which proclaims peace and good will to
mankind, and as one of the common brotherhood of men, I feel myself deeply
interested in the honor, prosperity, and happiness of every Society, whose
object is the peace, order, and welfare of the human race; and whose aim is the
establishment and cultivation of unity, brotherly love, and benevolence among
its several branches.

THIS is the professed design of your society. It considers the helplessness of
the infantine state of man, the wants and necessities of his mature age, the
numberless evils attendant on his declining years, as so many proofs that "it
is not good for man to be alone" -- that in a solitary, unconnected state, He
could not subsist, or could not subsist with safety and satisfaction to himself.

ANOTHER proof that man was made for society arises from the tender feelings of
which his heart is susceptible; of which, indeed, without violence and often
repeated efforts it cannot be divested; from the sympathetic anguish which
rises in it at the distresses of others; from the thrillings of joy and
gladness with which it is delighted by the prospect of human happiness; from
the soft emotions and extacy of pleasure which spring from the reciprocal
offices of friendship and love. -- These all proclaim that God intended man for
society -- that every individual of the human race should be a help and comfort
to every other.

To give full energy to these happy principles of human nature, and carry them
to their utmost effect, to cultivate natural knowledge and acquired arts, and
to disseminate their principles and improvements for the comfort and benefit of
man, as well as to harmonize the soul, and bring the tender affections of his
nature into action, is the professed purpose of the Masonic institution. It
commences its origin from the origin of man, because, from his origin, man has
ever wanted the advantage of knowledge, and arts, and humane affections to
ensure and make perfect the happiness of social life. Through various forms and
degrees of refinement it has hitherto subsisted in the world, sometimes
clouded in obscurity, and sometimes, shining in splendour; now distressed by
persecution and oppression, then cherished by the favor of the world and the
countenance of great men and princes. The former state arose from the ignorance
and the prejudices of narrow-minded men, the latter from the improvement of the
human mind by knowledge and liberality of sentiment.

BUT whatever was its outward condition in the world, whether persecuted or
cherished, Masonry was still the same; still it labored to promote the peace
and harmony of the world, by cultivating the principles of benevolence and
love; still it sought the happiness of men, by advancing the knowledge of
Architecture, Agriculture, Manufactures, and Commerce; still it endeavored to
promote the prosperity of social life, by restraining the tempers and
enlivening the affections which could either retard or advance it. Human
happiness was its object, and that object it kept ever in view. Through evil
report and good, it still pursued it. Though sometimes disappointed of its aim,
it renewed its attempts: Though baffled by human infirmity, and possibly by the
fault and ill conduct of particular members, it pursued its point, it repeated
its efforts, its object was still before it, still the end of its warmest
wishes, of its most zealous endeavors.

EXACTLY does the Masonic institution in this respect, coincide with the
morality of that holy religion, to the profession of which the mercy of God
has called us. To establish this assertion, I recommend to your attention the
exhortation of St. Paul, which I purpose for the subject of my present
discourse. It is recorded in HEB. XIII. 1. LET BROTHERLY LOVE CONTINUE.

I HAVE the rather chosen this text because it will give me the opportunity of
contributing my endeavors to promote the good purposes of your Society and the
end of this day's solemnity, by enforcing the precepts and spirit of that
amiable and divine Religion which we profess, respecting brotherly love and
benevolence -- a principle which, did it engage the hearts, and regulate the
actions of men, would calm all their discordant passions and partial views, and
bind them together, as strong cement binds together the materials of a
building, which without it would part and fall asunder.

THIS religion, I trust, is not only ours by profession, but by its being the
ruling principle in our hearts; and that it will bring every thought and
design, every temper and passion in obedience to its divine precepts. Its
importance demands our utmost attention; and that attention will convince us
that Christianity furnishes mankind with the best philosophy, and most perfect
institutions of life; that it contains not only the best system of moral duties
that is extant, but, in truth, the only system that is fully adapted to the
nature and condition of man in this world; being exactly squared to his
circumstances, and levelled to his capacity; laying the sure foundation for his
happiness; tending to raise his powers and faculties to their highest
perfection, to cement together the whole brotherhood of men, and build them up
an edifice of love, supported by the two grand pillars of virtue and holiness,
the light and strength of the world.

THE precepts of this religion which enjoin love and charity are very numerous,
and expressed in the strongest and plainest terms: And reason, as well as
experience, evinces the necessity of these precepts, to procure and preserve
the happiness of the human species. Born in weakness and ignorance, entirely
dependant on the care and protection of others; how soon must man fall a prey
to those numberless evils which surround him, did not the tenderness of love,
and sympathy of affection prevent it? And as he grows up to more mature age, he
still continues indebted to the same amiable principles for almost all his
enjoyments. Bodily strength comes too late to protect him against injuries, and
experience comes too late to point out the road to happiness. He must depend on
the protection and instruction of others; and nothing but love and affection
can excite others to afford this protection, or give this instruction. And in
his best estate, when bodily strength is perfected; when reason has come to
maturity, and instruction and experience supply their utmost help, the greater
part of his happiness must arise from the affectionate and social tendencies of
his nature.

LOOK at the malignant and baneful passions and tempers with which his nature
is now unhappily debased, and you will be immediately convinced of the truth of
what I have said. Malice, and revenge, and ill nature carry their own torment
with them. -- They may, and they probably will, vex, and and fret and torment
those against whom they are exerted: But, at the same time, they must torment
the bosom which indulges them; and, while they prevail, render it incapable of
any rational enjoyment. To have mentioned this matter is enough: It carries its
own evidence along with it, and needs no elaborate proof to convince us of its
reality. We know that ill nature and malice make those who indulge them
miserable in themselves, and odious to all around them. And we know that the
benign and social propensities of our nature give pleasure in their exercise,
and ensure happiness wherever they are practiced.

IN this view, then, as well as in all other views, the Christian Religion
deserves our best regards. It teaches us to consider mankind as one common
brotherhood -- the children of the same parent, and members of the same family
-- allied to each other by partaking of the same nature, and being subject to
the same necessities and infirmities: And it directs us to seek and promote
their happiness by all the means that shall be in our power; to comfort the
afflicted, to protect the weak, to relieve the oppressed, to support the
indigent, to instruct the ignorant, to administer, in short, to the various
necessities of mankind, as God shall bless us with ability and opportunity. --
It forbids all malevolent designs and intentions, as well as the open and
avowed acts of malice; and it carries the principle of love and charity so
high, as to require the forgiveness of real injuries, and the suppression of
even our just anger.

ALL the writers of the New Testament, however they may vary in the enumeration
of the other virtues, and in the encomiums they bestow upon them, are unanimous
in giving this of brotherly love the preference; making it pre-eminent in its
station, in its influence, and excellency above them all.

THE adorable Jesus, the great lover of men, declares that command of God,
which enjoins us to love our neighbor as ourselves, to be equal to that great
command which requires us to love the Lord our God with all our hearts; and
says, that on these two commandments, the love of God and man, all the Law and
the Prophets do hang: Thereby more than intimating to us, that the foundation
of all moral precepts, lies in this love of God and man; and that nothing in
morality has any virtue or real excellency in it, but as it is deducible from,
or may be referred to one or other of these principles.

ST. James calls this law which commands the love of our neighbor, the Royal
Law; thereby declaring its excellency and pre-eminence: And assures us that the
whole train of social duties is fulfilled by fulfilling this law, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thyself.

ST. Paul represents Love to others as a debt which, though due to all, can
never be paid so as to cancel its obligation, and declares, in expressions
similar to those of St. James, that the whole law, or obligation of duty, which
one man owes to another, is fulfilled by observing this one precept, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thyself. And in the conclusion of his epistle to the
Hebrews, the strong sense he had of it returns upon his mind with such force,
that he could not help mentioning it, as necessary to complete the Christian
character, Let brotherly love continue. He says nothing of the commencement of
it. It already subsisted among Christians. Christians they could not be without
it -- it was woven into their religion, and made a part of it. Their duty,
therefore, required them to nourish it, to support and maintain it, to regulate
their hearts and actions by it, to pursue it through all its branches, and
follow wherever it led them. It was one of the fruits of the Spirit of God, and
at no rate to be neglected.

FROM the Spirit of God it has descended and become the professed principle of
the Masonic fraternity: For wherever the principle of brotherly love is,
wherever it resides and governs the passions and actions of men, there is the
Spirit of God; for God is love; and "there is none good but one, that is God."

BE this love then the Line which directs your conduct, the Square by which to
form the rectitude of your principles and actions, the Plummet to try their
uprightness, the Level to ascertain their conformity to the Almighty Architect;
and let its Compass embrace the whole human race. Love has ever distinguished
your fraternity: Let, therefore, brotherly love continue. It will give
reputation to your Society, stability to the Lodge this day installed, and make
it an ornament to the city in which we live. Love to others, a desire to
promote their happiness will ensure respect. Real worth alone can acquire real
dignity, and propriety of conduct only can secure respect, either to
individuals, or to bodies of men.

I HAVE thought it needless to take up your time in explaining what is meant by
brotherly love. The feelings of your own hearts will do that better than the
most elaborate description. Let us only remember that every man is our brother,
being all the children of the same common parent, God Almighty, and the extent
of the duty will be immediately perceived. Only consider the common wants and
necessities of this brotherhood -- that its happiness can no otherwise be
promoted, and the variety of evils to which it is exposed no otherwise
prevented than by loving one another, and the reasonableness of the duty will
be clearly seen. Only reflect, that to love one another, to delight in doing
good to all, to cultivate the tender, benign, and social propensities of our
nature, is the command of our Creator, and the obligation of the duty will be
strongly felt. Only recollect, that God has declared him who hates his
brother to be a murderer, and that he must have his portion with apostate
spirits -- that He, God himself is the essence of love; and that he who loves
his brother resembles his Creator, and shall enjoy everlasting felicity with
him in heaven, and the motives to the practice of the duty will be too forcible
for an ingenuous mind to resist.

HOW unhappy is it for the world that unthinking man attends so little to these
considerations! How much of the misery which man endures, how many of the evils
under which he constantly groans, might be prevented by cultivating this
amiable, this divine quality! Look at the calamities that overspread the earth
-- What we call the evils of nature, sickness and accidents, storms and
tempests, thunder and earthquakes, bear no proportion to those evils which the
malevolent and baneful passions of men bring on it. War alone has done more
mischief, has destroyed more of the human race, has brought more misery into
the world, than all of them together. And whence come wars and fightings among
men? come they not from their unbridled lusts and malignant passions? How
dreadful is the situation! how melancholy the prospect, when brotherhoods of
men arm themselves for mutual destruction!

TO have mentioned this horrible state of human depravity is enough to expose
its enormity. With pleasure I turn from such a theme, to the contemplation of
the amiable qualities of affection and benevolence, which first founded that
brotherhood to which I have, this day, the pleasure of addressing myself; and
which has cemented it together, and built it up, an edifice of love, a temple
of unity and concord. May God prosper their endeavors to extend the blessings
of peace, friendship, love, and knowledge through the world!

IN cultivating this principle you are engaged; a principle on which human
happiness must be built. Of this happiness the foundation was laid by God his
Creator, when he gave man those tender, benign, and social feelings which are
the greatest ornament and highest perfection of his nature. To rear the fair
fabric to this perfection; to bring to maturity that seed of salvation which
was sown in the hearts of all men, when God said, The seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the serpent, was the end the Son of God, the adorable Savior
of men, had in view, when he took our nature upon him. He therefore went about
doing good, cultivating the tender propensities of that nature he had assumed,
calling into action all the amities and charities of the human heart, enforcing
them by his precepts, and confirming them by his example; making it the very
mark and essential characteristic of his disciples, that they should love one
another.

TO further this blessed disposition, and give it its utmost efficacy, is your
professed design; and as, I trust, it has the warmest wishes of your hearts, I
trust, also, it will have the utmost exertions of your abilities to bring it to
perfection. In this business you are workers together with God, and
fellow-laborers with Christ and his apostles, and with all good men.

PERMIT me then with the affection of a brother who earnestly wishes your
prosperity, as well as with the authority of a minister of the Gospel of peace
and good will to men, whose greatest glory it is to recommend that Gospel to
men, and make it effectual to their salvation, to put you in mind of your
obligations in this respect, and earnestly to exhort you, not to be weary in
doing good, but to let brotherly love continue, and mark all your conversation
as Christians, as well as Masons.

THE evil propensities of wicked men will, it is true, rise up in opposition;
and the malignant passions of human nature will counteract the benevolent
design of your holy religion, as well as of your particular institution. But
these, by their contrariety, will only add to the splendour of your glory, and
make the virtue of your conduct the more conspicuous, while you strive to bring
order and peace out of confusion and discord, and to make friendship and love
triumphant over enmity and malice.

RECOLLECT, therefore, that all the words and actions of men, -- the whole
tenor and particulars of their lives -- are noted by God who made them, and
will by him be brought into judgment. Not only so; but their open conduct is
viewed and scanned, and judged by their fellow-men; and that they will esteem
or disregard the particular Society to which they belong, not only according to
the worth of its institutions and regulations, but also according to the
conduct of those who are members of it. Of the institutions of Masonry, it may,
I assure myself, be justly asserted, that they are calculated to promote the
happiness of the world. Let then the conduct of Masons be answerable to them.
Let the force of their good institutions appear in their deportment. Let truth
and justice, sobriety and modesty, courtesy and affability, liberality and
candor, affection and love, benevolence and charity mark their whole conduct,
and show to the world, that they are the faithful servants of the merciful
Savior of men, united by particular badges and institutions, to do good to
mankind by promoting their happiness. Then shall their fellow-men regard and
respect them: God will look with favor upon them and bless them: This temporary
life will be closed in the satisfaction of having done good in their
generation, and the merit of their Redeemer will carry them to the eternal
kingdom of peace and love.

KEEP, therefore, Brethren, the lamp of brotherly love burning bright in your
hearts, square all your actions by the eternal rules of equity and just
proportion; measure your designs by analogy with that ratio which the lip of
truth has given you, "Whatsoever ye would that others should do to you, do ye
even so to them;" circumscribe all your desires by the compass of duty, and
level them by patience to your circumstances: So shall the Lodges of the craft
rise in order, beauty, and strength, cemented by the Spirit of the Almighty
Architect of nature, who always works in and by Love -- Jehovah -- Trinity of
Persons, in Unity of Essence: To whom be ascribed, by men and by angels -- by
every creature his hand has formed -- Glory, Honor, Dominion, Praise,
Thanksgiving, now and forever.

AMEN.

