AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE RISE, PROGRESS AND PRESENT STATE OF The Canal
Navigation in Pennsylvania.

WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING, Abstracts of the Acts of the Legislature since
the Year 1790, and their Grants of Money for improving ROADS and NAVIGABLE
WATERS throughout the State; TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, "AN EXPLANATORY MAP."

PUBLISHED BY DIRECTION OF THE PRESIDENT AND MANAGERS OF THE SCHUYLKILL AND
SUSQUEHANNA, AND THE DELAWARE AND SCHUYLKILL NAVIGATION COMPANIES.

"Here smooth CANALS, across the extended plain
Stretch their long arms to join the distant main.
The Sons of Toil, with many a weary stroke,
Scoop the hard bosom of the solid rock;
Resistless through the stiff, opposing clay,
With steady patience, work their gradual way;
Compel the Genius of the unwilling flood,
Through the brown horrors of the aged wood;
Cross the lone waste the silver urn they pour,
And cheer the barren heath, or sullen moor.
The traveller, with pleasing wonder, sees
The white sail gleaming through the dusky trees;
And views the altered landscape with surprise,
And doubts the magic scenes which round him rise,
Now, like a flock of swans, above his head,
Their woven wings the flying vessels spread;
Now, meeting streams, in artful mazes, glide,
While each, unmingled, pours a separate tide;
Now, through the hidden veins of earth they flow,
And visit sulphurous mines and caves below,
The ductile streams obey the guiding hand,
And social Plenty crowns the HAPPY LAND!"
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, NUMBER EIGHTY,
CHESNUT-STREET.

M DCC XCV.

Officers of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna Navigation Company. Officers of the
Delaware and Schuylkill Canal Company. President. President. Robert Morris.
Robert Morris. Managers. Managers. David Rittenhouse, David Rittenhouse, John
Nicholson, John Nicholson, William Smith, D. D. William Smith, D. D. William
Bingham, William Bingham, Standish Forde, Standish Forde, John Steinmetz,
Joseph Ball, Samuel Meredith, Jeremiah Parker, Walter Stewart, Robert Hare,
Joseph Ball, Benjamin R. Morgan, Thomas Ruston, Walter Stewart, Jeremiah
Parker, Charles G. Paleski, Francis West. Samuel Meredith. Treasurer.
Treasurer. Tench Francis. Tench Francis. Secretary. Secretary. Timothy Matlack.
William Moore Smith.

ADDENDUM.
N. B. In the Map, the artificial Canal work is colored with Red, and where the
natural and improved beds of the rivers are to be used, they are colored Blue.

The READER is requested to make the following CORRECTIONS: --

In page xi of the Introduction, last line, for "rivers" read "rivals." In page
xii, line 16, before the word "junction," insert "the." In page xiii, line 23,
for "Stretford" read "Setford." In page xv, the last line except one, for
"measures" read "minerals."

In page 22 of the work itself, line 27, for "yet they would make," etc. read
"but they," etc. and "(...) 22, for " but" read " and." Page 62, column 2, line
9, after the words "20 men," and before (...) word "horses," for "18" read
"80." Page 64, line 14, after the word "years" read as follows, viz. "The sum
already expended amounts to L. 52,500." Page 65, last line, for "bank" read
"banks." Page 68, line 9, for " John" read " Thomas." Page 72, in the 5th. line
from the bottom, for " and a grievous" insert " but a grievous."

INTRODUCTION.
COMMERCE, between the inhabitants of different countries, as regulated by the
general laws of NATURE and NATIONS, and by particular treaties, is the surest
means of uniting all mankind, in one happy bond of civilization, peace and
prosperity.

By COMMERCE, in this enlarged sense of the word, "the whole world becomes, as
it were, one single family." What Nature has denied to the inhabitants of one
climate, is supplied by what she has liberally bestowed on another; and the
super-abundance of each becomes common stock.

What COMMERCE, considered in this view, is to mankind in general, by means of
foreign trade and external navigation; she is, in a smaller degree, to
particular states and societies, by means of inland navigation and good roads;
whereby the produce of one part of the country, as the case may require, is
easily exchanged for that of another, and the superfluities of the whole
readily carried to the principal marts or seaports for exportation.

Without improvements of this kind, together with a good government and laws
for the encouragement of industry and protection of property, the inhabitants
of countries rich by nature, capable of being bound together in one flourishing
and civilized whole, sensible of a common interest, and rejoicing in the common
prosperity, may continue long in a state of almost savage wretchedness and
poverty, insensible to the benefits of social and civil life, contributing
scantily to the relief of their own wants, and nothing to relieve the wants of
others, or to increase the common stock of felicity in their own country, and
of the world in general.

When a country is well improved by means of good roads and canals, joining its
principal rivers, and thus establishing a general inland communication; each
district with its superfluity may, as already mentioned, purchase what it wants
of another, and each be reciprocally furnished with all necessaries and
commodities; and, therefore, improvements of this kind are among the strongest
marks of the good policy of a nation.

Canals and water-carriage, in particular (as is well observed by the writers
on this subject) "render land-carriages and beasts of burden less necessary;
and they may be more profitably employed in tillage and agriculture. By canals,
dry and barren grounds are fertilized, and marshy and watery grounds are
drained. By means of them, manufactures require fewer hands and less expense;
and traffic is extended and animates all parts of a country, procuring plenty
and happiness to the individuals, and enlarging the power and strength of a
state or sovereignty in general."

"In fine, by canals, a people may be supplied," in their cities, towns, and
elsewhere, "with grain, forage, fuel, materials for building, and also all
other heavy and raw materials for manufactures, which otherwise would remain of
little value at a distance from the place where they are wanted, because of the
great expense commonly attending their transportation by carriages, etc. for, a
barge of a reasonable size, worked by two men and drawn by two horses, can
transport seventy or eighty tons; which weight, by any other carriage, would
have required forty men and about one hundred and sixty horses." This
calculation is made for the canals in England, where, by means of turnpikes, a
level country and improved roads, land-carriage has a great advantage over any
land-carriage that can, for many years, be completed throughout the greatest
part of the United States; and the calculations are also verified by
considering the difference between land and water-carriage in the immense
commerce carried on by canals in Holland, France and Italy. To estimate the
difference of expense between land and water-carriage in Pennsylvania, while
our rivers continue in an unimproved state, is difficult. An estimate, however,
was attempted for this purpose, founded on the most authentic documents, and
laid before the Legislature in February, 1791, The plan of a more accurate
estimate will be added to the report of the engineer, for the year 1794, in the
subsequent papers.
as may be seen from page 11th. to page 17th. of the following papers, and was
greatly in favor of water-carriage. But when the canals, now in operation,
shall be completed, even to the connection of the city of Philadelphia with
Presqu' Isle on lake Erie (two short portages only excepted) the difference in
favor of water-carriage, it is probable, will be far greater than is estimated
in England, Holland, France and Italy, or indeed any other European country.

It is no wonder then, that from the earliest stages of commerce in the Old
World, and even for the convenience of military expeditions, and maneuvres both
of attack and defense, canals for water-carriage should have been among the
first improvements made on the face of nature, by the most powerful states,
both ancient and modern.

Among the canals executed by the ANCIENTS, the first mentioned by historians
is that which connected the Red Sea and the Mediterranean; by which, it is
said, king Solomon passed with his fleet to join that of Hyram, king of Tire,
to proceed together to Ophir in search of gold, as in Kings, I. chap. 9th.
Herodotus, Diodorus and Strabo among the ancients; Delisle, Father Secard and
Rollin among the moderns, have all borne testimony to the existence of this
canal; and its ruins have been traced by sundry travelers -- Rollin, in
particular, gives the following account of it --

"The canal which joined the Red Sea and Mediterranean, is not one of the least
advantages which the Nile afforded Egypt. This canal had its beginning near the
town of Bubastus; it was one hundred cubits, that is, fifty yards broad, so
that two boats could pass with ease, deep enough for the largest vessels, and
above one hundred Stadia, that is, fifty leagues long." But this canal, useful
and extensive as it is said to have been, can hardly be compared, in point of
utility or extent, to what may be anticipated in the future prospects of
commerce in the UNITED STATES, by means of canals and rivers joining the
tide-waters of Delaware, Susquehanna, Potomack, Hudson's river, etc. with the
Ohio, Mississippi, the great western lakes, and perhaps the South Sea itself.

It would be foreign to the main subject of the following papers, to speak of
the military canals of the Romans; such as the Fossa Mariana to draw
subsistence by sea up the Rhone; the canal from the Isser (which empties into
the Zuyder-zee) to the Rhone and Rhine; the canal joining the river Nine in
England, near Peterborough, with the Witham below Lincoln. But it may be proper
to observe, that even in a military as well as commercial view, it may be
worthy of the United States of America, to improve the natural advantages of
their situation along our sea coasts, as well as in the internal parts of our
country. For example, if it should ever be the misfortune of these states to be
engaged in a foreign war, especially with maritime powers, how easy and safe
might a water communication be made from Rhode Island and the eastern states to
New York; and from New York to Philadelphia, by joining the Millstone or other
branches of the Rariton with the river Delaware and the city of Philadelphia;
and then from Philadelphia down the Delaware, and (by a short cut of about four
miles and a half below Newcastle) from the Delaware to Chesapeak bay,
Baltimore, Annapolis and the city of Washington on Potomack; thence still by
bays, canals and cuts, through Virginia, North and South Carolina to Savannah
in Georgia. In time of war, this might not only give a safe communication from
one extremity of the United States to another, similar to the communication
from province to province and from town to town in Holland, free from the
interruption of the privateers of a foreign enemy; but even in time of peace
such a communication, at certain seasons, by vessels not fit for a coasting
trade, and the danger of doubling capes and going out to sea, might answer many
commercial purposes, and make shorter and fafer voyages -- But this hint is
only thrown out hastily, and by the bye. We return to the subject of ancient
and modern canals for internal navigation.

Next to the canals of the ancients, already mentioned, and indeed superior in
name to any of them, is the CANAL OF CHINA, begun about the end of the third
century; which is said to be the source of immense riches, being constantly
covered with a multitude of vessels and boats; by which one may travel, within
land, from Pekin to the extremity of the empire -- a space of six hundred
leagues. "The principal canal discharges itself on both sides, into a great
number of others, which accommodate the most part of the towns and villages,
and answer the convenience of travelers and traffic. The small canals are
again subdivided into a number of smaller to fertilize the neighboring plains.
Travelers speak with extacy of this canal, and of the magnificence and beauty
of the stone bridges over the same, the piers being so slender, by the goodness
of the materials, that the arches, which are very high, appear at a distance,
as if suspended in the air; and, when many can be seen at once, they form a
prospect the most agreeable in the world: yet these ingenious people have not
the use of locks and sluices, but by the help of ropes and pullies, draw their
boats up dams of masonry, where there is a fall, which is sometimes attended
with great danger."

Of MODERN CANALS, those of France deserve particular notice. "As early as the
reign of their Henry IV. the French became sensible of the great advantages the
Dutch and Flemings enjoyed by joining rivers and seas by canals; and therefore
conceived many projects of this kind. The most important of those executed are
the following --

I. The canal for joining the Seine and Loire, which was the first made in that
country, with locks and sluices to ascend and descend boats, without the labor
and danger of ropes and pullies, as in the ancient method.

II. The canal of Orleans, to aid the former, as of great importance to the
city of Paris; and which meets the Loire a little above Orleans and was
finished in 1724, making the navigation of the Seine, from near Orleans, as
good as can be desired.

III. But of all the great works executed in France, the CANAL of LANGUEDOC,
called also the canal of the two seas, is the greatest, and reflects more honor
on Lewis the XIV. than all the victories and spendid acts of his reign. By
means of this grand canal, a ready communication is made between the two
fertile provinces of Guyenne and Languedoc, and in consequence between the
Atlantic and Mediterranean. "It is sixty-four leagues long, and has one hundred
and four locks, extending in some places for a mile together by a passage dug
through rocks under ground. The expense was thirteen millions of livres, of
which the king contributed seven millions, and the province of Languedoc the
rest [See Savare Dict. Comm.] "And if the king, on the representation of
Colebert, had not shared the expense, and magnificently given the perpetual
revenues of it to the celebrated engineer, Mr. Riquet and his heirs, subject
only to the sole charge of keeping it in repair, this great work had, perhaps,
remained unfinished to this day. The states of Languedoc, with equal
magnanimity, contributed their part, by a tax on that province, without any
view to a share of the profits; excepting so far that they rightly considered,
the tax as continuing only for a time, but that the expenditures of the
profits, would be amongst themselves, and continue a permanent source of
riches, increasing more and more, by the advantages they would reap from trade,
added to that of obtaining with ease, those things which they stood in most
need of -- and the event confirmed their expectations."

"The opposition which Mr. Riquet met with from the OWNERS OF THE GROUND,
through which the canal was to pass, being made known to Colebert, he thought
the only way to avoid these difficulties, was to engage the king to indemnify
all those who might think themselves aggrieved; who, accordingly, took the
canal into his own protection, bought the ground through which it was to pass,
erected it into a fief, and gave the property to Mr. Riquet, as aforesaid."

A similar opposition has been made by some of the owners of lands on the route
of the Pennsylvania canals; but this, it is hoped, may be overcome gradually by
the good sense of the people: if not, the remedy is in the power of the
Legislature by an amendment of the incorporating acts, providing more
effectually for a valuation by good and lawful men indifferent to the parties.

But to return to some further account of the Languedoc canal, which,
traversing an immense tract of country, and joining two oceans by an entire
inland navigation, bears the greatest similitude (although upon a shorter
scale) to the canals proposed for joining the Atlantic ocean by means of the
tide waters of Hudson's river, the Delaware, Susquehanna and Potomack on the
east, with Ohio or Mississippi, and the great lakes, which are in the nature of
oceans, on the west.

The Languedoc canal (according to the account of VALLENCEY, an able engineer,
whose authority is made use of in many parts of this introduction) is "divided
into two principal parts, running from its The point of partage, is that point
on the summit of some mountain, or highest middle ground where the waters, head
springs, or sources of different great rivers rise; and, dividing themselves,
run different ways. Thus, in the navigation from Philadelphia, by means of the
Schuylkill, Susquehanna and Juniata rivers on the east side, and the Conemaugh,
Kiskeminetas, Allegheny and its branch called French creek, on the west side,
[See the map] by which the tide waters of Delaware may be connected with Lake
Erie (and the other great lakes) at Presqu' Isle; and with the Mississippi
waters, at the heads of Conemaugh; the point of partage is on a fine level on
the Allegheny mountain, where large springs running eastward into the Juniata
branch of Susquehanna, and westward into the Conemaugh branch of Allegheny
river, and consequently of the Ohio and Mississippi, are but a few rods apart;
and the present carrying place from the mouth of Poplar run on Juniata to the
forks of Little Conemaugh, less than sixteen miles.
point of partage, which is the most elevated spot in the neighborhood of
Castlenaudari. The first, which extends ninety-six thousand three hundred and
fifteen French fathoms toward the Mediterranean, descends from the point of
partage to the lake of Thau near Agde, and passes from thence to the port of
Cette in the Mediterranean. The second, which extends twenty-nine thousand
three hundred and sixty-six fathoms, descends from the point of partage to the
ocean at its mouth in the Garonne, below Toulouse; so that between the two
mouths of this grand canal, the whole extent is one hundred and twenty-five
thousand six hundred and eightyone fathoms, or fifty French leagues and an
half. An exact level of the ground being taken, it was found that the point of
partage was six hundred French feet higher than the lake of Thau, which is on a
level with the Mediterranean, and one hundred and eighty-six French feet above
the mean height of the Garonne, taken immediately below Toulouse."

"To pass the boats from the port of Cette up to the point of partage, there
are seventy-four locks, To pass from the summit level of the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna canal to the mouth of Tulpehocken on Schuylkill eastward, in the
distance of near thirty-five miles, the fall is three hundred and ten feet,
proposed to be divided into forty-five locks -- The descent from the west end
of the summit level to the Susquehanna, at the mouth of its Swatara branch, has
not yet been finally ascertained, nor, consequently, the number of locks,
should it be eventually necessary to make a canal and locks the whole way, and
every where to quit the bed of the river.
of about eight feet fall each; and twenty-six locks from the same point to the
Garonne, which is navigable from Toulouse to the ocean; so that this CANAL
contains one hundred great locks. The only difficulty in the accomplishment of
this work (for the ground is level and of a good kind) was the expense, which
was supplied as above stated.

"Of these one hundred locks, the most beautiful are the eight locks together,
near Beziers, which form one continued cascade of one hundred and fifty fathoms
long and sixty-six French feet fall; that is eight feet three inches fall to
each lock." -- Similar to this, and equally beautiful, are the five locks
together, at the east end of the summit level of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna
canal, between Myers-town, near the head of the Tulpehocken branch of
Schuylkill; and Lebanon, at the head of the Quittapabilla and Swatara branch of
Susquehanna. Here there is thirty feet fall, that is six feet fall to each
lock, comprised in the distance of three hundred and seventy feet; by which
junction there is a saving of about a fifth of the expense which would have
been requisite in the construction of so many locks separately.

"In the route of the Languedoc canal, there are several hills and mountains in
the aforesaid space of fifty leagues, which the canal was to cross; all of
which are cut through, except that of Malpas; which, being very high and rocky,
is hollowed, or tunnelled, in the form of a vault, with a foot bank four feet
broad, to draw the boats along. This work passes for as extraordinary and noble
a thing as any of the ancient Romans."

"This canal (of Languedoc) is sixty feet broad at top, thirty feet at bottom,
and six feet deep. At the point of partage, there is the great basin called
Narouse of an octangular form, being four hundred yards long, three hundred
broad and seven feet deep, its sides lined with masonry -- The greatest
difficulty in joining the two seas by means of this canal, was thought to be
that of finding a sufficient quantity of water at the point of partage, to
supply a continual navigation of fifty leagues, because of the inevitable loss
by the gates, the oozing and evaporation. It was here that Riquest gave proof
of his superior abilities, for providing for so essential an article, by the
This reservoir is said to contain a body of water, whose superficies is two
millions three hundred and (...) thousand square feet and one hundred feet
depth, which makes above one million cubic fathoms of water. The reservoir and
locks on the summit level of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna canal are supplied
by the head springs of Tulpehocken, which empties into the Schuylkill branch of
DELAWARE, and the head springs of the Quittapahilla and Swatara branch of
SUSQUEHANNA. An estimate of the quantity of water, which these head springs
will carry into the reservoir at the summit level, will be found in the
following papers.
reservoir of St. Farriol, the greatest work that has been executed by the
moderns -- This he accomplished by means of a trench collecting the waters
which rise and descend from the black mountain, into the grand reservoir at the
summit level, or point of partage. The waters of this reservoir, run out
through large brass cocks, which communicate with vaulted galleries, made at
the bottom of the dam, one hundred feet below the surface."

"In constructing this grand canal, they inevitably crossed many rivers and
rivulets; and then thought of no other expedient than to bring them into it,
and let them overflow again at particular places, that they might always keep a
sufficient depth of water for the navigation; and so far from thinking these
foreign waters an inconvenience, they were considered as proper to supply what
was lost by evaporation. At the end of some years they found their error; for
the mud, which these foreign waters brought into the canal, increased so fast,
that the canal would not have remained long navigable, had not the celebrated
engineer Vauban, found means to separate these foreign waters from the canal,
and to let in as much of them as they pleased, and when they thought proper.
This he completed by back drains, or side ditches, and aqueducts of his own
invention -- There are forty-five of these on this canal, which are of two
kinds; the first, called aqueduct bridges, raised on arches, to support the
canal, under which passes these foreign rivers and waters. There are
thirty-nine others, passing syphon-wise Commonly called Culverts.
from ^ne side ditch to another under the canal. There are many other (...),
which it would be needless to describe on this occasions such as that of Grave
navigable to Montpellier and from thence by (...) river Lez to the sea; that of
Lunel, emptying itself likewise into the sea; those of Radelle, Burgogne and
Silvessal, communicating from (...) on the Rhine to the sea; the canal of
Hovella crossing the lakes of Salces, Palm and Signeau from the neighborhood
of Perpignan to Harbonne, from thence to the river Aude, within one league of
the great canal; the whole facilitating one great and various communication,
from the mouth of the Rhone to Perpignan, and to the ocean, without running any
risks by sea.

It would be likewise needless to describe, or even to attempt, on this
occasion, to enumerate all the canals, made in Holland and the Netherlands,
within the two last centuries, for the benefit of commerce. The whole country
exhibits one chain of water carriage, for profit as well as pleasure, from port
to port, and from town to town, and from village to village, through these
countries. "Even under the government of a woman, Elizabeth Eugenia, in the low
countries, one hundred and seventy years ago the famous canal of St. Mary was
made; which joins the Rhine and the Meuse, extending from Rheinberg to Vanlo,
in order to transport all the merchandise, which comes from Germany into
Brabant, and to deprive the Dutch of that trade; foreseeing the jealousy that
this work would create amongst her Dutch rivers in trade, she caused it to be
fortified by twenty-four redoubts of defense, to support the workmen in case
they should be molested; and although the prince of Orange attacked them
several times, he could not prevent the work from being perfected."

"In addition to this, it may not be improper to mention the exertions of the
Czar, Peter I, who of all the sovereigns who have endeavored to polish and
enrich an almost barbarous multitude of subjects, justly merited the title of
great. This prince traveled through England, Holland, Germany and France, to
instruct himself in military discipline, trade, navigation and the art of
government; and having engaged many learned and skilful persons of foreign
(...) in his service, contemplated, in imitation of France, by internal
navigation, to join the seas which surround his kingdom."

"The principal rivers of Russia are the Dwina, which falls into the White Sea,
the Don into the Baltic, and the Wolga into the Caspian Sea. The Czar thought
that junction of these rivers by canals, would give his subjects a
communication with an the seas; and after going himself over this vast tract,
having taken all the levels, resolved on the places of the canals for their
junction -- in a word, having planned every thing for so great a project, he
began by the junction of the Wolga with Wolkava, which empties into the lake
Ladoga, running by Petersburg into the Baltic Sea. In this manner, it was
practicable to cross all Russia by water, which is above eight hundred leagues
from the Baltic to the Caspian Sea. The intention of this monarch was that
Petersburg, by its favorable situation, should become a magazine for the
commerce of the whole world, which would probably have happened, if he had not
died in one thousand seven hundred and twenty-five, before the completion of
his projects."

In England, Scotland and Ireland, it may be unnecessary to observe what
facilities have been given to trade and commerce, by means of roads and canals
-- mountains have been traversed and levelled for land-carriage, and, where
necessary, perforated for water-carriage; rivers running contrary courses, and
seas washing opposite shores, have been made to embrace each other, and an easy
and cheap inland navigation formed through all parts of the insular dominion.
The joining the friths of Forth and Clyde in Scotland, and the duke of
Bridgewater's navigation, not to mention a multitude of others, in England,
might be adduced as examples. Of the latter, namely -- the duke of
Bridgewater's, the re-publication of a short extract from memoirs of the life
of Mr. James Brindley, may be proper to show that neither mountains nor
valleys, rivers nor marshes, can be any long impediment to skill and
perseverance, supplied and supported by adequate finances.

The duke of Bridgewater has at Worsley, about seven miles from Manchester, a
large estate, rich with mines of coal, which had hitherto lain useless in the
bowels of the earth, because the expense of carriage was too great to find a
market for consumption.

The duke, wishing to work these mines, perceived the necessity of a canal from
Worsley to Manchester: upon which occasion, Mr. Brindley, who was now become
famous in the country, was consulted. Having surveyed the ground, be declared
the scheme to be practicable. In consequence of this, an act was obtained in
the years 1758 and 1759, for enabling the duke to cut a canal from Wordey to
Salford, near Manchester, and (...) carry the same to or near Hollin Ferry, in
the county of Lancaster. It being, however, afterward discovered, that the
navigation would be more beneficial, both to the duke of Bridgewater and the
public, if carried over the river Irwell, near Barton bridge, to Manchester --
he applied again to parliament, and procured an act, which enabled him to vary
the course of the canal agreeably to this new plan, and likewise to extend a
side branch to Longford bridge in Stretford. Mr. Brindley in the mean time had
begun these great undertakings, being the first of the kind ever attempted in
England, with navigable subterraneous tunnels and elevated aqueducts. The
principle laid down at the commencement of this business reflects much honor on
the noble undertaker, as well as upon his engineer. It was resolved that the
canal should be perfect in its kind, and that, in order to preserve the level
of the water, it should be free from the usual obstructions of locks. But, in
accomplishing this end, many difficulties occurred, which were deemed
unsurmountable. It was necessary that the canal should be carried over rivers,
and many large and deep valleys, where it was evident that such stupendous
mounds of earth must be raised as could scarcely, it was thought, be completed
by the labor of ages; and above all, it was not known from what source so large
a supply of water could be drawn, as, even upon this improved plan, would be
requisite for the navigation. But Mr. Brindley, with a strength of mind
peculiar to himself, and being possessed of the confidence of his great patron,
conquered all the embarrassments thrown in his way, not only from the nature of
the undertaking itself, but by the passions and prejudices of interested
individuals, and the admirable machines he contrived, and the methods he took,
to facilitate the progress of the work, brought on such a rapid execution of
it, that the world began to wonder how it could have been esteemed so difficult.

When the canal was completed as far as Barton, where the Irwell is navigable
for large vessels, Mr. Brindley proposed to carry it over that river, by an
aqueduct of thirty-nine feet above the surface of the water. This, however,
being generally considered as a wild and extravagant project, he desired, in
order to justify his conduct toward his noble employer, that the opinion of
another engineer might be taken: believing that he could easily convince an
intelligent person of the practicability of his design. A gentleman of eminence
was accordingly called in; who, being conducted to the place where it was
intended that the aqueduct should be made, ridiculed the attempt; and when the
height and dimensions were communicated to him, he exclaimed, I have often
heard of castles in the air, but never before was shown where any of them were
to be erected.

This unfavorable verdict did not deter the duke of Bridgewater from following
the opinion of his own engineer. The aqueduct was immediately begun; and it was
carried on with such rapidity and success, as astonished all those who had but
a little before condemned it as a chimerical scheme.

"This work commenced in September, 1760; and the first boat sailed over on the
17th. July, 1761. From that time, it was not uncommon to see a boat loaded with
forty tons drawn over the aqueduct, with great ease, by one or two mules; while
below, against the stream of the Irwell, persons had the pain of beholding ten
or twelve men tugging at an equal draught; a striking instance of the
superiority of a canal navigation over that of a river not in the tide way. The
works were then extended to Manchester, at which place the curious machines for
landing coals upon the top of the hill, gives a pleasing idea of Mr. Brindley's
address in diminishing labor by mechanical contrivances.

"The duke of Bridgewater perceiving, more and more, the importance of these
inland navigations, not only to himself in particular, but to the community in
general, extended his ideas to Liverpool; and though he had everydifficulty to
encounter, that could arise from the novelty of his undertakings, his grace
happily overcame all opposition, and obtained, in 1762, an act of parliament
for branching his canal to the tide way of the Mersy. -- This part of the canal
is carried over the Mersy and Bollen, and over many wide and deep valleys. Over
the valleys it is conducted without the assistance of a single lock: the level
of the water being preserved by raising a mound of earth, and forming therein a
channel for the water across the valley at Setford, through which the Mersy
runs: this kind of work extends nearly a mile.

"A person might naturally have been led to conclude, that the conveyance of
such a mass of earth must have employed all the horses and carriages in the
country, and that the completion of it would be the business of an age. But our
excellent mechanic made his canal subservient to this part of his design, and
brought the soil in boats of a peculiar construction, which was conducted into
caissoons or cisterns. On opening the bottom of the boats, the earth was
deposited where it was wanted; and thus, in the easiest and simplest manner,
the valley was elevated to a proper level for continuing the canal. The ground
across the Bollen was raised by temporary locks, which were formed of the
timber used in the caissoons, just mentioned. In the execution of every part of
the navigation, Mr. Brindley produced many valuable machines, which ought never
to be forgot in this kingdom; nor ought the economy, and forecast, which are
apparent through the whole work, to be omitted, in the stops, or floodgates,
fixed in the canal where it is above the level of the land. The stops are so
constructed, that, should any of the banks give way, and thereby occasion a
current, the adjoining gates will rise by that motion only, and prevent any
other part of the water from escaping, except that which is near the breach
between the two gates -- The success with which the duke of Bridgewater's
undertakings were crowned, encouraged a number of gentlemen, and manufacturers,
in Staffordshire, to revive the idea of a canal navigation through that
country, for the conveying to market at a cheaper rate, the products and
manufactures of the interior parts of the kingdom. This plan was patronized by
lord Gower and Mr. Anson; and met with the concurrence of many persons of rank,
fortune, and influence in the neighboring counties. Mr. Brindley was,
therefore, engaged to make a survey from the Trent to the Mersy; and upon his
reporting that is was practicable to construct a canal, from one of those
rivers to the other, and thereby to unite the ports of Liverpool and Hull, a
subscription for carrying it into execution was set on foot in 1765, and an act
of parliament He was the greatest enthusiast in favor of artificial navigations
that ever existed. Having spoken upon various circumstances of rivers before a
committee of the House of Commons, in which he seemed to treat all sorts of
rivers with great contempt, a member asked him, for what purpose he apprehended
rivers were created Brindley, considering with himself a little before he gave
an answer replied at last, "to feed navigable canals."
was obtained in the same year.

"In 1766, this canal, called by the proprietors, "the canal from the Trent to
the Mersy," but more emphatically by the engineer, "the grand trunk
navigation," on account of the numerous branches which he justly supposed would
be extended every way from it, was begun; and under his direction conducted
with great spirit and success, as long as he lived. Mr. Brindley's life not
being continued to the completion of this important and arduous undertaking, he
left it to be finished by his brother-in-law, Mr. Henshall, who put the last
hand to it in May, 1777, being somewhat less that eleven years after its
commencement. We need not say, that the final execution of the grand trunk
navigation gave the highest satisfaction to the proprietors, and excited a
general joy in a populous country, the inhabitants of which already receive
every advantage they could with from so truly noble an enterprise.

"This canal is 93 miles in length, and, besides a large number of bridges over
it, has 76 locks and 5 tunnels. The most remarkable of the tunnels is a
subterraneous passage of Harecastle, being 2880 yards in length, and more than
70 yards below the surface of the earth. The scheme of this inland navigation
had employed the thoughts of the ingenious part of the kingdom for upwards of
twenty years before, and some surveys had been made; but Harecastle hill,
through which the tunnel is conducted, could neither be avoided nor overcome by
any expedient the ablest engineers could devise. It was Mr. Brindley alone who
surmounted such difficulties, arising from the variety of measures, strata and
quicksands, as no one but himself would have attempted to conquer.

"Soon after the navigation from the Trent to the Mersy was undertaken,
application was made to parliament, by the gentlemen of Staffordshire and
Worcestershire, for leave to construct a canal from the grand trunk, near
Haywood, in Staffordshire, to the river Severn, near Bewly. The act being
obtained, the design was executed by our great engineer; and hereby the port of
Bristol was added to the two before united ports of Liverpool and Hull. This
canal, which is about 46 miles in length, was completed in 1772. Mr.
Brindley's next undertaking was the survey and execution of a canal from
Birmingham, to unite with Staffordshire and Worcestershire canal, near
Wolverhampton. This navigation, which was finished in about three years, is 26
miles in length. As by means of it vast quantities of coal are conveyed to the
river Severn, as well as to Birmingham, where there must be a peculiar demand
for them, extraordinary advantages have accrued to manufactures and commerce.

"Our engineer advised the proprietors of the last mentioned navigation, in
order to avoid the inconvenience of locks, and to supply the canal more
effectually with water, to have a tunnel at Smethwick. This would have rendered
it a complete work. But his advice was rejected; and to supply the deficiency,
the managers have lately erected two of Messrs. Watts and Boulton's steam
engines. The canal from Droitwich to the river Severn, for the conveyance of
salt and coal, was likewise executed by Mr. Brindley. By him also the Coventry
navigation was planned, and it was a short time under his direction.

"The Canal from Chesterfield to the river Trent, at Stockwith, was the last
public undertaking in which Mr. Brindley engaged.

"And notwithstanding some of the canals passed through the fine villas and
extensive lawns of many gentlemen's retreats, yet their MAGNANIMITY induced
them to sacrifice their private convenience for public utility. Persons were
offered to be appointed to value the ground, and assess damages, which they
refused.


"He surveyed and planned the whole, and executed some miles of the navigation,
which was successfully finished by Mr. Henshall in 1777.

"The last of our great mechanic's ingenuity and uncommon contrivances that we
shall mention, is his improvement of the machine for drawing water out of
mines, by a loosing and gaining bucket. This he afterward employed to
advantage in raising up coal from the mines."

P. S. Upon an extensive view of the natural advantages, which Pennsylvania
enjoys, for improvements of this kind, a few of her citizens, in the year 1789.
united by the name of "The SOCIETY for promoting the improvement of ROADS and
INLAND NAVIGATION;" and the number of members soon increased to more than one
hundred, residing in various parts of the state; whose meetings were to be on
every Monday evening, during the session of the Legislature, in order to
suggest information, schemes and proposals, for promoting internal trade,
manufactures and population, by facilitating every possible communication
between the different parts of the state.

The following are the principal memorials, which have hitherto been acted upon
by the Legislature, so far as concerns land and water carriage.

To the honorable the Senate and House of Representatives of the Freemen of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met.
The memorial of "The Society for promoting the improvement of roads and inland
navigation," Respectfully shows,
THAT your memorialists, residing in various parts of this state, with a view
to contribute their best endeavors to promote the internal trade, manufactures
and population of their country, by facilitating every possible communication
between the different parts of the state, have lately formed themselves into a
society, by the name above mentioned. And knowing that the Legislature, with
the laudable intention of advancing the best interests of this commonwealth,
and availing themselves of the extensive information, which they have obtained
of the geography and situation of the country, have now under their
consideration the important subject of roads and inland navigation; we,
therefore, beg leave, with all possible deference, to suggest some important
considerations which have occurred to us in our enquiries into this subject.

Pennsylvania, from her situation, and extent of territory, is a respectable
commonwealth in the Union. Her soil is fertile, her products various, and her
rivers, by the bountiful Author of Nature, have been made to flow in every
direction, as if on purpose to bear from all parts the wealth and produce of
the land, in an easy, cheap and expeditious manner, to her principal mart and
port in the city of Philadelphia. To combine the interests of all the parts of
the state, and to cement them in a perpetual commercial and political union, by
the improvement of those natural advantages, is one of the greatest works which
can be submitted to legislative wisdom; and the present moment is particularly
auspicious for the undertaking, and if neglected, the loss will be hard to
retrieve.

When once our trade has forced its way, even through a less advantageous
channel, it is difficult to alter its course; and a little expense, judiciously
and seasonably applied, may retain a stream in its channel, which with immense
sums cannot be restored, if once diverted from it. Large emigrations from
Europe are now directing their course to this country, and will be encouraged
by every improvement we make, by means of roads and water communications with
the distant parts of the state. The constant influx of settlers from the
eastern states is also a considerable object. Being stopped, for the present,
by the Indian disturbances from swarming into the western territory, many of
them may be encouraged to make a halt or settlement in this state, if they find
good roads and communications in the different parts thereof.

It may be proper, therefore, before we proceed farther, to subjoin a general
statement of the various communications and improvements of which Pennsylvania
is capable in this way; so far as relates to navigation.

DELAWARE NAVIGATION
From the tide water at Trenton falls to lake Otsego, the head of the
north-east branch of Susquehanna.
No. I.
Miles. Chapter Total. From Trenton falls to the mouth of Lehigh at Easton, 50 15
50 15 To Lechewacksin branch of Delaware, 94 12 144 27 Thence to Stockport on
Delaware, a little below the junction of the Mohock and Popachton branches, 66
24 210 51 Portage from Stockport to Harmony, at the great Bend, 20 00 230 51
Thence up the north east branch of Susquehanna to Otsego lake, 70 00 300 51

No. II. From the tide water on Delaware to Oswego on lake Ontario.
To Harmony, at the grent Bend of Susquehanna, as above, 230 51 230 51 Down
Susquehanna to the mouth of Tioga, 65 00 295 51 Up Tioga to Newtown, 18 00 313
51 Portage to Connedessago lake, which may be turned wholly into lock
navigation by Newtown creek, 18 00 331 51 Down Connedessago lake, 36 00 367 51
Down Seneca or Onandago river to Oswego, 86 00 453 51

Estimate of the expense of opening this navigation, from Trenton falls to
Stockport, near the state line.
From Trenton falls to the mouth of Lehigh, L. 1005 From Lehigh or Easton, to
Stockport, 1243 Portage from Stockport to Harmony at L. 20 per mile, 400 L.
2648

SUSQUEHANNA NAVIGATION,
As connected with Schuylkill on the east, and Ohio and the great lakes on the
west.
No. I.
From Philadelphia, or the tide waters of Schuylkill, to Pittsburgh on the Ohio.
Miles. Chapter Total. Up Schuylkill to the mouth of Tulpehocken, 61 00 61 00
Thence up Tulpehocken to the end of the proposed canal, 37 09 98 09 Length of
the canal, 4 15 102 24 Down Quitipahilla to watara, 15 20 117 44 Down Swatara
to Susquehanna, 23 00 140 44 Up Susquehanna to Juniata, 23 28 163 72 Up Juniata
to Huntingdon, 86 12 250 04 From Huntingdon, on Juniata, to the mouth of Poplar
run, 42 00 292 04 Portage to the Canoe Place on Conemaugh, 18 00 310 04 Down
Conemaugh to Old Town at the mouth of Stoney Creek, 18 00 328 04 Down Conemaugh
and Kiskeminetas to Allegheny, 69 00 397 04 Down Allegheny river to Pittsburgh
on the Ohio, 29 00 426 04 Estimate of the expense of clearing this navigation,
from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh.
Schuylkill from the tide water to Reading, by David Rittenhouse and others, L.
1147 0 By Benjamin Rittenhouse and John Adlum, L. 1519 13 Clearing the
Tulpehocken, by John Adlum, L. 1419 9 The canal from Tulpehocken to
Quitipahilla, 20 feet wide and 7 feet deep on an average, N. B. The Society
have left a blank for the estimate of the canal, as they mean to enquire
further whether it cannot be done cheaper upon a plan of lock navigation.
The Quitipahilla and Swatara, L. 18900 0 Susquehanna from Swatara to Juniata,
L. 300 0 The Juniata to Frank's Town, L. 2320 0 Canal or lock navigation to
Poplar run (if found necessary, which probably will not be the case) L. 7000 0
Portage of 18 miles to Conemaugh at L. 20 per mile, L. 360 0 Conemaugh and
Kiskeminetas to Allegheny, L. 7150 0 Total expense from Philadelphia to
Pittsburgh, being four hundred and twenty-six miles,

No. II.
From Philadelphia to Presqu' Isle on lake Erie, by the Juniata and
Kiskeminetas, etc.
Miles. Chapter Total. To the mouth of Kiskeminetas, by the same route, as above,
397 04 397 04 Up the Allegheny to French creek, 83 43 480 47 Up French creek to
Le Boeuf, 65 40 546 07 Portage from Le Boeuf to Presqu' Isle, ^5 40 561 47

N. B. The sum of L. 500 for French creek, and L. 400 for the portage, is all
the additional expense in the navigation from Kiskeminetas to Presqu' Isle, or
the lakes.

No. III.
From Philadelphia to Presqu' Isle, by the west branch of Susquehanna,
Sinnemahoning and Conewango.
Miles. Chapter Total. From Philadelphia to Swatara, as above, 140 44 140 44 Up
Susquehanna to the west branch, at Sunbury, 65 00 205 44 Up the west branch to
the mouth of Sinnemahoning, 106 00 311 44 Up Sinnemahoning to the Forks, 15 20
326 64 Up the north branch of Sinnemahoning, 19 40 346 24 By the portage to the
head of Allegheny river, 23 00 369 24 Down Allegheny river (partly through New
York state) to the mouth of Conewango, 76 00 445 24 Up Conewango to New York
line 11 miles -- thence up the same through the state of New York 17 miles to
Chatuaghque lake, 28 00 473 24 Across Chatuaghque lake to its head, 17 00 490
24 Portage to lake Erie at the mouth of Chatuaghque creek, 9 20 499 44 Along
lake Erie to Presqu' Isle, 25 00 524 44

No. IV.
From Philadelphia to Presqu' Isle, by the west branch of Susquehanna,
Sinnemahoning and Toby's creek.
From Philadelphia to the forks of Sinnemahoning, as before, 326 64 326 64 Up
the west branch of Sinnemahoning, 24 00 350 64 Portage to little Toby's creek,
14 00 364 64 Down little Toby's creek to the main branch, 10 00 374 64 Down the
main branch of Toby's creek to the Allegheny, 70 00 444 64 Up the Allegheny to
French creek, 35 00 479 64 Up French creek and the Portage to Presqu' Isle, 81
00 560 64

No. V.
From the tide waters of Susquehanna to Pittsburgh.
Miles. Chapter Total. From Thomas's near Susquehanna ferry, to the mouth of
Swatara, 54 00 54 00 From the mouth of Swatara, as above, to Pittsburgh, 285 40
339 40

No. VI.
From the tide waters of Potomack, at George Town, to Pittsburgh.
From George Town to William's Port at the mouth of Conecocheaque, 98 15 98 15
From William's Port to Fort Cumberland, 93 36 191 51 From Fort Cumberland to
the mouth of Savage river, 30 44 222 15 Portage from the mouth of Savage river
on Potomack to Dunkard Bottom on Cheat river, 37 20 259 35 Down Cheat river to
Monongahela, 25 00 284 35 Down Monongahela to Pittsburgh, 102 00 386 35

No. VII.
From Conedessago lake to New York.
From Geneva, at the outlet of Conedessago lake, by Seneca river to the Three
Rivers, 62 00 62 00 To the Oneida lake, 28 00 90 00 Up the Oneida lake to Wood
creek, 18 00 108 00 By Wood creek (a very crooked course, 25 miles, but
supposed longer) 30 00 138 00 Portage to the Mohock river, 1 00 1^9 00 To the
rapids or falls of the Mohock river, 60 00 199 00 Portage, 1 00 200 00 Down the
Mohock river to Schenectady, 55 00 255 00 Portage to Albany, 15 00 270 00 By
Hudson's river to New York, 165 00 435 00

No. VIII.
From the middle of the Genessee country to New York.
Down Genessee river to lake Ontario, 30 00 30 00 Along lake Ontario to Oswego,
60 00 90 00 From Oswego to the Three Rivers, 24 00 114 00 From thence to New
York, as above, 373 00 487 00

No. IX.
Miles. Chapter Total. From the Conedessago lake by the Portage, and by Tioga and
Susquehanna to the mouth of Swatara, 260 00 260 00 Thence to Philadelphia, as
above, 140 00 401 00

No. X.
From Conedessago by Tioga and Susquehanna to the great Bend, 101 00 101 00 The
Portage to Stockport and down Delaware to tide water, 230 51 331 51 To
Philadelphia, 34 00 365 51

On the inspection of the map hereunto annexed, compared with the foregoing
statement of distances and water communications, as they may be improved to
connect the western waters of the Susquehanna, the Ohio and great lakes, with
the port of Philadelphia; an almost unbounded prospect of future wealth and
importance opens to the citizens of this commonwealth. That this subject may be
better comprehended in detail, give us leave to consider it under two great
(...).

First, The Delaware navigation, as stated in No. I. and II. by which the
countries on the waters of the north east branch of Susquehanna up to its (...)
at lake Otsego, and all the countries lying from the mouth of Tioga to lake
Ontario, may be connected with the city of Philadelphia; having only twenty
miles portage from Stockport on Delaware to Harmony at the great bend of
Susquehanna, in the whole distance of three hundred miles and an half from the
tide water of Delaware to lake Otsego; and only eighteen miles more in the much
larger distance of four hundred and fiftythree miles and an half from the same
tide waters to Oswego on lake Ontario.

The expense of this whole navigation, by the estimate annexed, is only -- For
the river Delaware, L. 2248 0 The portage of twenty miles, 400 0 And the Tioga
waters and portage, about

But as the Tioga waters, and the communications from thence to lake Ontario,
lie within the state of New York, it is probable that they will not be improved
by that state, unless it can be done with a view to draw the trade of that
country by the Oneida lake, Wood creek, etc. into Hudson's river, and even when
that shall happen, by a happy rivalship between the cities of Philadelphia and
New York, to draw the trade of those vast countries to their respective ports,
a great part of it will come with more ease to the former than to the latter;
and while the waters are left in their present unimproved state, every
advantage is on the side of Pennsylvania, by means of the navigation down the
Tioga, and then either down Susquehanna to the mouth of Swatara, and thence to
Philadelphia by the waters of Swatara, Quitipahilla, Tulpehocken and
Schuylkill; or from the mouth of Tioga up Susquehanna to the great bend, and
thence by the portage to Stockport, and by Delaware to Philadelphia. Taking
Conedessago lake as a central place of embarkation for the settlers in the
Genessee country, the distance to the city of New York will be four hundred and
thirty-five miles (See No. VII.) whereof seventeen miles are land carriage; and
the distance to Philadelphia, by Delaware (See No. II.) will be three hundred
and thirty-one miles; or by Swatara and Schuylkill (See No. IX.) will be four
hundred and one miles. Or if the middle of the Genessee settlement, on the
Genessee river, be taken as the place of beginning, the distance to New York
will be four hundred and eighty-seven miles, whereof In this route to New York
there are the same portages, viz. seventeen miles, as in the other (...) the
Conedessago lake, supposing Genessee river could be made navigable; but it is
doubtful whether it can be made useful in navigation, having many falls, and
one of them sixty feet.
seventeen miles are land carriage, (See No. VIII.) and the distance to
Philadelphia three hundred and sixty-five miles and an half (See No. X.)
whereof thirty-eight miles are land carriage.

Connected with the Delaware navigation, we beg leave further to add, that
above Stockport, the Mohock and Popaughton branches, are each navigable for
boats of fifteen tons for more than fifty miles above their junction, and
considerably higher still for rafts. The Lehigh and Lechawacksen, likewise,
offer themselves as very important branches of this navigation, lying in the
interior parts of the state; but nothing need be added to the report of the
Commissioners on this head. We proceed, therefore, to the second great and most
important head, viz.

The Susquehanna navigation, as it may be connected with the Schuylkill waters,
on the one hand, and the Ohio waters and great lakes on the other. Here is a
navigation which we may properly call our own, passing through the most
inhabited and central parts of the state; in which we can have no rivals, if
duly improved, and opening such numerous sources and channels of inland trade,
all leading to the port of Philadelphia, as perhaps no other nation or sea port
on the whole globe can boast of.

For, in the first place, if we turn our view to the immense territories
connected with the Ohio and Mississippi waters, and bordering on the great
lakes, it will appear from the tables of distances, that our communication with
those vast countries (considering Fort Pit as the port of entrance upon them)
is as easy and may be rendered as cheap, as to any other port on the Atlantic
tide waters. The distance from Philadelphia to the Allegheny, at the mouth of
Kiskeminetas, is nearly the same as from the mouth of Monongahela to George
Town on Potomack; and supposing the computed distances from Pittsburgh to the
Dunkard Bottom to be just, and the navigation of Cheat river, on the one hand,
and the Potomack, at the mouth of Savage river, on the other, to be, at all
seasons of the year, equal to the navigation of the Kiskeminetas, Conemaugh and
Juniata; yet as the portage from Dunkard Bottom to the Potomack, at the mouth
of Savage river, is thirty-seven miles and a quarter, and the portage from
Conemaugh to Juniata only eighteen miles (which may be considerably shortened
by locks) there can be no doubt but that the transportation of all kinds of
goods and merchandise from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh may be at a much cheaper
rate than from any other sea port on the Atlantic waters.

This is not mentioned with a view to disparage the internal navigation of our
sister states, more especially Maryland and Virginia. We admire their noble
exertions to improve the natural advantages of their country, and desire to
imitate and to emulate them. Every improvement, and every new communication
with the western territories, promoted by any of the United States, by which
the trade of the lakes, the Ohio and the Mississippi waters can be drawn to our
sea ports, is a benefit to the whole Union. By no other methods than by opening
easy communications, both by good roads and safe water carriage, can the
settlers, in those vast western countries, be made useful to the Atlantic
states, and comfortable in their own situation. Nor can we expect by any other
means than by inviting their trade, and making it their interest to be
connected with us, that we can long secure such connection. But, although a
considerable part of the settlers on the Ohio waters may be accommodated by the
Potomack navigation, and the state of Pennsylvania may only have a share in the
trade of those waters; yet there remains to us the immense trade of the lakes,
taking Presqu' Isle, which is within our own state, as the great mart or place
of embarkaation. Here there can be no competition, in respect to the distances
or the ease of water carriage, between the port of Philadelphia and any other
port on the Atlantic tide waters; whichsoever of the three communications,
between Philadelphia and Presqu' Isle, we may choose to pursue.

Of those three communications, it is of importance to choose the best in the
first instance, and not to neglect the improvement of it; nor to entertain
doubts and delays, till the opportunity of receiving benefit from it be
entirely lost, and the trade of those vast countries drawn into other channels.

We shall speak first of the communication with Presqu' Isle, by the Chadaghque
lake, the Conewango river, part of Allegheny, the Sinnemahoning, Susquehanna,
Swatara and Schuylkill (No. III.) which appears to be the shortest, being about
five hundred and twenty-four miles and an half. The navigation of the Conewango
and north branch of Sinnemahoning, according to the report of the
Commissioners, may be made very good, and is, on that account, as well as the
shortness of the distance, preferable to that by the way of Toby's creek and
the west branch of Sinnemahoning. But a considerable part of this communication
lies through the state of New York, in a yet unsettled country; and although it
leads, in the most direct way to Presqu' Isle and the great lakes, it cannot be
of any great use in the main communication with the Ohio and Mississippi by the
way of Pittsburgh, which is the great object of present consideration.

The second route from Philadelphia to Presqu' Isle, by the west branch of
Susquehanna, as connected with Swatara and Schuylkill, and by the Sinnemahoning
and Toby's creek, being five hundred and sixty miles and a quarter (See No.
IV.) passes indeed wholly through our own state; but besides what has been
already mentioned concerning the waters of Toby's creek, compared with the
Conewango and Chadaghque lake, this navigation could be of no farther use than
the former, in respect to the main communication with Pittsburgh, as the mouth
of Toby's creek lies fifty miles higher on the Allegheny than the mouth of
Kiskeminetas; and even with respect to Presqu' Isle, the navigation from
Philadelphia, by the way of the Juniata and Kiskeminetas, is as short as by the
way of Toby's creek, the latter being five hundred and sixty miles and three
quarters, as mentioned above, and the former five hundred and sixty-one miles
and an half.

Third, This third communication, then, is that which embraces all present
interests. It connects Philadelphia with Pittsburgh and all the Ohio waters, by
the Schuylkill, the Swatara and Juniata branches of Susquehanna, and the
Kiskeminetas branch of Allegheny, with the distance of five hundred and
sixty-one miles and an half (No. II.) and also Philadelphia and Presqu' Isle,
using the same waters, as above, to the mouth of Kiskeminetas, and then by the
easy waters of Allegheny and French creek. In this whole communication to
Pittsburgh, there are only eighteen miles portage between the Juniata and
Conemaugh (which may be considerably reduced as is said before) and only the
addition of fifteen miles and an half more at the portage from Le Boeuf to
Presqu' Isle, which portage is, likewise, included in both the other
communications. In this statement of portages, it is supposed that the canal or
lock navigation between the heads of Tulpehocken and Quitipahilla, is to be
completed; but it that work should be thought too great to begin with, it will
be only the addition of four miles portage, by an excellent and level road.

The navigation; by this route, we beg leave to recommend to the Legislature,
as one of the first and greatest works which they can undertake for the honor
and advantage of their country. It is a work within their reach -- a work in
which not only the citizens of this state, but of the United States in general,
are deeply interested. The expense, even including the canal, has been
estimated, and does not exceed the sum which would be requisite to complete a
good road of fifty or sixty miles in some of the interior parts of the state,
and which, after all, would only be of partial benefit, contributing but little
to unite the remote parts of the same, in one easy central chain of
communication, with the capital.

The improvement of roads is, however, one great part of the design of our
association, and we mean to make it our endeavor to bring forward and to
encourage useful plans for this purpose. Some roads, as connected with the plan
of inland navigation, require the immediate attention of the Legislature. Among
these are the different portages mentioned in the respective water
communications stated above; and, particularly, that between Stockport on
Delaware, and Harmony, at the great bend of Susquehanna, and between the mouth
of the Poplar run on Juniata, and the Canoe Place on Conemaugh. Another most
important road, as connected with the navigation scheme, will be from the
highest boatable waters of Yohiogeny, near the Turkey Foot, to the junction of
the Rays-town branch of Juniata and Dunning's creek near Bedford; or even to
the mouth of Poplar run on the Frank's-town branch. By this road, all the
inhabitants of the upper parts of Washington and Fayette counties, and part of
Bedford county, would have access to the great water communication by the
Juniata, or to the great state road from Bedford to Philadelphia; avoiding the
mountainous and circuitous course they are now obliged to pursue; and a great
part of their trade, which would otherwise go to Potomack, would be thereby
secured to Pennsylvania.

In this view, also, the state road, through Lancaster, Carlisle and Bedford to
Pittsburgh, is an object of primary consideration, and may be undertaken
without delay or injury to the plan of western navigation. This commonwealth,
we are happy to believe, is now, in its resources, equal to the accomplishment
of all necessary improvement, both of roads and navigation.

We would beg leave, before we conclude, to point out some other roads as
worthy of attention, viz.

I. The road through Reading and Sunbury, and thence to be continued by the
best and most practicable route to Presqu' Isle, or the lands on French creek.

II. The road through Bethlehem to the northern boundary of the state, at some
point between Delaware and the great bend of Susquehanna.

III. A road leading from Hudson's river, in the state of New York, to be
continued from Stockport on Delaware, across toward the west branch of
Susquehanna, between Munsey and the great Island, and to join the road,
mentioned above, as leading to French creek and Presqu' Isle.

But, in every view, we humbly conceive, that the laying out and improving
those roads ought not to interfere with, or delay the improvement of our inland
navigation. The ease and cheapness of water carriage, compared with every
other, furnish sufficient arguments, on this subject, if there were none else.

The annexed comparative view, of the expenses of both, is submitted to the
consideration of the Legislature, as a conclusion to this memorial.

Signed on behalf, and by order of the Society, ROBERT MORRIS, President.
February 7 th. 1791.
Remarks and Calculations respecting the Communications between Schuylkill and
Susquehanna.
IN the present year 1790, by the best estimates that can be obtained, the
quantity of one hundred and fifty thousand bushels of grain has been brought
down the Susquehanna, and passed through Middle Town, on its way to
Philadelphia market. Juniata has afforded a very considerable part of this
quantity; and here it must be observed, that the lands on this river are but in
an infant state of cultivation, and suppose them to be ever so well improved,
the proportion they bear to the lands on the other branches of the Susquehanna
is not more than one-fifth part.

In the year 1788, large quantities of wheat and flour were carried up the
river for the use of the settlers in Northumberland county: since last March,
about thirty thousand bushels of wheat returned down the stream to market from
said county. It may also be reasonably expected, that should an easy inland
communication be effected between the Susquehanna and the Schuylkill, the whole
produce of Cumberland, and part of York county, would cross the Susquehanna to
the Philadelphia market. From these principles it is evident, that there will
be an annual increase of the country produce that will descend the Susquehanna,
although, from so short an experience, certainty in our estimates cannot be
expected: but, in order to reduce the subject more to view, let the annual
increase be put at one-eighth, which I expect will be allowed, on all hands, to
be guarded by moderation and justified by strong probability.

I said one hundred and fifty thousand bushels of grain are allowed to have
passed to Middle Town in the present year, which, augmented by an annual
increase of one-eighth, will, in 1793, amount to two hundred and six thousand
two hundred and fifty bushels, which, at two shillings and six pence per
bushel, (the carriage, on the present principles, to the Philadelphia market)
amounts to twenty-five thousand seven hundred and eighty-one pounds, five
shillings; then, by adding one-eighth, the annual increase, it will stand thus:
-- L. 25,781 5 0 for the year 1793 28,125 0 0 1794 30,468 15 0 1795 32,812 10 0
1796 35,156 5 0 1797 37,500 0 0 1798 39,843 15 0 1799 42,187 10 0 1800 L.
271,875 0 0 Whole amount of carriage to market.

The abovementioned quantity of grain is equal to five thousand five hundred
and twenty-four tons and an half; and suppose one-third of the weight is
carried back, in salt, liquors and other merchandise, at five shillings per
hundred or five pounds per ton, there will be one thousand eight hundred and
forty-two tons, with an annual increase of one hundred and sixty-seven tons. --
It will then stand thus: -- L. 9,210 0 0 for the year 1793 10,045 0 0 1794
10,880 0 0 1795 11,715 0 0 1796 12,550 0 0 1797 13,385 0 0 1798 14,220 0 0 1799
15,055 0 0 1800 L. 97,060 0 0 Whole amount of back carriage in eight years.

The whole amount of carriage to and from Middle Town in eight years: -- To
Philadelphia, L. 271,875 Middle Town, 97,060 L. 368,935

Suppose the quantities before mentioned to be carried by water, the wheat at
one shilling and six pence per bushel, and the back loads at three shillings
per hundred or three pounds per ton, it will then stand thus: -- To this
market, L. 15,468 15 0 for the year 1793 From this market, L. 5,426 0 0 16,875
0 0 1794 5,927 0 0 18,281 5 0 1795 6,428 0 0 19,687 10 0 1796 6,929 0 0 21,093
15 0 1797 7,430 0 0 22,500 0 0 1798 7,931 0 0 23,906 5 0 1799 8,432 0 0 25,312
10 0 1800 8,933 0 0 L. 163,125 0 0 L. 57,436 0 0 57,436 0 0 L. 220,561 0 0
Whole amount of carriage by water. Carriage by land in eight years, L. 368,935
Carriage by water, 220,561 Balance, L. 148,374

A number of observations naturally present themselves as consequences of this
water communication: First, The difference between the carriage by land and
that by water, during the aforesaid period, is one hundred and forty-eight
thousand three hundred and seventy-four pounds, which will be a clear gain to
the country, and the stock now vested in horses, wagons, etc. could be
employed to other useful purposes; the so general use of horses might be abated
and oxen used in their stead by the farmers, whose principal reason for giving
so decided a preference to horses is their being supposed better for draught on
the roads: a more general use of oxen would not only be attended with immediate
profit to the husbandman, but would tend to increase the article of beef as an
export. The lands in the old counties, below the mountains, are known to have
abated in that virgin fertility which attends all new cultivation; -- they must
now be manured. Added to this, the population is increasing very rapidly; the
operation of these causes, in a few years more, will make the consumption equal
to the produce in the old counties. If the staple of the port of Philadelphia
is to be supported, it can be best done by conducting the streams of commerce,
in the article of grain, from the Susquehanna to this city.

The late information obtained from the commissioners who have viewed the
communications with the Allegheny and lake Erie, make it highly probable, that
an immense trade will one day be carried on from Philadelphia with the great
lakes and furr countries, and with the settlements on the Ohio, etc. The
proposed communication between Schuylkill and Susquehanna will serve as a basis
to this traffic, whether the route be by the Juniata or the other branches of
the Susquehanna.

The expense attending the transportation of two hundred and six thousand two
hundred and fifty bushels of grain to market.
THE above quantity of grain is equal to five thousand five hundred and
twentyfour tons and an half, and, a boat to carry six tons, will be equal to
nine hundred and twenty-one boat loads, and each boat to pass and repass eight
times, annually, it will take one hundred and fifteen boats to transport the
quantity above mentioned in a season; -- the expense of hands and provisions
attending each load will be fifteen pounds -- consequently, nine hundred and
twenty-one loads will cost thirteen thousand eight hundred and fifteen pounds,
and the annual increase of expenses for an additional number of boats, hands,
etc. to transport the increase of produce, will be one thousand five hundred
and twenty pounds a year, and then it will stand thus: -- For the year 1793 L.
13,815 0 0 1794 15,335 0 0 1795 16,855 0 0 1796 18,375 0 0 1797 19,895 0 0 1798
21,415 0 0 1799 22,935 0 0 1800 24,455 0 0 L. 153,080 0 0

The whole expense of carriage, and for seventy-seven additional boats, some of
which will be seven-eighths worn, and so on to one-eighth, allowing a boat to
last eight years.

Amount of carriage by water in eight years, L. 220,561 Expense attending the
same, 153,080 Balance, L. 67,481

It is supposed, by these calculations, that the boats for the beginning of the
carriage, will be taken in the estimate with the canal.

The grain consumed as horse-feed will be another object of attention: -- two
hundred and six thousand two hundred and fifty bushels of grain, at forty-five
to a wagon load, are equal to four thousand five hundred and eighty-three
loads; each team, to be ten days on the road, will eat ten bushels of rye,
which is equal to forty-five thousand eight hundred and thirty bushels, which,
with the annual increase, will, in eight years, amount to four hundred and
eighty-three thousand four hundred and eighty bushels; or, annually, it will
stand thus: -- For 1793 45,840 1794 50,010 1795 54,180 1796 58,350 1797 62,520
1798 66,690 1799 70,860 1800 75,030 483,840 bushels.

Estimate of the expense of clearing the river Schuylkill, from the falls to
Reading, by David Rittenhouse and others, in the year 1773.
Clearing the Schuylkill from the falls to the Spring Mill, L.192 0 0 Clearing
the Schuylkill from the falls to Reading, 955 0 0 L.1147 0 0

Estimate of the expense of clearing the river Schuylkill, from the falls to
Reading, by Benjamin Rittenhouse and John Adlum, in 1789.
Clearing the Schuylkill from the falls to the Spring Mill, L. 270 0 0 Clearing
the Schuylkill from the falls to Reading, 1111 10 0 Contingencies, L. 10 per
cent. 138 3 0 Sum carried over L. 1519 13 0

Estimate of the expense of clearing the Tulpehocken creek from its mouth to
the head of the same, by Benjamin Rittenhouse and John Adlum.
Sum brought forward, L. 1519 13 0 Clearing the Tulpehocken from its mouth to
Lechner's mill, twenty-eight miles and sixteen chains up said stream, L. 1289
10 0 Contingent expenses, say ten per cent, 129 19 0 Amount of the estimate
from Lechner's mill to the mouth of the creek, L. 1419 9 0 A canal to be cut
from Lechner's mill to Loy's spring at the head of the Tulpehocken creek, about
seven miles and a half in length, suppose twenty feet wide, and, on an average,
seven feet deep, the expense of common cutting at nine pence per yard, L. 7699
19 9 For ten locks in the above distance, 2000 0 0 For temporary damages to
lands, impediments to works, etc. suppose ten per cent. on the above, 970 0 0
Amount of expense from Lechner's mill to the head of Tulpehocken creek, L.
10,669 19 9 For cutting the canal from Loy's spring, the head of Tulpehocken
creek, to Kucher's dam on the head of the Quitapahilla creek, four miles and
sixty perches, on an average twenty five feet deep and thirty feet wide, the
expense of common cutting nine pence per yard, L. 23,031 4 6 The amount of the
expense for clearing the Schuylkill, Tulpehocken canal, etc. to the head of the
Quitapahilla, N. B. This expense may be avoided by leaving a portage of about
four miles, which will reduce the whole to L. 32,540. L. 36,640 6 3 Amount of
expense on Quitapahilla and Swatara to Susquehanna, by Matlack, Maclay and
Adlum, in 1790, L. 18,900 0 0 Amount of expense from Philadelphia to
Susquehanna by way of Schuylkill and Swatara, L. 55,540 6 ^ From the mouth of
Swatara up the Susquehanna to the mouth of Juniata, by Galbreath, Boyd and
Huling, 300 0 0 Sum carried over, L 55,840 6 ^ Sum brought forward, L 55,840 6
^ Up Juniata to Water-street on the Frank's Town branch of Juniata, 820 0 0
Clearing the Frank's Town branch to Frank's Old Town, by Matlack, Maclay and
Adlum, 1500 0 0 Canal from thence to Poplar run, 7000 0 0 Portage to Little
Conemaugh, eighteen miles, at L. 20 per mile, 360 0 0 From the Canoe Place on
the Little Conemaugh, down the same and Kiskeminetas to Allegheny, 7150 0 0
Opening French creek to Le Boeuf, 500 0 0 Road from Le Boeuf to Presqu' Isle,
400 0 0 Contingencies in Matlack's, Maclay's and Adlum's estimate, 3,599 0 0
Amount of expense from Philadelphia to Presqu' Isle on lake Erie, by way of
Schuylkill, Swatara, Juniata, etc. L. 77,169 6 3

N. B. This may be reduced to L. 54,169 by leaving a portage of four miles
between the Tulpehocken and Quitapahilla.

Estimate of the expense for opening, the navigation and communications to
Presqu' Isle, on lake Erie, from Philadelphia, by way of Schuylkill, Swatara,
the west branch of Susquehanna, Sinemahoning, Conewango, etc.
From Philadelphia to the mouth of Swatara, by Schuylkill, etc. L. 55,540 6 3
From Swatara to North Town at the forks of Susquehanna, 600 0 0 To the Canoe
Place on Sinemahoning, 660 0 0 Portage to the Allegheny, 460 0 0 From the head
of the Allegheny to the mouth of Chataughque creek on lake Erie, 1400 0 0 Whole
amount of expense to Presqu' Isle as above, L. 58,660 6 3

N. B. This estimate may be reduced to L. 35,660 by leaving the distance
between Tulpehocken and Quitapahilla a portage.

Estimate of the expense of opening the river Delaware, from the falls, at
Trenton, to Stockport, near the Popachton branch of the same, and the portage
across to Harmony on the great bend of Susquehanna.
From the Falls at Trenton to Easton, L. 1005 0 0 From thence to Stockport,
1243 0 0 Portage to the great bend on the north-east branch of Susquehanna, 400
0 0 Amount, L. 2648 0 0

A proposal and plan for carrying into immediate execution the improvement of
roads and inland navigation.
To the Senate and House of Representatives of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met.
THE Society for promoting the improvement of roads and inland navigation, beg
leave to present the result of their enquiries, concerning the best method, and
most effectual plan, for the carrying that important work into immediate
execution. And, in the first place, with respect to the improvement of roads,
on turning our attention to the history of this work, as it has been conducted
in other countries, and especially in the island of Great Britain, we find that
but little attention was paid to the improvement of roads, till in the year
1285, the first statute was passed for widening the roads between market towns
in "England," but this was done purely to prevent robberies, and not the least
hint of its being yet necessary for the use of carriages or to promote
commerce. But, in the year 1555, a statute was passed "taking notice that the
high ways were become very noisome and tedious to travel, and dangerous to all
passengers and carriages;" wherefore, it was enacted, "That every parish should
annually choose two Surveyors of the high ways, to see that the parishioners,
according to their lands, abilities and farms, shall send their carts, horses,
men, tools, etc. four days in every year, for mending the roads, etc." and,
from this time, to the reign of Charles II. there were no less than twenty six
statutes, on similar principles, passed for keeping the highways in repair;
from which the road laws of Pennsylvania have been in great measure copied,
only substituting townships for parishes. But soon after the restoration of
Charles II. we find it set forth, "That the vast increase of the capital city
of London, and of the nation's commerce and manufactures, with the concomitant
increase of wealth and luxury, had introduced such numbers of heavy wheel
carriages on the roads, as rendered it impracticable, in most cases, for
parishes to keep their own part of the roads in repair; more especially in the
counties lying nearer London, and in the manufacturing counties; and,
therefore, a more equitable and effectual method was introduced of tolls and
toll-gates called turnpikes; by which means the burden of putting and keeping
the roads in repair (as it is strongly expressed) was put upon the identical
wearers-out of the roads, according to the use they made of them -- and,
accordingly, upon this new and more equitable and effectual plan, many local,
as well as general, statutes have been enacted for limiting the weight of
wagon loads, the breadth of wheel rims, called fellies; the number of horses,
etc. And what has been said of roads may be applied to the deepening of rivers,
and the improvement of inland navigation, by locks, tolls, and canals," which
was begun about the same time, and is now extended over the whole kingdom by
subsequent acts of parliament special and local as well as more general.

The present circumstances of Pennsylvania, in respect to the increase of
commerce, wheel carriages, etc. and the unimproved state of our roads and
inland navigable waters, being so similar to those of England in the time of
Charles II. the foregoing reasoning will justify the conclusion which we mean
to draw from it, namely -- That the putting or keeping the great roads in
repair, either in the counties near the capital city of Philadelphia, or,
indeed, in distant counties but thinly inhabited, would be a burden not only
intolerable to the inhabitants of the particular townships, through which the
roads pass, but, likewise, unequal in itself, and ought neither to be borne by
the state at large, nor yet by the particular townships and counties; but, for
the greater part, "by the identical wearers-out of the roads," according to the
use they make of them. -- And the like reasoning applies to the improvement of
rivers and opening of canals for water carriage.

From these preliminary observations, the Society beg leave to lay down the
following principles, as the ground work of the plan herewith submitted to the
consideration of the Legislature of Pennsylvania.

First, The method of turnpike roads and toll navigation must be adopted.

Secondly, The work, both of roads and navigation, must be undertaken and
carried into execution, by separate companies and associations of men; upon
some uniform and consistent plan, aided and directed by the Legislature; as
neither the state alone, nor any number of companies without public regulations
and assistance, can be adequate to the great work in all its parts; and,
therefore, the assistance of the state should be apportioned to different parts
of the work, with a liberal and equal hand, in respect both to roads and
navigation, as it may be most necessary, and where the smallness of the tolls,
the distance from the market and other circumstances may yield the least
probability of an adequate encouragement or speedy reimbursement to the
adventurers.

Upon those principles, the Society beg leave to offer the following

Heads of a Plan: --
I. The Legislature to appropriate a sum not less than (...) dollars to this
object.

II. In order that there may be sufficient wisdom, consistency, experience,
impartiality and public spirit attached to the execution of the work, and
interested in its success; the Legislature to appoint, by law, a "Board of
Commissioners for the improvements of roads and inland navigation, within the
state of Pennsylvania."

III. The Board to consist of (...) members, of which the Governor shall be
President, with a Vice President, to be annually elected. They shall meet once
a week, or as often as may be needful. The time and place of every meeting to
be announced in one of the daily newspapers, and the members present, being
not less than (...) to be capable of transacting business.

IV. The Board of Commissioners to be allowed the use of a room, or rooms, in
some of the public buildings in the city of Philadelphia; wherein they may hold
their meetings, and deposit their books, maps, plans, and other papers. They
are to be allowed string, candles, stationary, clerks' hire and actual
contingent necessary expenses to be paid by the public. But they shall not
receive any pay for their own time or personal services, unless when any of
them shall be employed by the Board to make surveys, or to inspect or
superintend any of the works that may be carried on under their direction; in
which cases they shall be entitled to their traveling charges and expenses.

V. The general and standing powers of the said Board of Commissioners shall be
as follow, viz.

1. To employ, at the public expense, a proper person or persons, to examine,
survey, mark out, and report, in writing, such roads as may be deemed the most
proper to be established as turnpikes, assigning their reasons that induced
them to be of opinion, in any instance, that it will be of public utility to
depart from the present or old line of any established road.

2. To determine finally (after considering such reports and obtaining all
necessary information) upon the line of road, which shall be established as
turnpike.

3. To determine on such roads as, not being suitable for turnpike, ought to be
made or repaired at public cost, and to employ proper persons to perform the
same.

4. To advertise the roads which they shall establish for turnpikes; receive
propositions and enter into contracts with individuals, companies or
corporations, for constructing and mending the said roads, in such manner, and
upon such principles, as have, in other countries, been found upon experience
to be best.

5. To fix in each contract, the particular road, and the extent or length
thereof which the parties are to improve, and the rates or tolls which they
shall be entitled to receive for horses, cattle, carriages, etc.

6. To appoint a superintendant, if desired by the contractors, who shall
attend and survey the work and see that it be well executed, and at as moderate
an expense as may be practicable: he shall likewise, examine and certify every
account, so as to ascertain truly the actual amount necessarily expended.

7. To engage with such contractors as shall submit their operations to the
control of a superintendant.

First, That if the tolls fixed should, upon experience, be found so
unproductive as not to yield, after paying annual charges, six per centum per
annum, clear, upon the capital expended, the Board of Commissioners shall, in
such case, pay the annual deficiency; or may annual such contract, on re-paying
to the contractors the money expended.

Secondly, That on the contrary, where the toll shall be found so productive as
to yield more than six per centum per annum, the Commissioners may, at the end
of (...) years, annual such contract, paying back the capital sum with an
advance of (...) per cent. to the proprietors. But if the contractors do not
agree to a public superintendant, or ask aid, it may be supposed that the
contract is amongst the advantageous ones, and the Commissioners may, at the
end of (...) years, annul the same, as above.

8. To authorize the contracting parties to establish fences and gates, at such
distances as may be deemed necessary and proper, to enable the due collection
of the tolls with the least possible inconvenience to travelers.

9. The several Boards of Contractors shall be declared, by law, to be
corporations or bodies politic, for carrying into effect the purposes of their
contracts, for and during the terms thereof; and shall be authorized,

First, To divide the capital sum expended into shares of (...) dollars each;
and,

Secondly, To grant a certificate to every proprietor of a share, which shall
be transferrable at pleasure, and every holder of a share, whilst be continues
so to be, shall be a member of the corporation.

Thirdly, Each corporation shall have a right to elect a Treasurer and
Managers, to conduct the affairs of the corporation, agreeably to such rules
and regulations as it may, from time to time, establish.

Fourthly, Every share to entitle the holder to a vote in establishing general
rules and regulations, and in the choice of the Treasurer and Managers.

Fifthly, The Managers to have power --

1st. To call upon the contractors, or subscribers, for such proportions, from
time to time, of their respective subscriptions, as may be necessary to carry
on the work until finished, placing the sums collected in the hands of the
Treasurer.

2d. To employ workmen, purchase materials and conduct the whole business,
either under their own inspection, or by their agent or agents.

3d. To settle all accounts, and draw orders upon the Treasurer for the
payments, or advances, which ought to be made.

4th. To superintend the collection of the tolls, either by proper agents to be
employed for the purpose, or by farming the same to individuals.

5th. To settle the accounts of the tolls, and make dividends half yearly,
which shall be announced in the newspapers.

6th. To call the corporation together whenever they shall find necessary, and
to lay their proceedings and accounts before it; at least once a year, and
oftener if thereunto required by a quorum thereof.

9. The said Board of Commissioners to have the care and superintendency of
inland navigations, respecting which they should be empowered,

First, To determine which of those that are proposed by the report of the
committee of Assembly, shall be undertaken solely at the public expense, and
which of them can be best performed by contractors entitled to tolls, etc. The
latter to be preferred whenever the situation, and nature of the improvements
will admit of it. With respect to the former, the Board should be authorized to
carry on the work at the public expense, under the direction of such agent or
agents as they may appoint for that purpose. In regard to the latter, viz. such
improvements as may be entitled to tolls, the Board should be empowered,

1st. To advertise for contracts.

2d. To appoint superintendants to examine, survey and report the works
necessary to be performed.

3d. To make the contracts and engagements with individuals, or companies
willing to undertake the same, and who are to be declared bodies politic, as
proposed in the case of roads.

4th. The Commissioners shall also have power to fix the tolls, and to divide
the capital into shares transferable, etc. as in the case of turnpike roads.

10. By an article in each contract, the government shall be restrained from
laying out or establishing turnpikes, or toll navigations, in a second
instance, that during (...) years, would destroy or diminish the income or
revenue of turnpikes or toll navigations which they had established in the
first instance.

11. The Board of Commissioners to be empowered to lend public money, if
necessary, to any contractors or subscribers, to turnpike roads, or toll
navigations, for the purpose of completing what they have undertaken, if after
going certain lengths, it should appear that they would be unable to complete
the same without such aid, sufficient security being given, that the sums so
lent shall be faithfully applied to the uses intended, and re-paid at the end
of the term stipulated. Or, the said Board may subscribe, on behalf of the
commonwealth, such number of shares under any contract for turnpike roads or
toll navigation, as may be found necessary, and be entitled to all the rights
and privileges conferred on the share holders.

12. The Board of Commissioners shall make application to the Governor, for his
warrant upon the Treasurer, for the sums of money which they may, from time to
time, require for carrying their duty into effect; their requisitions to be
made in writing, and to be founded upon estimates of expenditures necessary or
actually made, or upon engagements, subscriptions, or contracts made for the
purposes of their appointment, and the Governor to grant his warrants upon such
requisition (to be paid out of the fund appropriated to this use) unless he
shall see sufficient cause to refuse; in which case he shall assign his reasons
in writing.

The Society have directed an accurate geographical and hydrographical map to
be compiled from actual surveys; exhibiting a general and complete view of the
roads and water communications, which are proposed to be improved, connecting
them with the roads and water communications of the neighboring states; and
they have promoted a liberal subscription for the immediate publication of the
same; considering that such a map will not only be highly useful to all persons
who wish to gain a general knowledge of the situation of the country, and the
various improvements of which the state of Pennsylvania is susceptible, but it
will likewise be useful to the public, by directing their attention to the
different parts of the state which are the objects of improvement, and bringing
forward individuals, as well as companies, to promote and undertake the
execution of the same. But as the subscriptions of the members of the Society
alone may not be sufficient encouragement for the publication of a map of such
an expensive nature, the Society beg leave to recommend the further
encouragement of the same to the Legislature, and herewith have presented the
original draft of the same to their inspection. All which is humbly submitted.

By order and on behalf of the Society, ROBERT MORRIS, President.

THE foregoing memorial, with the estimates and proposed plan of execution,
having been referred by the Legislature to committees of their respective
Houses, to confer with the committee of the Society of roads and navigation,
and to report thereon; the result of the whole, after mature deliberation, was
the adoption of the following general principles --

That the Legislature, although animated with the warmest zeal for the
improvement of their country, by means of roads and inland navigation, yet
could not subject the finances of the state (even if adequate) to the burden of
the whole; yet they would make liberal appropriations of public money for the
improvement of such roads and navigable waters, as lying too remote from the
more populous parts of the country, and the inhabitants but thinly settled,
rendered it impracticable for them either to improve their own roads and waters
by subscriptions or the usual county taxes; and the profits of the tolls would
yet be too small, to induce companies to undertake the work at their own
expense; but that in the more settled parts of the country, especially near the
metropolis, they would be ready to incorporate companies, for the gradual and
progressive improvement of roads and waters, where the tolls would be
sufficient to recompense the subscribers or stockholders, and the charge would
fall according to justice upon those who were to be benefited, in proportion to
the use they might make of such roads and waters.

The Legislature, therefore, in discharge of their part, and to set a laudable
example of public spirit, made large appropriations by law, for the improvement
of sundry roads and waters; [see the appendix.] They also passed the following
acts of incorporation, viz. --

An act to enable the Governor of this commonwealth to incorporate a company,
for opening a canal and lock-navigation between the rivers Schuylkill and
Susquehanna, by the waters of Tulpehoccon, Quittapahilla and Swatara, in the
counties of Berks and Dauphin.
WHEREAS the opening a communication by water, for the transportation of the
produce of the country, and of goods, wares and merchandises, between the city
of Philadelphia and the western and north western counties of the state of
Pennsylvania, will greatly tend to strengthen the bands of union between
citizens inhabiting distant parts of a country governed by the same free and
happy constitution and laws, to the encouragement of agriculture and
manufactures, and the promotion of commerce: And whereas, from reports made by
certain Commissioners appointed by the late Supreme Executive Council, in
pursuance of an act of the General Assembly of this commonwealth in such case
provided, it appears, that the waters of Tulpehoccon, Quittapahilla and
Swatara, in the counties of Berks and Dauphin, united, by means of a canal and
locks, will be sufficient for an inland navigation for the purposes aforesaid;
and it is reasonable that the expense of procuring so great a convenience
should be defrayed by the persons who will derive an immediate benefit by the
use of it:

Section I. Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives
of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby
enacted by the authority of the same, Commissioners appointed;
That Henry Drinker, Robert Hare, Joseph Hiester, George Latimer, George Fry,
William Montgomery, and Samuel Miles, be, and they are hereby, appointed
Commissioners, to do and perform the several duties herein after mentioned,
that is to say; their duties.
they shall and may, on or before the first day of December next, procure a
book, To open a subscription book, etc.
and therein enter as follows: We, whose names are hereto subscribed, do
promise to pay to the President, Managers and Company of the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna navigation, the sum of four hundred dollars for every share of
stock in the said company set opposite to our respective names, in such manner
and proportions, and at such times, as shall be determined by the said
President and Managers, in pursuance of an act of the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania, entitled, "An act to enable the Governor of this commonwealth to
incorporate a company, for opening a canal and lock-navigation between the
rivers Schuylkill and Susquehanna, by the waters of Tulpehoccon, Quittapahilla
and Swatara, in the counties of Berks and Dauphin; and shall thereupon give
notice in three of the public newspapers, printed in Philadelphia, one whereof
shall be in the German language, for one calendar month at the least, of the
time and place when and where the said book will be opened to receive
subscription and stock for the said company, at which time and place the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, shall attend, and shall permit and suffer
all persons who shall offer to subscribe in the said book, which shall be kept
open for at least fifteen days, The subscription book to be kept open fifteen
days, and how many shares may be subscribed;
for any number of shares of the said stock, not exceeding ten by or for any
one person or copartnership at one time, and, if need be, shall adjourn from
time to time, as the said Commissioners shall find proper and necessary, until
the number of subscriptions shall amount to one thousand shares of stock; and
if, while the said subscription shall be open, a greater number of shares shall
be applied for than will fill up the said number of shares, if a greater
number, how to be distributed.
then the said Commissioners shall apportion the whole number of shares
previously applied for, by lottery, to and among the persons who shall have
subscribed, or offered to subscribe, before the said Commissioners shall have
declared the subscription to be full, When 500 shares are subscribed, a return
shall be made to the Governor.
and the book closed; and when the said subscription shall be filled to the
amount of five hundred shares, the said Commissioners shall return to the
Governor of this commonwealth a full and perfect list of all the subscriptions
to the said stock, with the number of shares by them respectively subscribed,
certified under the hands and seals of the said Commissioners.

Section II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
whenever five hundred shares shall be subscribed to the capital stock of the
company, Thereupon the Governor shall incorporate the subscribers.
that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the Governor of this
commonwealth, by letters patent, under the great seal of the state, to create
and erect the said subscribers into one body corporate and politic in deed, and
in law, with perpetual succession, and with all the privileges and franchises
incident to a corporation, by the name, style and title of "The President, The
corporate style,
Managers and Company of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna navigation;" and by
such name the said subscribers shall be able and capable, by force of this act
and the said letters patent, of exercising all and singular the said privileges
and franchises; and, moreover, and powers.
shall be able and capable of holding their said capital stock, and the
increase and profits thereof, and of enlarging the same, from time to time, by
new subscriptions, in such manner and form as they shall think proper, if such
enlargement shall be found necessary to fulfill the end and intent of this act;
and of purchasing, taking and holding to them, their successors and assigns, in
fee simple, or for any lesser estate, all such lands, tenements and
hereditaments, as shall be necessary for them in the prosecution of their
works; and of doing all and every other act, matter and thing, which a
corporation or body politic may lawfully do.

Section III. The first seven named patentees to give notice of a time
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the first seven
persons named in the said letters patent shall, as soon as conveniently may be
after sealing the same, give notice in three of the newspapers, published in
the city of Philadelphia as aforesaid, and place for choosing the officers of
the corporation.
of a time and place by them to be appointed, not less than thirty days from
the time of issuing the said notice, at which time and place the said
subscribers shall proceed to organize the said corporation, and shall choose,
by majority of votes of the said subscribers, by ballots, to be delivered in
person or by proxy, one President, twelve Managers, one Treasurer, and such
other officers as they shall think necessary to conduct the business of the
said company, for one year, and until other such officers shall be elected; and
shall or may make such bye-laws, rules, orders and regulations, not
inconsistent with the constitution and laws of this commonwealth, as shall be
necessary for the well ordering the affairs of the said company: No person to
have more than twenty votes, but under that number there shall be a vote for
each share.
Provided always, That no person shall have more than twenty votes in the said
elections, or in determining any question arising at such meeting, whatever
number of shares he may be entitled unto, and that each person holding one or
more shares, under the said number of twenty, shall have one vote for every
share by him held.

Section IV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said company shall meet on the first Monday of January, The time and place of
meeting annually, for choosing officers, etc.
in each succeeding year, at such place within this state as shall be fixed by
the rules and orders of the said company, to be made as aforesaid, for the
purpose of choosing such officers as aforesaid for the ensuing year, and at
such other time as they shall be assembled by the Managers for the purpose of
making such further bye-laws, rules, orders and regulations, not inconsistent
with the constitution and existing laws of this state, Notice to be given of
the meetings.
as shall from time to time, be necessary, of which meetings previous notice
shall be given, in such manner as shall be provided by such rules and orders.

Section V. The subscribers to be furnished with certificates of their shares.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said President
and Managers shall procure certificates to be written or printed, for every
share of the capital stock of the said company, and deliver one to each
subscriber, signed by the President, and sealed with their common seal, he
paying to the Treasurer of the company the sum of seventy-five dollars for
every share by him subscribed, The certificates transferable.
which certificate shall be transferable at his pleasure, in the presence of
the Treasurer of the said company, subject, however, to all payments thereupon
due and to grow due; and the holder of every such certificate, having first
caused the assignment to him to be entered into a book of the company, to be
kept for that purpose, shall be a member of the said corporation, entitled to
one share of the capital stock, and of all the estate and emoluments of the
company, and to vote as aforesaid at the general meetings thereof.

Section VI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, Vacancies to
be supplied;
That the said President and Managers shall have full power and authority to
appoint all officers necessary to supply vacancies by death, resignation, or
otherwise, and also to appoint one or more superintendant of the works to be
undertaken by them, and superintendants, etc. of the works appointed.
and to hire and employ all such engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, as
they shall find necessary to carry on the same; and by the said superintendant,
engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, to enter into and upon all and
singular the land and lands covered with the water situate upon, The
superintendants, etc. may enter upon all lands, etc. and lay out and survey the
best track for a canal.
near, and between Tulpehoccon creek, in the county of Berks, and Swatara
creek, in the county of Dauphin, and to lay out and survey such route or tracks
as shall be most practicable for effecting a navigable canal between the rivers
Schuylkill and Susquehanna, by means of locks and other devices, doing
nevertheless as little damage as possible to the grounds and enclosures in and
over which they shall pass; The President etc. to agree with owners for the
purchase of such lands, etc.
and thereupon it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and
Managers to contract and agree with the owners of any lands and tenements, for
the purchase of so much thereof as shall be necessary for the purpose of
making, digging and perfecting the said canal, and of erecting and establishing
all the necessary locks, works and devices, to such a navigation belonging, if
they can agree with such owners; In case of disagreement, or legal incapacity
of the owners, a writ in the nature of a writ of ad quod damnum, shall issue
from the Supreme Court.
but in case of disagreement, or in case the owner thereof shall be feme
covert, under age, non compos mentis, or out of the state, then it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said President and Managers to apply to two of the
Justices of the Supreme Court of this commonwealth, who, upon such application,
are hereby authorized and empowered, enjoined and required, to frame and issue
one or more writ or writs, as occasion shall require, in the nature of a writ
of ad quod damnum, to be directed to the Sheriff of the county in which such
lands and tenements shall be, commanding him, that by the oaths and
affirmations of twelve good and lawful men of his bailiwick, who shall be
indifferent to the parties, Proceedings on the writ.
he shall enquire whether the person or persons owning any lands and tenements
necessary to be used by the said President and Managers, or which shall be
injured in establishing the said canal and navigation, which person or persons
shall be named, and which lands and tenements shall be described in such writ
or writs, will suffer and sustain any, and what, damages, by reason or means of
taking any lands, tenements, mill, mill-pond, water, watercourse, or other
real hereditament, necessary for the use of the said canal and navigation, and
the locks and works thereto belonging, Return of the writ.
and to return the same writ, together with the finding of the said jury, to
the next Supreme Court of this commonwealth after such finding; Time of
executing the writ to benotified to the owners of the lands, etc.
and upon such writ being delivered to the said Sheriff, he shall give at least
ten days notice in writing to all and every the owners of the lands and
tenements in the said writ described, of the time of executing the same, and
shall cause to come upon the premises, at the time appointed, twelve good and
lawful men of his bailiwick, A jury to be summoned and qualified;
who shall be selected in such manner as struck juries usually are, to whom he
shall administer an oath or affirmation, that they will diligently enquire
concerning the matters and things in the said writ specified, and a true
verdict give according to the best of their skill and judgment, they shall view
the premises, and enquire of the damages;
without favor or partiality; and thereupon the said Sheriff and inquest shall
proceed to view all and every the lands and tenements in such writ specified;
and having considered the quantity of land, land covered with water, mills,
buildings, or other improvements, that shall be necessary to be vested in the
said company for the purposes aforesaid, and any water course then existing,
the use whereof will be necessary for the purpose aforesaid, they shall cause
the same to be minutely and exactly described by metes and bounds, or other
particular descriptions, and shall value and appraise the injury or damages, if
any, which the owner or owners of the said lands, tenements, mills, waters,
watercourses, buildings, or improvements, will, according to their best skill
and judgment, sustain and suffer, by means of so much of the said lands and
tenements being vested in the said company, or by means of such improvements
being destroyed, or rendered useless or of less value, or by means of the said
company being permitted to turn such water to fill their canal and locks, or by
means of said company being permitted to enlarge any mill-pond, mill-race, or
other watercourse, and to use the same as and for part of their said canal and
navigation, or by any other means whatsoever, defining and ascertaining, as
well all such lands and tenements, liberties and privileges, so to be vested in
the said company, as the several sums at which the said injuries and damages
shall be so assessed; and make an inquisition thereof under hand and seal, etc.
and the said Sheriff and jury shall make an inquisition, under their hands and
seals, distinctly and plainly setting forth all the matters and things
aforesaid; and the Sheriff shall forthwith return the same, together with the
said writ, to the office of the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court; and at the
first Supreme Court which shall be held next after the return of any such writ,
the Justices of the said court shall examine the same, The Supreme Court to
examine the writ and inquisition, and if duly issued and executed, shall give
judgment that the company hold the premises, paying, etc.
and if the said writ shall appear to have been duly executed, and the return
thereof be sufficiently certain to ascertain the lands and tenements, rights,
liberties and privileges, intended to be vested in the said company, and the
several compensations awarded to the owners thereof, then the said court shall
enter judgment, that the said company, paying to the several owners as
aforesaid the several sums of money in the said inquisition assessed, or
bringing the same into the said court, over and besides the costs of such writ,
and of executing and returning the same, shall be entitled to have and to hold
to them, and their successors and assigns, for ever, all and every the lands,
tenements, rights, liberties and privileges, in the said inquisition described,
as fully and effectually as if the same had been granted to them by the
respective owners thereof; and if any return so to be made shall not be
sufficiently certain for the purposes aforesaid, the said court shall award an
inquisition de novo.

Section VII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
wherever the said canal shall cross any public or private laid out road or
highway, Proceedings, where the canal crosses a road.
or shall divide the grounds of any person into two parts, so as to require a
ford or bridge to cross the same, the jury, who shall enquire of the damages to
be sustained in manner herein directed, shall find and ascertain whether a
passage across the same shall be admitted and maintained by a ford or by a
bridge, and on such finding, the said President, Managers and Company shall
cause a ford to be rendered practicable, or a bridge, fit for the passage of
carts and wagons, to be built, and for ever hereafter maintained and kept in
repair, at all and every the places so ascertained by the said jury, at the
costs and charges of the said company; but nothing herein contained shall
prevent any person from erecting and keeping in repair any foot or other bridge
across the said canal, at his own expense, where the same shall pass through
his ground, provided the same shall be of such height above the water as shall
be usual in the bridges erected by the company; and provided also, that such
foot or other bridges, so to be erected by the owners of such land, shall not
interfere with any of the locks, buildings, or other works of the company.

Section VIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall have power and authority, Subscription money,
how to be paid;
from time to time, to fix the several sums of money which shall be paid by the
subscriber or holder of every share of the stock of the said company, in part
of the sum subscribed, and the time when each and every dividend or part
thereof shall be paid, and dividends, how to be received.
and the place where it shall be received, and shall give at least thirty days
notice in three of the public newspapers, published in the city of
Philadelphia, as aforesaid, of the sum or dividend, and the time and place of
receiving the same; and if any holder of any share shall neglect to pay such
proportions at the place aforesaid, Penalty on subscribers neglecting to pay.
for the space of sixty days after the time so appointed for paying the same,
every such share holder, or his assignee, shall, in addition to the dividend so
called for, pay after the rate of five per centum for every month's delay of
such payment; and if the same, and the said additional penalty, shall not be
paid for such space of time, as that the accumulated penalties shall become
equal to the sums before paid for and on account of such shares, the same shall
be forfeited to the said company, and may and shall be sold by them to any
person or persons willing to purchase for such prices as can be obtained
therefore.

Section IX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and Managers, The
Corporation may enter upon lands, and carry away stone, gravel, etc. paying or
tendering payment to the value.
and their superintendants, engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, with
carts, wagons, wains, and other carriages, with their beasts of draft and
burden, and all necessary tools and implements, to enter upon the lands
contiguous or near to the said track of the intended canal and navigation,
first giving notice of their intention to the owners thereof, and doing as
little damage thereto as possible, and repairing any breaches they may make in
the enclosures thereof, and making amends for any damages that may be sustained
by the owners of such ground, by appraisement in manner hereinafter directed,
and upon a reasonable agreement with the owners, if they can agree, or, if they
cannot agree, then upon an appraisement to be made upon the oath or affirmation
of three, or, if they disagree, any two indifferent freeholders, to be mutually
chosen, or, if the owners neglect or refuse to join in the choice, to be
appointed by any Justice of the Peace of the county, and tender of the
appraised value, to carry away any stone, gravel, sand or earth, there being
most conveniently situate for making or repairing the said canal and
navigagation, and to use the same in carrying on the said works.

Section X. Collectors of tolls to be appointed, when the canal, or any part is
perfected.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said President and Managers of the said company, so soon
as the said canal and navigation, or any part thereof, shall be perfected, to
appoint such and so many collectors of tolls for the passage of boats and
vessels in, through, and along the same, and in such places as they shall think
proper; and that it shall and may be lawful to and for such toll collectors,
Duty of the collectors and their deputies.
and their deputies, to demand and receive, of and from the persons having the
charge of all boats and vessels, and rafts of timber, boards, plank, or
scantling, passing through the said canal and navigation, and the locks thereto
belonging, such tolls and rates for every ton weight of the ascertained burden
of the said boats and vessels, and for every hundred feet cubic measure of
timber, and twelve hundred feet board measure of boards, plank or scantling, in
rafts, as the said President and Managers shall think proper at any lock or
other convenient place; Limitation of the amount of tolls.
provided that the amount of all the tolls, from the mouth of Swatara to the
mouth of Tulpehoccon, shall not exceed in the whole the sum of one dollar for
every ton of the burden of such boat or vessel, and for every hundred feet
cubic measure of timber, and twelve hundred feet board measure of boards,
plank, or scantling, and so in proportion for any smaller distance and lesser
number of locks, in any interval between the mouths of the said creeks.

And in order to ascertain the tonnage of boats using the said canal
navigation, and to prevent disputes between the supercargoes and collectors of
tolls concerning the same:

Section XI. Tonnage of boats using the canal, how to be ascertained, by
agreement with the owner.
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That upon the request of the
owner, skipper, or supercargoe of such boat or raft, or of the collector of the
said tolls at any lock upon the said canal and navigation, it shall and may be
lawful for each of them to choose one skilful person to measure and ascertain
the number of tons which the said boat or vessel is capable of carrying, and to
mark the same in figures upon the head and stern of the said boat, in colors
mixed with oil; and that the said boat or vessel, so measured and marked, shall
always be permitted to pass through the said canal and locks for the price per
ton, to which the number of tons so marked on her shall amount unto, agreeably
to the rates fixed in the manner aforesaid; or in case the owner shall decline
the mode prescribed.
and if the owner, skipper or supercargoe of such boat or vessel shall decline
choosing a person, resident within four miles of the place where such toll is
payable, to ascertain the tonnage thereof, then the amount of such tonnage
shall be fixed and ascertained by the person appointed for that purpose by the
said President and Managers, or chosen by the said collector of tolls for the
said company, and the toll shall be paid according to such measurement, before
any such boat or vessel shall be permitted to pass the lock or place where such
toll shall be made payable by the said company.

Section XII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons whatsoever shall wilfully and knowingly do any act or thing
whatsoever, Penalty for injuring the canal or works.
whereby the said navigation, or any lock, gate, engine, machine, or device,
thereto belonging, shall be injured or damaged, he or they so offending shall
forfeit and pay to the said company fourfold the costs and damages by them
sustained, by means of such known and wilful act, together with costs of suit
in that behalf expended, to be recovered by action of debt, in any court having
jurisdiction competent to the sum due.

Section XIII. Collectors of tolls may stop boats, or distrain a part of the
cargoe for tolls.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the collectors of
tolls, duly appointed and authorized by the said President and Managers, may
stop and detain all boats and vessels using the said canal and navigation,
until the owner, skipper or supercargoe of the same shall pay the tolls so as
aforesaid fixed, or may distrain part of the cargoe therein contained,
sufficient, by the appraisement of two credible persons, The distress to be
kept 5 days, and then sold.
to satisfy the same, which distress shall be kept by the collector of the
tolls taking the same for the space of five days, and afterward be sold by
public auction, at the most public place in the neighborhood, to the highest
bidder, in the same manner and form as goods distrained for rent are by law
sold and saleable, rendering the surplus, if any there be, after payment of the
said tolls, and the costs of distress and sale, to the owner or owners thereof.

Section XIV. The persons employed by the corporation to give bonds for
performance of their respective trusts.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the President and
Managers of the said company may demand and require of and from the said
Treasurer, and of and from all and every other the superintendants, officers,
and other persons by them employed, bonds, in sufficient penalties, and with
such sureties, as they shall by their rules, orders and regulations, require,
for the faithful discharge of the several duties and trusts to them, or any or
either of them, respectively, committed.

Section XV. The President and Managers to keep accounts of all moneys received
and expended.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the President and
Managers of the said company shall keep fair and just accounts of all moneys
received by them from the subscribers to the said undertaking, for their
subscriptions thereto, and all penalties for delay or non-payment thereof, and
of all moneys by them expended in the payment of the costs and charges of
procuring and purchasing all estates, rights and titles, in the said company to
be vested in pursuance of this act, or by any other means, and in paying their
several officers by them to be appointed, and the wages of the different
engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, by them to be employed, and for the
materials and work furnished and done in the prosecution of the works projected
by the said company, they shall submit such account, at least once a year, to
the stockholders, until the works are completed, and the expenses discharged
and liquidated.
and shall, once at least in every year, submit such account to the general
meeting of the stock holders, until the said canal and creeks therewith
connected shall be rendered navigable, and until all the costs, charges and
expenses of effecting the same shall be fully paid and discharged, and the
aggregate amount of such expenses shall be liquidated; and from and after the
liquidation thereof, if the one thousand shares above mentioned shall not be
sufficient, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President, Managers
and Company, at a general meeting of the stock holders thereof, After such
liquidation, the number of shares may be increased at a general meeting of the
stockholders. Proceedings in such case.
held in pursuance of the preceding provisions, or called by the President and
Managers of the company for the especial purpose, by public notice in three
newspapers in manner aforesaid (which shall be given three months previous to
the opening of the said subscriptions) to increase the number of shares to such
extent as shall be deemed sufficient to accomplish the object of this act, and
to demand and receive such additional subscriptions from the former, or, in
ease of their neglect or refusal, from new subscribers, and upon such terms,
and in such manner, as by the said general meeting shall be agreed upon; The
President, etc. to keep an account of tolls received;
and the said President and Managers shall also keep a just and true account of
all and every the moneys received by their several and respective collectors of
tolls in and through the said canal and navigation, from the one end thereof to
the other, and shall make and declare a dividend of the clear profits and
income thereof (all contingent costs and charges being first deducted) among
all the subscribers to the said company's stock; and declare and pay a dividend
of the profits half-yearly.
and shall, on every the second Mondays of January and July, in every year,
publish the half yearly dividend to be made of the said clear profits to and
amongst the stock holders, and of the time and place when and where the same
shall be paid; and shall cause the same to be paid accordingly.

Section XVI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall, An abstract of the accounts to be laid
before the General Assembly at the end of every third year.
at the expiration of every third year from the date of their incorporation,
lay before the General Assembly of this commonwealth an abstract of their
accounts, showing the whole amount of the capital expended in purchasing real
estates, and in digging, erecting, and establishing the whole of the said
canal, locks and works, and the whole income and profits arising from the said
tolls for and during the said periods, together with the exact amount of the
contingent charges of supporting, maintaining and keeping the same in repair
for the said periods, to the end that the clear annual profits may be known;
Two years after the canal is completed, if the profits will not divide at the
rate of six per cent. on the capital, the tolls may be increased to make that
amount.
and if at the end of two years after the said canal and navigation shall be
completed, it shall appear that the said clear profits and income will not
bear a dividend of six per centum per annum on the whole capital stock of the
said company so expended, then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President, Managers and Company, to increase the tolls herein above allowed to
them, so much per ton through the whole length of the canal and navigation, and
in proportion for each separate part thereof, as will raise the dividends up to
six per centum per annum; and at the end of every period of ten years after the
said canal shall be completed, they shall render a like abstract to the
General Assembly of their accounts for three preceding years, A like abstract
to be rendered every ten years, and if the profits will then divide at the rate
of 25 per cent. on the capital, the tolls shall be reduced.
and if at the end of any such decennial period it shall appear, from such
abstract, that the clear profits and income of the said company will bear a
dividend of more than twenty five per centum per annum, then, and in such case,
the said tolls shall be reduced so much per ton, as will reduce the said clear
profits and income to a dividend not exceeding twenty-five per centum per annum.

Section XVII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
whenever the profits of the said society shall amount to a clear annual
dividend of fifteen per centum on the whole amount of their capital, When the
dividend shall amount to 15 per cent. on the capital, 1 per cent. shall be
reserved for the establishment of schools, etc.
there shall then be reserved one per centum out of the same, which shall be
applied, at the direction of the Legislature, for the establishment of schools,
and the encouragement of the arts and sciences, in one or more seminaries of
learning, according to the provisions of the constitution.

Section XVIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if
the said company shall not proceed to carry on the said work within the space
of two years from the passing of this act, If the work is not carried on within
two years, or is not finished within ten, the Legislature may resume the
rights, etc. hereby granted.
or shall not, within the space of ten years from the passing of this act,
complete the same canal and navigation, so as to open an easy and safe water
communication from the mouth of Swatara to the mouth of Tulpehoccon, navigable
for boats of at least seven tons burden, then, and in either of those cases,
it shall and may be lawful for the Legislature of this commonwealth to resume
all and singular the rights, liberties and privileges, hereby granted to the
said company.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, Speaker of the House of Representatives. RICHARD PETER'S,
Speaker of the Senate.

Approved, September the twenty-ninth, 1791. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

An act to enable the Governor of this commonwealth to incorporate a company,
for opening a canal and water communication between the rivers Delaware and
Schuylkill, and for other purposes therein mentioned.
WHEREAS connecting the waters of the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, by means
of a canal, will not only immediately contribute to the convenience of the
citizens, but correspond with the extensive plan of connecting the eastern with
the western waters of the state; and there being ample reasons for expecting
that the same may be effected by individual citizens, if invited thereto by
reasonable encouragement: Therefore,

Section I. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted
by the authority of the same, Commissioners appointed to take subscriptions for
establishing a canal between Schuylkill and Delaware.
That David Rittenhouse, William Moore Smith, Elliston Perot, Cadwallader
Evans, junior, and Francis Johnston, be, and they are hereby, appointed
Commissioners, to do and perform the several duties hereafter mentioned; that
is to say, they shall and may, on or before the first day of July next, procure
a book or books, and therein enter as follows: We, whose names are hereunto
subscribed, do promise to pay to the President and Managers of the Delaware and
Schuylkill canal navigation, Proceedings in taking subscriptions regulated.
the sum of two hundred dollars, for every share of stock in the said company
set opposite to our respective names, in such manner and proportions, and at
such times, as shall be determined by the said President and Managers, in
pursuance of an act of the General Assembly of this commonwealth, entitled, "An
act to enable the Governor of this commonwealth to incorporate a company, for
opening a canal and water communication between the rivers Delaware and
Schuylkill;" and shall thereupon give notice, in three of the public
newspapers printed in Philadelphia, one whereof shall be in the German
language, for one calendar month at the least, of the time and place, when and
where the said book or books will be opened to receive subscriptions of stock
for the said company; at which time and place the said Commissioners, or any
three of them, shall attend, and shall permit and suffer all persons, who shall
offer to subscribe in the said book or books, which shall, for that purpose, be
kept open at least six hours in every juridical day, for the space of at least
three successive days; and on any of the said juridical days, within the hours
aforesaid, any person, of the age of twenty-one years, shall have liberty to
subscribe in his own, or any other name or names, by whom he shall be
authorized, for one share; on the second day, for one or two shares; on the
third, for one, two or three shares; and on any succeeding day, while the said
books shall remain open, for any number of shares in the said stock; and if, at
the expiration of the said three first days, the said book shall not have two
thousand shares therein subscribed, the said Commissioners may adjourn, from
time to time, until the said numbers of shares shall be subscribed, of which
adjournments public notice shall be given in at least one public paper; and
when the said subscriptions in the said books shall amount to the respective
numbers aforesaid, the same shall respectively be closed; and if on that day,
and before the said subscriptions shall be declared to be full, applications
shall be made to subscribe more shares than will fill the said book to the
numbers aforesaid, respectively, then the said Commissioners shall apportion
the whole number of shares, unsubscribed on the morning of that day, among all
those who shall have subscribed, or offered to subscribe, as aforesaid, on that
day, by deducting from the subscribers of more shares than one, such proportion
of the shares by them respectively subscribed, as will, with the least
fraction, and leaving every person one or more shares, come nearest to the
exact numbers of shares aforesaid: Provided always, Deposit of ten dollars to
be made on each share.
That every person offering to subscribe in the said book, in his own name, or
any other name, shall previously pay to the attending Commissioners ten dollars
for every share to be subscribed, out of which shall be defrayed the expenses
attending the taking such subscriptions, and other incidental charges, and
compensation to the said Commissioners, not exceeding two dollars to each of
them for every day they shall be publicly employed in the said business, and
the remainder shall be paid over to the Treasurer of the corporation, as soon
as the same shall be organized, and the officers chosen, as herein after
mentioned.

Section II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That when
one hundred persons, The commissioners to certify to the Governor when a
certain number of shares are subscribed; and thereupon the subscribers shall be
incorporated.
or more, shall have subscribed five hundred or more shares in the said stock,
the said Commissioners may, or, when the whole number of shares aforesaid shall
be subscribed, they shall certify, under their hands and seals, the names of
the subscribers, and the number of shares subscribed by, or apportioned to,
each subscriber, to the Governor of this commonwealth; and thereupon it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Governor, by letters patent, under the great
seal of the state, to create and erect such subscribers into one body, politic
and corporate, in deed and in law, with perpetual succession, and with all the
privileges and franchises incident to a corporation, by the name, Style and
franchises of the corporation.
style and title, of The President, Managers and Company of the Delaware and
Schuylkill canal navigation; and by such name the said subscribers, and such
other subscribers as may thereafter become shareholders, not exceeding the
number of two thousand, as aforesaid, shall be able and capable of bolding
their said capital stock, and the increase and profits thereof, and of
enlarging the same, from time to time, by new subscriptions, in such manner and
form as they shall think proper, if such enlargement shall be found necessary
to fulfill the end and intent of this act, and of purchasing, taking, and
holding to them, their successors and assigns, in fee simple, or for any lesser
estate, all such lands, tenements and hereditaments, as shall be necessary for
them in the prosecution of their work, and of doing all and every other act,
matter and thing, which a corporation, or body politic, may lawfully do.

Section III. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful for the said President and Managers to take water from
the river Schuylkill by means of a canal, Powers of the President and Managers
to take water from the Schuylkill for the canal;
beginning at any place on the easterly side of the said river, between the
upper side of the mouth of Stony creek, at Norriton, and the north bound of the
city of Philadelphia, where it strikes the said river, and to conduct the water
thereof, by means of a canal, along the easterly bank of the said river, course
of the canal;
or as near thereto as the nature of the ground and intervening obstacles and
impediments will admit, and from thence to conduct the said water, as nearly
parallel as may be, to the north bounds of the said city, its width;
by the most convenient route to the river Delaware, the width of the said
canal, at or near the place where it shall be taken from the river Schuylkill,
its construction.
not to exceed thirty feet; and no more water shall be drawn from the said
river, than will pass through a thirty feet water way, which shall be erected
of stone or wood by the said company, and be kept in constant repair, under the
penalty of forfeiting all the rights and immunities granted by this act; which
water way shall be erected within the distance of one mile, at most, from the
mouth of the said canal on the river Schuylkill; The owners of the ground to be
first paid.
but no part of the said work shall be commenced, before the said President and
Managers shall have ascertained and paid for the value of the ground to be
occupied the said canal and works, as also for any damage which the owners may
sustain by means of such alienation, or otherwise, by means of the canal
passing through their grounds, agreeably to the mode herein after directed:
Provided always, President and Managers may erect a wing, extending up the
stream.
That wherever the said President and Managers shall find it most convenient to
commence the said canal, they shall have liberty to erect a wing from the
easterly shore of the said river Schuylkill, extending up the stream, but not
to extend more than one-third across the said river, Restrictions with respect
to such wing.
except the said wing shall be erected at the upper side of the mouth of Stony
creek, in which case it may extend to the head of the island opposite thereto,
but the said canal shall not be commenced, and the said wing be erected, at any
place which shall render the navigation of the said river dangerous,
Proceedings in case it is thought advisable to construct the canal by
locknavigation, to be supplied from streams within eight miles of the north
bound of Philadelphia.
by forcing boats or rafts on the opposite shore, or on rocks or shoals, which
they might otherwise have passed in safety; and if the said President and
Managers shall be of opinion that it may be advisable to construct a canal
between the said rivers Schuylkill and Delaware, by means of lock navigation,
to be supplied with water from the streams lying between the north bounds of
the city of Philadelphia and the distance of eight miles therefrom, it shall
and may be lawful for them so to do, and, to effect the same, shall have power
to conduct any of the said streams into such canal, paying for the damage
occasioned thereby in manner aforesaid.

Section IV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall have power to form dry and wet docks, Dry and
wet docks may be formed near Philadelphia, and pipes to supply the
neighborhood with water.
for the accommodation of vessels, near the city of Philadelphia, to
communicate with the waters of the said canal, and to supply the city of
Philadelphia, and the neighborhood thereof, with water, by means of pipes and
other conductors, under the public roads, streets and alleys, conveying water
from thence for the use of such persons, as will agree to pay for the same such
annual prices as shall be established by the said President and Managers:
Injuries done to roads for such purpose to be immediately repaired.
Provided always, That they shall immediately repair any injury which they may
do to said roads, streets or alleys, by means of laying down or repairing any
of the said pipes or conductors, and give as little obstruction to the use of
the said roads, streets or alleys, For the supply of water for the the city,
ten per cent. is allowed.
as the nature of the works will admit: Provided also, That the said company
shall not be entitled to any greater price for water to supply the city, and
neighborhood thereof, than will create the annual profit of ten per centum on
the capital that may and shall be expended for that particular purpose,
exclusive of the general expense of the canal.

Section V. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
seven persons first named in the said letters patent shall, Proceedings, to
organize the corporation.
as soon as conveniently may be after sealing the same, give notice in three of
the newspapers, published in the city of Philadelphia as aforesaid, of a time
and place by them to be appointed, not less than thirty days from the time of
issuing the said notice, at which time and place the said subscribers shall
proceed to organize the said corporation, and shall choose, by majority of
votes of the said subscribers, by ballots, to be delivered in person or by
proxy, one President, twelve Managers, one Treasurer, and such other officers
as they shall think necessary to conduct the business of the said company, for
one year, and until such other officers shall be elected; and shall or may make
such bye-laws, rules, orders and regulations, not inconsistent with the
constitution and laws of this commonwealth, as shall be necessary for the well
ordering of the affairs of the said company; Provided always, That no person
shall have more than twenty votes in the said elections, or in determining any
question arising at such meeting, whatever number of shares he may be entitled
to, and that each person holding one or more shares, under the said number of
twenty, shall have one vote for every share by him held.

Section VI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said company shall meet on the first Monday of January, Times of meeting.
in each succeeding year, at such place as shall be fixed by the rules and
orders of the said company, to be made as aforesaid, for the purpose of
choosing such officers as aforesaid for the ensuing year, and at such other
times as they shall be assembled by the Managers for the purpose of making
bye-laws, rules, orders and regulations, not inconsistent with the constitution
and existing laws of this state, as shall from time to time, be necessary, of
which meetings previous notice shall be given, in such manner as shall be
provided by such rules and orders.

Section VII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall procure certificates to be printed or
written, Certificates of shares to be issued;
for every share of the capital stock of the said company, and deliver one to
each subscriber, signed by the President, and sealed with their common seal, he
paying to the Treasurer of the company the sum of twenty-five dollars for every
share by him subscribed, which shall be transferable.
which certificate shall be transferable at his pleasure, in the presence of
the Treasurer of the said company, subject, however, to all payments due and to
grow due; and the holder of every such certificate, having first caused the
assignment to him to be entered into a book of the company, to be kept for that
purpose, shall be a member of the said corporation, entitled to one share of
the capital stock, and of all the estate and emoluments of the company, and to
vote as aforesaid at the general meetings thereof.

Section VIII. Vacancies to be supplied, and superintendants, etc. appointed,
by the President and Managers.
And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said President
and Managers shall have full power and authority to appoint all officers
necessary to supply vacancies by death, resignation, or otherwise, and also to
appoint one or more superintendants of the works to be undertaken by them, and
to hire and employ all such engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, as they
shall find necessary to carry on the same; They may enter on lands etc.
convenient for the canal;
and by the said superintendant, engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, to
enter into and upon all and singular the land and lands, which may be deemed
most convenient for accommodating the said canal navigation, and to lay out and
survey such route or tracks as shall be deemed most practicable for effecting a
navigable canal between the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, near the said city,
by means of locks and other devices, conformably to the provisions in the third
section of this act, doing, nevertheless, as little damage as possible to the
ground and enclosures in and over which they shall pass; and contract with the
owners for necessary parts thereof.
and thereupon it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and
Managers to contract and agree with the owners of any lands and tenements, for
the purchase of so much thereof as shall be necessary for the purpose of
making, digging and perfecting the said canal, and of erecting and establishing
all the necessary locks, works and devices, to such a navigation belonging, if
they can agree with such owners; Proceeding, in case of disagreement, or
disqualification of the owner to convey.
but in case of disagreement, or in case the owner thereof shall be feme
covert, under age, non compos mentis, or out of the state, or otherwise
incapacitated to convey, then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President and Managers to apply to two of the Justices of the Supreme Court of
this commonwealth, who, upon such application, are hereby authorized and
empowered, enjoined and required, to frame and issue one or more writ or writs,
as occasion shall require, in the nature of a writ ad quod damnum, to be
directed to the Sheriff of the county in which such lands and tenements shall
be, commanding him, that by the oaths and affirmations of twelve good and
lawful men of his bailiwick, who shall be indifferent to the parties, he shall
enquire whether the person or persons owning any lands and tenements necessary
to be used by the said President and Managers, or which shall be injured in
establishing the said canal and navigation, which person or persons shall be
named, and which lands and tenements shall be described in such writ or writs,
will suffer and sustain any, and what, damages, by reason or means of taking
any such lands, tenements or other real hereditaments, necessary for the use of
said canal and navigation, and the locks and works thereto belonging, and to
return the same writ, together with the finding of the said jury, to the next
Supreme Court of this commonwealth after such finding; and upon such writ being
delivered to the said Sheriff, he shall give at least ten days notice in
writing to all and every the owners, or their representatives, of the lands and
tenements in the said writ described, of the time of executing the same, and
shall cause to come upon the premises, at the time appointed, twelve good and
lawful men of his bailiwick, who shall be selected in such manner as struck
juries usually are, to whom he shall administer an oath or affirmation, that
they will diligently enquire concerning the matters and things in the said writ
specified, and a true verdict give according to the best of their skill and
judgment, without favor or partiality; and thereupon the said Sheriff and
inquest shall proceed to view all and every the lands and tenements, or other
real hereditaments, in such writ specified, and having considered the quantity
and quality thereof, which shall be necessary to be vested in the said company,
for the purposes aforesaid, they shall cause the same to be minutely and
exactly described, by metes and bounds, or other particular descriptions, and
shall value and appraise the injury and damages which the owner or owners of
the said lands, tenements, or other real hereditaments or improvements, will,
according to their best skill and judgment, sustain and suffer, by means of so
much of the said lands, tenements, or other real hereditaments or improvements,
being vested in the said company, or by means of any works being destroyed, or
rendered useless or of less value, or by means of the said company being
permitted to turn any water course, for the use of the said canal, or by means
of said company being permitted to enlarge any pond or water course, and to use
the same for the purposes aforesaid, or by any other means whatsoever, defining
and ascertaining, as well all such lands and tenements, liberties and
privileges, so to be vested in the said company, as the several sums at which
the said injuries and damages shall be so assessed; and the said Sheriff and
jury shall make an inquisition, under their hands and seals, distinctly and
plainly setting forth all the matters and things aforesaid, and the Sheriff
shall forthwith return the same, together with the said writ, to the office of
the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court; and at the first Supreme Court which
shall be held next after the return of any such writ, the Justices of the said
court shall examine the same, and if the said writ shall appear to have been
duly executed, and the return thereof be sufficient to ascertain the lands and
tenements, rights, liberties and privileges, intended to be vested in the said
company, and the several compensations awarded to the owners thereof, then the
said court shall enter judgment, that the said company, paying to the several
owners, as aforesaid, the several sums of money in the said inquisition
assessed, or bringing the same into the said court, over and besides the cost
of such writ, and of executing and returning the same, shall be entitled to
have and to hold to them, and their successors and assigns for ever, all and
every the lands, tenements, rights, liberties and privileges, in the said
inquisition described, as fully and effectually, as if the same had been
granted to them by the respective owners thereof; and if any return so to be
made shall not be sufficiently certain for the purposes aforesaid, the said
court shall award inquisition de novo.

Section IX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
whenever the said canal shall cross any public or private laid out road or
highway, In what cases bridges shall be erected across the canal.
or shall divide the grounds of any person into two parts, so as to require a
ford or bridge to cross the same, the jury, who shall enquire of the damages to
be sustained in manner herein directed, shall find and ascertain whether a
passage across the same shall be admitted and maintained by a ford or bridge,
and on such finding, the said President, and Managers and Company shall cause a
ford to be rendered practicable, or a bridge, fit for the passage of carts and
wagons, to be built, and for ever after maintained and kept in repair, at all
and every the places so ascertained by the said jury, at the costs and charges
of the said company; but nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from
erecting and keeping in repair any foot or other bridge across the said canal,
at his own expense, where the same shall pass through his ground, provided the
same shall be of such a height above the water as shall be usual in the bridges
erected by the company; and provided that such foot or other bridges, so to be
erected by the owners of such lands, shall not interfere with any of the locks,
or buildings, or other works of the company.

Section X. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
President and Managers shall have power and authority, Subscription, how and
when to be paid.
from time to time, to fix the several sums of money which shall be paid by the
subscriber or holder of every share of the stock of the said company, in part,
or for the sum subscribed, and the time when each and every dividend or part
thereof shall be paid, and the place where it shall be received, and shall give
at least thirty days notice in three of the public newspapers, published in the
city of Philadelphia, as aforesaid, of the sum or dividend, Penalty on neglect
to pay.
and the time and place of receiving the same; and if the holder of any share
shall neglect to pay such proportions at the place aforesaid, for the space of
sixty days after the time so appointed for paying the same, every such share
holder, or his assignee, shall, in addition to the dividend so called for, pay
after the rate of five per centum for every month's delay of such payment; and
if the same, and the said additional penalty, shall not be paid for such space
of time, as that the accumulated penalties shall become equal to the sums
before paid for and on account of such shares, the same shall be forfeited to
the said company, and may and shall be sold by them to any person or persons
willing to purchase for such prices as can be obtained therefore.

Section XI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and Managers, Mode of
obtaining materials for the work from contiguous lands.
and their superintendants, engineers, artists, workmen and laborers, with
carts, wagons, wains, and other carriages, with their beasts of draft and
burden, and all necessary tools and implements, to enter upon the lands
contiguous or near to the said track of the intended canal and navigation,
first giving notice of their intention to the owners thereof, or their
representatives, and doing as little damage thereto as possible, and repairing
any breaches they may make in the enclosures thereof, and making amends for any
damages that may be sustained by the owners of such ground, by appraisement in
manner hereinafter directed, and upon a reasonable agreement with the owners,
if they can agree, or, if they cannot agree, then upon an appraisement to be
made upon the oath or affirmation of three, or, if they disagree, any two
indifferent freeholders, to be mutually chosen, or, if the owners neglect or
refuse to join in the choice, to be appointed by any Justice of the Peace of
the county, and tender of the appraised value, to carry away any stone, gravel,
sand or earth, thereon, being most conveniently situate for making or repairing
the said canal and navigation, and to use the same in carrying on the said
works.

Section XII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said President and Managers of the said
company, Collectors of the tolls, how and where to be established.
so soon as the said canal and navigation shall be perfected, to appoint such
and so many collectors of tolls for the passage of boats, vessels and rafts, in
and through and along the same, and in such places as they shall think proper;
and that it shall and may be lawful to and for such toll collectors, and their
deputies, to demand and receive, of and from the persons having the charge of
all boats, vessels and rafts, passing through the said canal and navigation,
and the locks thereto belonging, such tolls and rates, What tolls shall be paid;
for every ton weight of the ascertained burden of the said boats and vessels,
and for every hundred feet, cubic measure, of timber, and twelve hundred feet,
board measure, of boards, plank or scantling, in rafts, as the said President
and Managers shall think proper, at any lock or other convenient place at the
said canal; and limitation of the amount.
provided that the amount of the said tolls shall not, in the whole, exceed the
rate of one-sixteenth of a dollar per mile, for every ton of the burden of
such boat or vessel, and for every hundred feet, cubic measure, of timber, and
twelve hundred feet, board measure, of boards, plank or scantling.

Section XIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That in
order to ascertain the size of rafts and the tonnage of boats using and passing
the said canal and navigation, Mode of ascertaining the size of rafts and the
tonnage of boats.
and to prevent disputes between the supercargoes and collectors of tolls
concerning the same, upon the request of the owner, skipper, or supercargoe of
such boat or raft, or of the collector of the said tolls, at any lock upon the
said canal and navigation, it shall and may be lawful for each of them to
choose one skilful person to measure and ascertain the size of the said rafts,
or the number of tons which the said boat or vessel is capable of carrying, and
to mark the said tonnage, so ascertained, in figures, upon the head and stern
of the said boat, in colors mixed with oil, and that the said boat or vessel,
so measured and marked, shall be permitted to pass through the said canal and
locks, for the price per ton to which the number of tons so marked on her shall
amount to, agreeably to the rates fixed in the manner aforesaid; and if the
owner, skipper or supercargoe of such boat or vessel shall decline choosing a
person resident within two miles of the place where such toll is payable, to
ascertain the tonnage thereof, then the amount of such tonnage shall be fixed
and ascertained by the person appointed for that purpose by the President and
Managers, or chosen by the said collector of tolls for the said company, and
the toll shall be paid according to such measurement, before any such boat or
vessel shall be permitted to pass the place where such toll shall be made
payable by the said company. Provided always, That if any of the said boats
shall have been marked on any other canal, the said collectors may admit the
same as the rate of tonnage, unless they shall have cause to suspect that the
same is not correct, in which case a new mark be painted, without defacing the
old mark.

Section XIV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons whatsoever shall wilfully and knowingly do any act or thing
whatsoever, Penalty on injuring the works.
whereby the said navigation, or any lock, gate, engine, machine, or device,
thereto belonging, shall be injured or damaged, he or they so offending shall
forfeit and pay to the said company fourfold the costs and damages by them
sustained, by means of such known and wilful act, together with costs of suit
in that behalf expended, to be recovered by action of debt, in any court having
jurisdiction competent to the sum due.

Section XV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
collectors of tolls, Payment of tolls, how to be enforced.
duly appointed and authorized by the said President and Managers, may stop and
detain all boats and vessels using the said canal and navigation, and also all
rafts passing the same, until the owner, skipper or supercargoe of the same,
shall pay the tolls so as aforesaid fixed, or may distrain part of the cargoe
therein contained, or a part of such rafts, sufficient, by the appraisement of
two credible persons, to satisfy the toll, which distress shall be kept by the
collector of the tolls taking the same for the space of five days, and
afterward sold by public auction, at some public place in the neighborhood,
to the highest bidder, in the same manner and form as goods distrained for rent
are by law sold and saleable, rendering the surplus, if any there be, after
payment of the said tolls, and the costs of distress and sale, to the skipper,
supercargoe or owners thereof.

Section XVI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
President and Managers of the said company may demand and require of and from
the said Treasurer, The officers of the company to give security.
and of and from all and every other the officers, superintendants, and other
persons by them employed, bonds, in sufficient penalties, and with such
sureties, as they shall by their rules, orders and regulations require, for the
faithful discharge of the several duties and trusts to them, or any of them,
respectively, committed.

Section XVII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
President and Managers of the said company shall keep fair and just accounts of
all moneys received by them, The President and Managers to keep accounts of the
receipts and expenditures, till the whole is completed.
from the subscribers to the said undertaking, for their subscriptions thereto,
and all penalties for delay or non-payment thereof, and of all moneys by them
expended in the payment of the costs and charges of procuring and purchasing
all estates, rights and titles, in the said company to be vested in pursuance
of this act, or by any other means, and in paying their several officers by
them to be appointed, and the wages of the different engineers, artists,
workmen and laborers, by them to be employed, and for the materials and work
furnished and done in the prosecution of the works projected by the said
company, and shall, once at least in every year, submit such account to the
general meeting of the stock holders, until the said canal and navigation shall
be completed, and until all the costs, charges and expenses of effecting the
same shall be fully paid and discharged, and the aggregate amount of such
expenses shall be liquidated; The capital stock, how it may be increased.
and from and after the liquidation thereof, if the works shall not be
sufficiently perfected, or from any casualty should be injured, so as to
require an increase of the capital stock, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said President, Managers and Company, at a general meeting of the stock
holders thereof, held in pursuance of the preceding provisions, or called by
the President and Managers of the company for the especial purpose, by public
notice in three newspapers in manner aforesaid (which shall be given three
months previously to the opening of the said subscriptions) to increase the
number of shares to such extent as shall be deemed sufficient to accomplish the
object of this act, and to demand and receive such additional subscriptions
from the former, or, in case of their neglect or refusal, after ten successive
days from the time of such meeting, from new subscribers, and upon such terms,
and in such manner, as by the said general meeting shall be agreed on.

Section XVIII. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall also keep a just and true account of all and
every the moneys received by their several and respective collectors of tolls
on the said canal navigation, The President and Managers to keep account of
tolls received by collectors, and make the dividends.
and shall make and declare a dividend of the clear profits and income thereof
(all contingent costs and charges being first deducted) among all the
subscribers to the said company's stock, and shall, on every the second Mondays
of January and July, in every year, publish the half yearly dividend to be made
of the said clear profits to and amongst the stock holders, and of the time and
place, when and where the same shall be paid, and shall cause the same to be
paid accordingly.

Section XIX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said President and Managers shall, President and Managers to lay their accounts
before the Legislature.
at the expiration of every third year from the date of their incorporation,
lay before the General Assembly of this commonwealth an abstract of their
accounts, showing the whole amount of the capital expended in purchasing real
estates, and in digging, erecting, and establishing the whole of the said
canal, locks and works, and the whole income and profits arising from the same,
for and during the said periods, together with the exact amount of the
contingent expenses of supporting, maintaining and keeping the same in repair
for the said periods, to the end that the clear annual profits may be known;
Proceedings, in case the profits will not divide six per cent.
and if, at the end of two years after the said canal and navigation shall be
completed, it shall appear that the said clear profits and income will not
bear a dividend of six per centum per annum on the whole capital stock of the
said company so expended, then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
President, Managers and Company, to increase the tolls herein above allowed to
them so much per ton, as will raise the dividend up to six per centum per
annum; and at the end of every period of ten years after the said canal shall
be completed, they shall render a like abstract to the General Assembly of
their accounts for three preceding years; or exceed twenty-five per cent.
and if, at the end of any such decennial period, it shall appear, from such
abstract, that the clear profits and income of the said company will bear a
dividend of more than twenty five per centum per annum, then, and in such case
the said tolls shall be reduced so much per ton, as will reduce the said clear
profits and income to a dividend not exceeding twenty-five per centum per annum.

Section XX. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That
whenever the profits of the said company shall amount to a clear annual
dividend of fifteen per centum on the whole amount of their capital stock
expended, When the profits divide fifteen per cent. one per cent to be reserved
for the public.
there shall then be reserved one per centum per annum out of the same, which
shall be applied, under the direction of the Legislature for the establishment
of schools, and the encouragement of the arts and sciences, in one or more
seminaries of learning.

Section XXI. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if the
said company shall not proceed to carry on the said work within the space of
two years from the passing of this act, Limitation for commencing and
completing the work.
or shall not, within the space of ten years from the passing of this act,
complete the same canal and navigation, so as to open an easy and safe water
communication from the river Schuylkill to the river Delaware, which canal or
water shall be of the depth of three feet, and the width of at least twentyfour
feet, then, and in either of those cases, it shall and may be lawful for the
Legislature of this commonwealth to resume all and singular the rights,
liberties and privileges, hereby granted to the said company.

WILLIAM BINGHAM, Speaker of the House of Representatives. SAMUEL POWEL,
Speaker of the Senate.

Approved, April the tenth, 1792. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.

An act to incorporate the Conewago Canal Company.
WHEREAS the General Assembly of this commonwealth did, in and by an act,
entitled "An act to provide for the opening and improving sundry navigable
waters and roads within this commonwealth" authorize and empower the Governor
to contract with individuals or companies, among other things, for improving
the navigation of the river Susquehanna, from Wright's ferry to the mouth of
Swatara creek, inclusive, and for that purpose appropriated the sum of five
thousand two hundred and fifty pounds: And whereas a contract and articles of
agreement were made and entered into on the third day of July, in the year of
our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two, between Thomas Mifflin,
Governor of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on behalf of the state, of the
one part, and Robert Morris, William Smith, Walter Stewart, Samuel Meredith,
John (...), (...) Francis, John Nicholson, John Donaldson, Samuel Miles,
Timothy Matlack, David Rittenhouse, Samuel Powel, Alexander James Dallas,
William Bingham, Henry Miller, Abraham (...) and Robert Harris, all of the
state of Pennsylvania, of the other part, as a company, by the name of The
Conewago company, for opening and improving that part of the river Susquehanna,
from Wright's ferry to the mouth of Swatara creek, inclusive, agreeably to the
true intent, meaning and design of the Legislature, whereby the said Robert
Morris and others, as a company, and each of them, did agree, undertake, and
contract, to and with the said Thomas Mifflin, and his successors, Governors of
the said commonwealth, that they, the said company, will well and truly open
and improve the navigation of the said river Susquehanna, between Wright's
ferry and the mouth of Swatara aforesaid, agreeably to the true intention of
the Legislature, in the manner set forth in the said contract, reference being
thereto had at large; and, particularly, that at the Conewago falls they will
cut, establish and (...) a canal, of a sufficient and convenient width, not
less than forty feet, of a length sufficient to pass and extend beyond all
obstructions created in the navigation of the said river by means of the said
Conewago Falls and of a depth sufficient at all times to contain and convey,
through the whole distance of the said canal, a body of water, at least four
feet deep; and that they will also erect and maintain on the said canal a
sufficient number of safe and commodious locks, not less than two, for the
benefit of navigation; and that the said canal and locks, and the works
thereunto belonging, shall be for ever kept and maintained in good and perfect
order and repair, by them, the said contractors, their heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, at the proper cost of them, and every of them, and
opened as a public highway and for public use for ever, so that all persons
whosoever, with boats, rasts, and other suitable vessels, and their freights,
may thenceforth, at all seasons when the navigation of the said river
Susquehanna is not rendered impracticable by ice, pass and repass in the said
canal, and use and enjoy the benefit of the said locks, free of toll, and any
and every other charge whatsoever, a freely as if the said canal and locks,
were made and established by the public and duly declared by law to be a public
highway: And whereas the said Thomas Mifflin in behalf of this commonwealth, in
consideration of the undertakings and contracts of the said company, did
covenant and agree, that they shall have and receive the sum of five thousand
two hundred and fifty pounds, the sum appropriated by law, to be taken as full
satisfaction (...) compensation of all their services and expenses in carrying
on, completing, and maintaining the said works: And whereas it has been (...)
to the Legislature by the said company, that no provision having been made by
the public to purchase the ground through which the said canal is to pass, for
the distance of three hundred and six perches, more or less, nor to compel the
owners to part with the same, at a reasonable price or valuation, for the
public use, and that they have been obliged to purchase the same at their own
expense, and at a very high rate, appropriating to the use of the public such
part of their grounds as may be necessary to the said canal and works, the
whole of which is to be constructed and maintained within the grounds so
purchased; but that in the execution of the said important work, for the public
use and benefit, as well as for securing and maintaining the necessary
constructions and erections from trespasses and damages, the better managing
their several shares, dividing and transferring the same, making and executing
contracts for carrying on the work, and the improvement of the natural
advantages of their estates and interest in the lands contiguous to and
connected with the said canal (including the ferry at the lower end of the said
Conewago falls) they labor under many inconveniences, as a number of
individuals bound by temporary articles to the execution and support of a
public work, for permanent and perpetual use to the community at large, and
have therefore prayed, that they may be constituted into a body politic and
corporate, with the powers, rights and privileges, incident and necessary to a
corporation of the like nature and kind:

Section I. Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives
of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby
enacted by the authority of the same, The contractors for improving the
navigation of the Susquehanna, at Conewago falls, incorporated.
That the said Robert Morris, William Smith, Walter Stewart, Samuel Meredith,
John Steinmetz, Tench Francis, John Nicholson, John Donaldson, Samuel Miles,
Timothy Matlack, David Rittenhouse, Samuel Powel, Alexander James Dallas,
William Bingham, Henry Miller, Abraham Witmer, and Robert Harris, their
successors and assigns, shall be, and they are hereby, incorporated into a body
politic and corporate, in deed and in name, by the name, style and title of
"The Conewago Canal Company;" and by the same name, style and title, they shall
have succession for ever, and be able and capable in law to sue and be sued, to
implead and be impleaded, and to have and to make one common seal, to use in
their affairs, and the same to break and alter at their pleasure; and to hold
and enjoy any lands, tenements, goods, wares and merchandise, and all manner of
estates, (...) and personal, and mixed, provided the same shall not exceed, at
any time, one million of dollars; and shall have power to meet, choose, appoint
and contract with all officers, servants, and persons necessary in the
management of their affairs, and to do and perform such acts, and to make such
rules, ordinances, bye-laws and regulations, (not inconsistent with the laws of
the United States and of this state) as they, or a majority of them, shall from
time to time find convenient, useful, and necessary for establishing and
maintaining the said canal and locks, and the works thereunto belonging, or
connected with the same; and in general for the better managing and promoting
the interests of the said corporation and company, and the improvement of the
natural advantages of their estate in the premises, in as full and ample a
manner as any other corporate body within this commonwealth can or may do.

Section II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said canal and locks shall be, and the same are hereby declared to be, a public
highway, and as such shall be kept and maintained by the said corporation and
company, for public use, for ever, so that all persons with boats, The canal
and locks to be established at the Conewago falls declared a public highway,
and to be kept as such by the company.
rafts, and other suitable vessels, with their freights, may at all seasons,
when the navigation of the river Susquehanna and the said canal is not rendered
impracticable by ice, pass and repass in the same, and use and enjoy the
benefit of the said locks, free of toll, and any and every other charge
whatsoever; and the said company shall keep and maintain a skilful person for
opening and shutting the locks, for assisting the boatmen in their passage
through the same.

Section III. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons whatsoever shall, Penalty for injuring the canal or its works.
wilfully and knowingly, do any act or thing whatsoever, whereby the said
navigation, or any lock, gate, engine, machine or device, thereto belonging,
shall be injured or damaged, he, she or they, so offending, shall forfeit and
pay to the said company fourfold the costs and damages by them sustained by
means of such known and wilful act, together with costs of suit in that behalf
expended, to be recovered, by action of debt, before any Justice of the Peace,
or in any court having jurisdiction competent to the sum due.

Section IV. Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority
aforesaid, This act not to invalidate the contract formed with the Governor.
That nothing in this act contained shall be held, deemed, taken, or in any
wise understood, to invalidate the contract had and made between the Governor
of this commonwealth and the said company, for completing the said canal and
locks in the manner, and in the time, therein specified, nor to release the
said company, or any of them, from their responsibility, each for the other,
jointly and severally, in the due and faithful execution of the work, according
to the true intention of the Legislature, as specified and set forth in the
said contract.

GERARDUS WYNKOOP, Speaker of the House of Representatives. SAMUEL POWEL,
Speaker of the Senate.

Approved, April the tenth, 1793. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.

Schuylkill and Susquehanna Canal Navigation.
To the Senate and House of Representatives of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met: --
THE President, Managers and Company of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna
navigation, with every sentiment of respect and grateful acknowledgment of that
protection, encouragement and support, which they have received from the
Legislature in the carrying on the great work committed to their trust and
direction; beg leave to submit, to the consideration of the General Assembly,
an account of the work already executed, the moneys expended, the plan and
probable expense of the work remaining to be accomplished, and the prospect of
an effectual completion of the whole undertaking, within the time limited by
law.

The magnitude and immense importance of the system of roads and inland
navigation, projected, and now in rapid progress, through the various parts of
the state, as tending to the increase of our commercial and agricultural
interest, to the general prosperity of our citizens of every class and degree,
and strengthening the bands of their union to the most distant parts of the
state, need not be mentioned to an enlightened Legislature; which has nursed
this great work, by the aid of public money from the beginning, and has
incorporated and encouraged companies with liberal franchises, for carrying on
and completing the same.

Within the whole habitable globe, there is not a country, of equal dimensions,
which offers to its industrious inhabitants more resources of wealth,
independence and happiness, than Pennsylvania; considering the salubrity of
climate, the fertility of soil, the variety of produce and manufacturing
materials, and the means of communication by improved roads and the inland
navigation of our great rivers and their numerous branches, embracing and
interlocking with each other, and spreading themselves (up to their sources)
through all the parts of the state; and forming water communications by sundry
routs, from the tide waters of Delaware and the Atlantic, to the great lakes
and extreme bounds of the United States.

The CANAL which is to connect the Schuylkill and Susquehanna navigation is the
chief link of this vast chain -- a link on which the success and utility of the
whole (...) necessarily depend.

The summit level of this canal, between Lebanon and Myers-town, for upwards of
three miles is completed, in respect to the heavy digging, and the purchase of
all the ground for the site of the canal, the locks and towing paths; as well
as the grounds containing the sources and springs of the waters, and through
which they are to be conducted into the reservoir at the summit level. The
exhorbitant prices allowed by juries for some of the lands and waters necessary
to the work, has considerably enhanced the expense of this part; but a
sufficiency of water to fill the canal and locks at the middle ground, was of
such essential consequence to the success of the undertaking, that the whole
system of our inland navigation must have been deranged, and have become
abortive, if the Managers had been deterred, or slackened their exertions, on
account of the expense; which, after all, does not greatly or disproportionably
exceed the original estimates for the middle ground; and the final amount of
expenditures on this part will not be above forty thousand pounds.

The two remaining parts of this grand communication under our direction, are
--

1. The Tulpehocken canal navigation, from the east end of the middle ground,
down to Schuylkill at the mouth of Tulpehocken; being, by the courses of the
creek and along its margin, thirty-five miles.

2. The Quitipahilla and Swatara navigation, from Lebanon to Susquehanna, being
thirty-two miles.

The report of our engineer, his plan and estimates, together with his able and
judicious arguments and reasons for preferring, generally, a CANAL NAVIGATION
along the margin, to the natural bed of the waters, (as being a more complete
navigation, with less injury to the meadows or mills of the land holders, and
on the whole, at an expense not so much greater as to be placed in competition
with the permanent advantages to be derived from it) are herewith submitted to
the Legislature.

But the original calculations, on framing the act by which we were
incorporated, were grounded upon the presumption that the natural beds of those
rivers, by means of dams and locks, might answer the purpose of a temporary
navigation, with little more than eight or ten miles digging on the whole;
whereas, on the present improved plan, (which will remain of permanent
emolument to the state, so long as those rivers continue to run) the expense
will be about thrice the sum first contemplated, as will appear by the annexed
estimate -- It is an expense however, (considering the magnitude of the
undertaking) which can by no means be viewed as beyond the powers of this
state, and is a prize worthy of their public spirit, and utmost exertions to
see accomplished. -- Your memorialists therefore, cannot but entertain the most
sanguine expectations of the aid and encouragement of the Legislature in
prosecuting and completing the work.

By the estimates hereto annexed, it will appear, that in order to complete the
navigation upon a permanent foundation, through the distance of about seventy
miles (from the mouth of Tulpehocken on Schuylkill, to the mouth of Swatara, on
Susquehanna) there will be a deficiency of L. 308,000 -- but the trade which
may reasonably be expected through this immense communication with the Western
World, will amply compensate the public, as well as the individual
stockholders, for the capital stock to be employed in the work.

There are but two ways to raise this CAPITAL --

1. Either by enlarging the present capital by the increase of shares and new
subscriptions, on the terms of the act of incorporation; or,

2. By the company's negociating and obtaining an effectual loan.

A loan, in the opinion of the stockholders and agreeably to their resolutions,
at a meeting held to consider of the state of their affairs, is the mode they
would prefer; and therefore they have instructed the President and Managers to
pray the Legislature, and they accordingly pray --

For an aid in money to the amount of the said deficiency, or as much thereof
as the Legislature may think proper to grant, either by lending the same to the
company on interest, at the rate of six per centum per annum (the principal of
the loan to be advanced, by the state, to the company, in monthly instalments
of ten thousand dollars each;) or by the state taking an interest in the work,
for the speedy accomplishment of the same, to the amount of the deficient
capital, or such part thereof, as, in regard to the public emolument, they may
think meet; and that, in case the loan shall be granted as aforesaid, the
corporation engage to pay the same with interest, by instalments of not less
than fifty thousand dollars annually; the first instalment to be paid at the
end of twelve months after the work shall be finished, and the commencement of
tolls thereon.

That, as by the act of incorporation, although some parts of the said canal
navigation may be finished and in use, before the whole distance of seventy
miles can be completed; yet the Company are not enabled to receive toll for
that part, except at the rate of one dollar for seventy miles, or the whole
distance, which is only one cent and three-sevenths of a cent per mile; whereas
the Delaware and Schuylkill canal is allowed one-sixteenth of a dollar per
mile, whenever any part thereof is finished; and although a remedy is given for
this inequality by the sixteenth section of the act of incorporation, which
provides, "that the company may increase the toll, if it should appear that the
clear profits and income will not bear a dividend of six per centum per annum
on the whole capital stock of the company expended, in such manner that the
tolls will raise the dividend to six per centum per annum through the whole
length of the canal and navigation, and in proportion for each separate part
thereof;" Yet this remedy cannot be applied to any particular part, till at the
end of two years after the whole of the said canal and navigation shall be
completed. Your memorialists are, therefore, instructed by the stockholders
further to pray, and they do pray, That the Legislature will grant such toll
per mile, for any part of the canal that may be finished, as is allowed on the
Delaware and Schuylkill canal, under the same restrictions, for that part of
the canal so finished, as are provided in the said sixteenth section of the act
of incorporation, on the finishing of the whole canal.

By order and in behalf of the corporation, ROBERT MORRIS, President.

To the President, Managers and Company of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna
Navigation: The report of William Weston, Esquire. Engineer and Superintendant, etc.
Gentlemen,
PURSUANT to an order of the Board, made in April last, I have now the honor to
lay before you, a plan and estimate of that part of the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna canal, which extends from the east end of the summit level, to the
junction of the Tulpehocken with the river Schuylkill near Reading. Independent
of other circumstances, I purposely delayed the survey of the intended line
until autumn, as by that means I had an opportunity of viewing the creek in its
lowest state. My instructions directed me to explore the Tulpehocken, the
adjacent ground, and any other practicable course by which a navigable canal
might be made to the Schuylkill. I had conceived very sanguine hopes in favor
of the practicability of the latter mode; as I had been informed by persons
well acquainted with the face of the country, that there was a probability of
finding a more direct route to the Schuylkill, than by following the circuitous
windings of the Tulpehocken. But on a very attentive view I do not hesitate to
declare that it is impracticable to deviate from the course of the creek; which
from its source to its mouth is environed with hills, so as to render it
impossible to leave its banks at any considerable distance, as will be seen by
an inspection of the plan. One of the two remaining modes must therefore be
adopted, viz. a canal navigation totally unconnected with the river: or by
using the bed of the present creeks and making such improvements as they are
capable of. I have well considered every argument that has been advanced in
favor of, and every objection that has been made against, the latter mode.
After stating with as much perspicuity as I am able, the reasons that have
influenced my determination, I shall leave it to the Board to adopt that plan,
which to them appears the most eligible. The contest between river navigations
and canals is an old one. Many very plausible arguments have been adduced in
favor of the former, and until time had proved their fallacy they had much
weight, as may be conceived from the many fruitless attempts that have been
made in England to render navigable the river Avon, from Stratford to
Tewksbury, the Stour to the Severn, the Severn from Shrewsbury to Worcester;
the Irwel, the Kennet, the Mersey and the Thames from Crechlade to the tide
water; the last of which rivers has employed the abilities of the first
engineers for more than a century to no purpose; for after immense sums have
been expended upon it, it is now so imperfect as to be unnavigable six months
in the year. A collateral canal has been recommended as much cheaper, but the
prejudices of corporations, millers and land-owners has hitherto prevented the
adoption of this plan. The unerring test of experience has at length convinced
the warmest advocates for river navigations how inefficacious they are. (...)
have mentioned the above instances, as practical examples are more conclusive
than theoretical arguments. It should also be remembered that the danger to be
encountered in this country is much greater than in England, as the floods are
more violent and accompanied by ice in greater quantities. The usual method of
making rivers navigable is to throw dams across the stream in the most
convenient situations, and to build a lock in a collateral channel to enable
the boats to pass from one pond to the other. To obtain the necessary depth of
water, the bed of the river at the tail of each lock must be deepened; or the
water raised so much by the next dam as to effect the same purpose. In the
instance before us the former mode may be deemed impracticable, the bed of the
creek being chiefly solid work -- The latter is liable to the following
objections. To obtain the requisite depth, the water will be raised higher than
the adjacent meadows; to prevent their being overflowed an embankment must be
made which obstructs the natural drainage from the meadows. This may be
remedied by cutting a back drain to the tail of the next lock, but, in many
instances, it will be impracticable. These banks are liable to be destroyed
every winter by the floods if raised only to the height necessary to pen up the
water, as they will not be sufficient to confine the river in its bed at that
time: and if it overflows it will inevitably destroy them. To prevent this it
follows, that the banks should be raised sufficiently high, and of a proper
strength, to resist every effort of this powerful element. I am not so well
acquainted with the state of the Tulpehocken in the winter season as to assign
the just dimensions of these embankments, which will vary with the increase of
its stream by every new accession of water. But from the best information which
I have been able to collect, I have reason to believe they will destroy as much
land and be nearly as expensive as cutting a canal. And when every precaution
has been taken that human ingenuity can suggest they are in continual danger of
being destroyed -- and that these instances are far from being rare, the works
on the rivers I have beforementioned will evince, having been frequently swept
away. The lifts of the locks on the canal will be on an average seven feet; but
on the river it would not be prudent to make them more than four or five feet;
this circumstance by increasing the number of locks will add considerably to
the expense of execution, as the difference between a four feet and seven feet
lock is not so much as may be imagined. For the ease and conveniences of
hauling, and also for its stability, a towing path should be as little elevated
above the surface of the water as possible; but as in the most favorable
seasons the water will be continually fluctuating, it would be necessary to
raise it at least three times its usual height; and then it will be
considerably damaged every flood -- If the Tulpehocken was in a permanent state
it would be much less difficult to render it navigable; but its variations both
from natural and artificial causes being so great, it will be almost impossible
to assign a just proportion of fall and lockage, to acquire the opposite
advantages requisite in a summer and winter season. The above are the most
material objections that occur to me at present. The only argument advanced in
favor of river navigations is that they are less expensive in the execution.
What the saving may amount to in the case before us is difficult to ascertain;
but it will not be of any consequence when put in competition with the manifest
advantages of a canal navigation -- And the necessary annual repairs will, I am
persuaded, amount to as much as the interest of the principal sum, saved in the
execution. As far as my opinion will influence the Board, it is necessary to
declare, that taking every object into consideration, I recommend, as most
subservient to their immediate interest, and beneficial to the public at large,
the adoption of a canal navigation, independent of the Tulpehocken, except in
such instances as nature, or art, render it expedient to deviate therefrom.
These particular cases will be pointed out in the course of the annexed
description of the proposed line. Having done my duty, by declaring my opinion,
it only remains for me to assure the Board; that whatever their decision may
be, I shall execute their orders with as much alacrity as if my recommendation
had been adopted.

The plan herewith exhibited will give the Board a better information
respecting the appearance of the country; the direction of the canal and the
course of the Tulpehocken, than could be conveyed by words. The track of the
canal is shown by a red line, and though I may hereafter find it expedient to
vary therefrom, in some few instances, these variations will be so trifling as
not to cause any sensible alteration in the plan.

The water courses intended to convey the several springs into the summit level
of the canal, are distinguished by different colors, which the table of
reference on the plan will explain. In placing the locks, particular regard has
been paid to their situation and lift, so as to combine the double advantage of
suiting the ground, and affording the easiest communication with the divided
lands by bridges over the tails, which saves two hundred pounds in every
instance. In a first survey it cannot be expected that every local circumstance
can be comprehended -- I may hereafter see sufficient reasons to induce me to
make some alteration in their situation and lift; whenever that is done, it
will be from economical motives. The ground in Loy's plantation would have
admitted the lifts of the locks to have been ten feet, but as it would have
caused a considerable additional expenditure of water, I have deemed it most
eligible to fix them at six feet; and this has been continued until additional
supplies of water have justified increasing the falls of the subsequent locks.

The regular and uniform descent of the ground in the vicinity of the
Tulpehocken prevents us having locks of more than eight feet fall; as the extra
digging at the tail of each lock would be more expensive than the saving of an
increased lift. On account of the proximity of the hills on each side of the
Tulpehocken, the canal is obliged to keep very near the channel, and
consequently in the meadows; this circumstance makes it very unpopular with the
farmers; but it cannot be avoided, as any other course would enhance the
expense of execution infinitely more, than any consideration which will be made
for the land. In the following estimate I have been as particular and accurate
as the uncertainty of works of this kind will admit. I trust it will be found
that sufficient allowance has been made for the execution. In some instances I
may have overrated, and in others undervalued the contingent expense; but I
believe the average will be found very near what I have allowed it. Not to
depend altogether upon appearances to form a judgment of the quality of the
ground through which the canal passes, I caused it to be bored in every field
-- I found the strata generally the same, viz. black earth, clay of different
kinds, gravel and rock, on which the borings mostly terminated, but at
irregular depths from the surface, viz. from one to six feet. The rock in
general lies sufficiently deep from the surface to permit the canal to be cut
without interfering with it. When it lies near the surface, I shall cause it to
be accurately examined before the canal is set out, and shall regulate the
locks accordingly. -- It has been a common complaint, (and experience in
general has evinced the justice of it) that the estimates of most public works
have fallen considerably short of the sums afterward actually expended in
their execution. Whatever may have been the motives for these deceptions, they
have not influenced me. The following estimate, (though not greater than the
majority of the English canals of the same length have cost) would not have
been so high but for the unusual quantity of lockage, and the peculiar
disadvantages it labors under in being far removed from most of the necessary
materials, particularly stone and sand. However the execution will be as
economical as possible, as I shall let all the work by contract that can be
done with propriety.

The important article of lockage, I am well persuaded, will be found accurate.
-- Bridges, the next object, I am not so confident of, with respect to number.
I have allowed them in all places where I suppose them necessary, but perhaps a
jury may think otherwise. It would be advisable, in many cases, for the
company to purchase the land cut off by the canal, as it is very rarely worth
the expense of erecting a bridge, and very frequently not a fourth part. These
parcels of land if purchased and re-sold to the owners of the adjacent
plantations would save some thousand pounds. In the estimate, I have not
included the value of the land necessarily destroyed by the canal; this rests
entirely with the juries who have hitherto differed so much in their valuations
that no certain idea can be formed of it -- In the article of fencing there
would be a considerable saving by introducing the modern mode of towing path
gates, at the division of every enclosure.

The following description of the nature of the ground through which the canal
passes, aided by a reference to the plan, will convey as just an idea of it as
can be obtained by any other mode than ocular observation -- Beginning at the
line of Michael Loy the summit level is continued twenty-two perches to the
head of the first lock, between which, and Michael Loy's road, there will be
six other locks, of six feet fall each; at the tail of the seventh lock we
shall acquire a considerable accession of water by taking in two copious
streams which rise in the spring houses of Loy, and Spangler; from this place,
therefore, the canal may be considered as abundantly supplied with water at all
seasons. Leaving Leonard Immels and Michael Ramlers on the south, the canal
passes through the meadows to the west end of Bassler's milldam, across which
an embankment must be made for a towing path three hundred and twenty yards in
length, with a waste wear under it to discharge the superfluous water into the
mill-pond.

The tenth lock is intended to be placed at the road from Myers-town to
Lebanon, with a bridge over the tail. Leaving Myers-town about a quarter of a
mile to the northward, the canal passes through the lands of Simon Bassler, and
John Myers, to Valentine Millers, in very favorable ground; from thence to the
line of John Kuster is one continued rock in length forty perches: this part
will be very expensive; I have considered it in the estimate as cut through the
solid rock, but if on trial it should prove difficult to quarry, I shall bank
over it as the cheapest mode. Through the plantations of Kuster, Haag, Kreitzer
and Wolborn the ground in general is good. Through Sharf's plantation it will
be rocky, but, by adapting the fall of the proceeding lock to suit the level of
the ground, it may in a great measure be avoided. Near the great spring the
Tulpehocken makes a considerable elbow, as will be seen by the plan; the canal
is laid down as crossing the isthmus. Of the propriety of this route I am not
fully satisfied; the distance does not exceed twenty-two perches, but it is
composed wholly of rocks in distinct but large masses. To cut the canal through
these, and also a new channel for the Tulpehocken, will certainly be very
expensive. The next mode of execution is to carry the canal over the
Tulpehocken by means of two small aqueducts, and to bank across the isthmus;
another mode is to make use of the bed of the river, which may be rendered
navigable by erecting a dam at the second intersection, sufficient to raise the
water to the requisite height. The first plan is the most perfect, and the last
most economical. I am not now prepared to speak decisively on this point; but
before it is set out, I shall carefully examine the ground, and adopt that mode
which shall appear most eligible. From the great spring, no material obstacle
occurs till we arrive at Lower's mill-dam. Here there are two routs, the first
through the hill to the northward of the mill, the other by an embankment
through the dam; this last is the most preferable, as being much the cheapest.
In the estimate I have divided the canal into five districts, the first of
which terminates at this place. The length is six miles, four furlongs, and six
chains, and the fall one hundred and nine feet seven inches. From Lower's to
Lechner's mill, the ground is various in quality, but in general it is not
unfavorable. In many places it will be necessary to cut a new channel for the
river, as it frequently runs so near the hills as not to leave a sufficient
width for a canal and towing path; it will be unnecessary to specify these
instances particularly, as they will be shown more plainly on the plan, where
they are denoted by a blue line. At Lechner's, the canal will pass through the
hill between the mill and a small out building; at this place I propose to
contract the width of the canal to eleven feet, admitting the passage of one
boat only at a time; the length of this hill is twenty perches. From Lechner's
the canal passes through the plantations of Lantz, Read, Kortz, Brown, Sheafer
and Meyer, in favorable ground. The course of the canal through Debe's meadow
might have been more direct; but as the circuitous tract, laid down on the
plan, saves a bridge, it will be the cheapest. At Edge's it will be advisable
to make use of the present dams indeed there is no alternative, as the hill on
the west side, approaching nearly perpendicular to the water edge, precludes
every idea of making a canal in this place. All that is necessary here will be
to make a towing path elevated about three feet above the surface of the water,
that being the height to which the floods generally rise in the winter season.
This is the end of the second district, which is five miles, seven furlongs and
two chains in length; and the fall is fifty-four feet, eleven inches, divided
into eight locks. Leaving the mill-dam by the new race cut to the slitting
mill, the canal passes through the plantations of George Ege, Deppe, Lutz and
Clinger to Forrar's mill. From this place to the North hill creek, the ground
is very irregular in quality. In the wood belonging to Jasper Stump, the canal
crosses the North hill; at the time I viewed it, the stream was very trifling,
but from the appearance of its banks and the width of the channel, it must be
very considerable in the winter season. Until I am better acquainted with it I
cannot determine upon the most eligible mode of crossing it, whether by an
aqueduct or a tumbling dam. The latter will be the cheapest, but the most
inconvenient for the boats. The third district terminates here; the length is
six miles and seven furlongs; and the fall forty-eight feet, eight inches,
which I have divided into six locks. From hence the canal passes through the
plantations of Shomo, Stouch, Geis, and Dunder, to Stouch's mill. From this
place to Hiester's mill the ground is various in quality and irregular in
surface; a considerable portion is rock, the particulars of which will be
specified in the estimate. From Hiester's mill to Raebar's, the canal proceeds
in very favorable ground: at this place the river must be turned from its
natural course, which will be occupied by the canal. From Raeber's the line of
the canal runs through the plantations of Bon, Ruhl, John Raeber, to Read's
mill, near which the fortieth lock is placed. From Read's mill to the
Schuylkill, the ground on each side of the Tulpehocken, with very few
exceptions, is so extremely irregular and rocky, that on account of the
enormous expense that would be incident to a canal navigation, it will be the
most eligible mode to make the Tulpehocken navigable by means of dams and side
locks -- The ground on each side of the creek is well adapted to this purpose;
in most places it will require no banking, nature having already performed that
office; and in those places where the water will be raised above the surface of
the adjacent land, it is of so little value as to render the purchase of it an
object of little importance -- The length of this district, extending from
Hiester's mill to the Schuylkill, is eight miles, seven furlongs and four
chains, and the fall sixty seven feet, eleven inches. -- The total length of
the canal, from the east end of the summit level to the Schuylkill, is
thirty-four miles, one furlong and six chains; the fall three hundred and ten
feet, divided into forty-five locks.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble servant, WILLIAM
WESTON.
January 15 th. 1794.
General estimate of the probable cost of completing the canal from Schuylkill
to Susquehanna.
For the crown level from near Lebanon to Michael Loy's, nearly completed,
upwards of three miles, L. 40,000 0 0

Length. Fall. Mls. furlng. feet. inch. From the summit to Lower's mill, 6 4, 6
109 7 L. 54,233 0 11 Lower's to Ege's, 5 7, 2 54 11 30,575 7 1 Ege's to the
North-hill, 6 7, 0 48 8 30,819 2 3 North-hill to Hiester's, 5 7, 4 28 11 26,848
10 3 Hiester's to the Schuykill, 8 7, 4 67 11 43,894 15 6 34 1, 6 310 0 L.
186,373 16 2 Cost of land already valued, 8,051 0 0 Cost of land necessary on
the same estimate, 15,300 0 0 Ten houses for clerks and toll gatherers, 1,500 0
0 Supposed damages to lands, mills, water, etc. 4,700 0 0 Salaries, office hire
and incidental charges for all persons employed by the company for four years,
10,078 3 10 Whole cost from Lebanon to Schuylkill, thirty-eight miles, average
L. 7000 per mile, 266,000 0 0 From Lebanon to Susquehanna the difficulty will
not be so great -- thirty-two miles supposed to cost L. 6000 per mile, 192,000
0 0 Total valuation, L. 458,000 0 0 Sum provided for by law, 1000 shares, at
400 dollars, 150,000 0 0 Deficient and to be provided for, L. 308,000 0 0

One hundred and sixteen thousand pounds, a part of the sum deficient, will
complete the work from Lebanon to Schuylkill; when that part is finished the
company will draw a considerable annual toll. The citizens of the state will be
convinced that although this great work will be attended with considerable
difficulty, it can be surmounted so as to perfect a navigation from the eastern
to the western waters. For finishing the work from Lebanon to Susquehanna a
further sum of L. 192,000 is to be provided, making agreeably to the above
estimate, L. 308,000

But as the work from Lebanon to Susquehanna has not yet been laid out by the
engineer, L. 192,000 is mentioned as the greatest sum, supposing no part of the
bed of the Quittapahilla and Swatara to be made use of. But if, instead of a
canal navigation along the whole margin of the rivers, the beds of the said
rivers, wherever they can be made safe and permanent, should be adopted, the
expense may possibly be found less. This point will be ascertained during the
ensuing Summer.

Report of WILLIAM WESTON, Esquire, for the Year 1794. To the PRESIDENT and
MANAGERS of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna Navigation Companies.
Gentlemen,
HAVING received from the Secretary of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna, canal,
the request of the Managers for my immediate attendance on the committee, who
are appointed to state the present situation of their works, and a general
statement of their affairs; -- I have endeavored to supply them with every
information which the shortness of the notice would allow. It was my original
intention to have postponed my report until the close of the present year; but
the commands of the Board not permitting me to carry it to that time, I have
endeavored to anticipate, as accurately as possible, the probable state of the
works at that period. It must be understood, that the annexed details and
statements relate only to that part of the canal eastward of the summit level,
the operations of which commenced early in June; the previous expense of
day-wage, and some subsequent pieces of contract work on the summit, will be
included in Mr. Roberdeau's accounts herewith exhibited.

I flatter myself the progress made in the works, in the short space of seven
months, will prove satisfactory to the Board. On a careful comparison of the
actual state of the various works, and an ample allowance for the completion of
such parts as remain unfinished, with the previous estimate laid before the
Board in my last report, it appears, that from the east end of the summit level
to Michael Kreitzer's plantation, a distance of more than four miles and a
quarter, the actual expenditure will fall short of the estimated one at least
three thousand pounds. Though I would not wish to appear too sanguine, yet I
may be allowed to draw favorable inferences of the remainder of the line;
which, if realized, cannot be more gratifying to the Board than pleasing to
myself. -- Independent of this, I have well-founded reasons for asserting, that
the works will rather proportionably diminish than increase in expense, as the
important object of land-carriage will, after the ensuing year, in a great
measure be done away, by the canal being made subservient to that purpose. The
sand for the locks, bridges, etc. will be (from the approaching proximity of
the canal) delivered at the respective works for little more than half the
present cost; the same remark will hold good respecting the lime. Though the
average value of the bricks (reduced to statute size) will not exceed
twenty-four shillings per thousand, yet I must own I have been disappointed in
the quantity made the last season; the unfavorable state of the weather, during
the greatest part of the summer, has prevented the produce coming up to my
calculations; at the same time that the number has been diminished, the cost of
those actually made has of consequence been increased. From the difficulty of
procuring wagons to haul bricks, lime, sand, etc. I was under the necessity of
not employing half the number of bricklayers I had at first contemplated;
though, at the same time, more work has been done in four months than is
generally executed on most canals in one season. Five locks of six feet fall,
and two road bridges, are completed, and such progress made in the sixth lock,
and two more bridges, that a fortnight's work, in the ensuing spring, will
suffice to finish them. The whole of the works on the canal (excepting such
parts as it would have been imprudent to set) have been executed by contract,
and on such terms as I doubt not will be satisfactory to the Board. As the
subsequent statements contain the whole of the expenses incurred on the
respective articles to the present period, it is proper to observe that a
considerable portion thereof belongs to the next year's account; -- upwards of
a million and a half of bricks; hollow quoins for ten locks; coping for nine
bridges; and a considerable quantity of lime, sand, etc are now on hand, ready
for immediate use. The different works are classed separately; the amount of
these will not contain the whole expenses of the present year; there being many
accounts which could not with propriety be fixed to any article, others that
belong not solely to the present year, and others which I have had no
opportunity of seeing; but the accounts of Mr. Roberdeau and Mr. Beatty will
give the Board every information they may desire on this head.

I am, Gentlemen, With the greatest respect, Your obedient humble servant,
WILLIAM WESTON.
Lebanon, December 16 th. 1794,
Account of the number of bricks made for the use of the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna canal, and the attendant expense.
Digging of clay, 9785 cubic yards at 6 d. 7 d. and 8 d. per yard, L. 294 2 2
Moulding and burning, 1418 17 9 Tempering and ditto, 1042 12 6 Wheeling and
ditto, 724 3 5 Off-bearing, 346 6 5 Wood-cutting, 2388 cord of wood at 2 s6, 3
s and 3 s9 per cord 358 11 10 Labor of various kinds -- emptying kilns,
stacking the bricks,etc. 622 0 0 Hauling wood, sand, dust, etc. 391 19 1 Amount
carried over, L. 5198 13 2

Amount brought forward, L. 5198 13 2 998,699 bricks laid in the locks and
bridges. 72,065 ditto laid in the stop-gate, towing path, walls, etc. 1,419,236
ditto in the brick-yard. 106,000 ditto at the sixth lock. 204,000 ditto in
kilns, clamps, chimneys, etc. 2,800,000 Total, which reduced to statute size,
and some deductions made which do not belong to the brick account, will average
twenty-four shillings per thousand.

Brick-laying.
Laying 1,103,052 bricks in the five locks, bridges, etc. 987 19 4

Lime.
Burning 10 kilns of lime, at L. 12 12 s per kiln, L. 134 8 0 Cutting wood and
hauling, 99 5 11 7500 bushels of lime, which is equivalent to 7 per bushel, 233
13 1^

Sand.
Damages of land by digging, unbasing the sand pit, digging and loading the
sand, and hauling ditto to the locks and bridges, 281 16 ^ Three hundred and
sixty wagon loads have been delivered at the locks and bridges, containing
fourteen thousand four hundred bushels, equal to four pence half penny per
bushel. L. 6702 2 6

Cutting the Canal from the east end of the summit to Kreitzer's
Length -- 4 miles, 16 chains, Amount, L. 8526 13 2, viz. Chains, Links.
Through Loy's plantation, 46 25 876 7 3 Spangler's ditto, 20 51 369 11 8
Immel's ditto, 22 86 616 17 2 M. Rambler's ditto, 23 60 645 12 2 L. Rambler's
ditto, 16 50 498 6 9 T. Basler's ditto, 39 40 710 7 11 Myer's ditto, 41 50 1353
11 10 S. Basler's ditto, 18 50 522 6 4 Miller's ditto, 27 10 931 9 9 Kushter's
ditto, 19 40 606 0 0 Haag's ditto 30 90 746 9 8 Kreitzer's ditto 30 649 13 8
Total L. 8526 13 2

Amount brought forward, L. 8526 13 2

Stone-work.
Getting stone at the different quarries for the locks and bridges, L. 761 7 6
Hauling stone from the quarries to the canal, 189 15 0 Working and setting the
coping of the bridges, hollow quoins of the locks, 424 15 0 1375 17 6

Wagons.
Hauling bricks, lime, etc. from May 19th. to December 31st. L.186 4 7 Feed for
the company's horses, overseers' and waggoners' wages, 597 7 6 783 12 1

Lock-pits.
By order in favor of Samuel Galbraith for cutting 1st lock-pit, L. 56 1 3
Ditto ditto ditto 2d. ditto, 48 17 6 Ditto ditto ditto 3d. ditto, 48 17 6 Ditto
ditto ditto 4th. ditto, 48 17 6 Ditto ditto James Rannels 5th. ditto 137 16 6
Ditto ditto Samuel Galbraith 6th. ditto, 262 6 3 Ditto ditto John Fletcher 7th.
ditto, 97 17 9 Ditto ditto John Butler 8th. ditto, 120 0 0 Ditto ditto Thomas
Morris 9th. ditto, 72 7 6 993 1 9 Backing the five locks in Michael Loy's wood
to December 31st. 465 5 0 L. 12134 9 6

December 15 th. 1794.
A comparative statement of the expense of conveying twenty tons of produce
from Middle-town, on the Susquehanna, to the city of Philadelphia, by LAND and
by WATER carriage.
Water-carriage. Land-carriage. Miles. Miles. Schuylkill and Susquehanna canal,
say 70 From Middle-town to Philadelphia, 100 Schuylkill, from Reading to
Norristown, 46 Schuylkill and Delaware canal, 16 132

Toll on 20 tons of produce for N. B. Forty-six miles from Reading to
Norris-town, where the bed of the Schuylkill is to be used as a temporary
navigation, being taken from the whole distance of 132 miles, leave 86 miles as
above, for the canal navigation subject to toll.
86 miles of canal navigation, at 1/10 of a dollar per mile, L. 40 6 3 Hauling
20 tons 132 miles, 1 man 5 days, 1 5 0 Hauling 20 tons 132 miles, 1 boy 5 days,
1 0 0 Hauling 20 tons 132 miles, 1 horse 5 days, 1 10 0 Freight or hire of a
boat, 0 18 9 20 tons for L. 45 0 0 The present price of carriage from
Middletown to Philadelphia is 5 s6 per cwt. or for 20 tons L. 110 0 0

Or L. 2 5 0 per ton, Or L. 5 10 0 per ton. Or 0 3 11 per barrel of flour, Or 0
9 7 per barrel of flour. Or 0 1 2 per bushel of wheat, Or 0 2 11 per bushel of
wheat. The above produce is conveyed to market by 2 men, 1 horse. The same by
land requires 20 men, 18 horses,

AN ATTEMPT to ascertain the probable trade and consequent tonnage on the
Schuylkill and Susquehanna CANAL, [as referred to in the note at the bottom of
page iv of the Introduction.]
I. Taking the extent of country on an average width of 10 miles on each side
of the canal from Reading to Middletown, the distance being 55 miles by a
straight course, we shall have 1100 square miles, or 704,000 acres; and taking
each plantation at 320 acres, we have 2200 plantations. Supposing each
plantation to cultivate 40 acres of grain, at 10 bushels per acre, the total
produce will amount to 880,000 bushels, which, at 60 th. per bushel, gives
23,576 tons; and taking the average tonnage at half the length of the canal, or
35 miles, according to its various windings, it amounts to, at one sixteenth of
a dollar per ton per mile, L. 19351 19 4 Sum carried over, L. 19351 19 4

Sum brought forward, L. 19351 19 4

II. The produce of the extensive country bordering on the navigable waters of
the Susquehanna and its numerous branches, are at present very great; but in a
few years, from the natural increase of population, it will be so immense as to
exceed the bounds of calculation; at present we believe it may very safely be
estimated at 600,000 bushels or 16,071 tons, and as the distance is 70 miles,
the tonnage will amount to L. 1 12 9 per ton, 26366 9 8 III. Back carriage,
consisting of salt, groceries, liquors, and various kinds of European and
domestic manufactures; this we will estimate at one fourth of the above, or
11429 12 3 IV. The carriage of lime, timber for building, coals, firewood,
iron, stone, bricks, etc. will certainly be very great; but such as to render
it impossible to form an accurate idea of the amount; but taking it at the
lowest rate it may be estimated at one eighth of the two first articles, 5714
16 1 L. 62862 17 4

Exclusive of the above annual income, the stockholders will derive great
emolument from the seats for water works, of which there will be many from the
surplus water at the different locks within the grounds purchased for the
canal, and without damage to the mills erected on the lands of the adjoining
owners. It will also be a peculiar advantage, that from the situation of these
water works, all produce and manufactures, or raw materials, may be loaded or
unloaded directly, without the intervention of land carriage, to and from the
boats. The waters of the Tulpehocken and Quittapahilla are abundantly copious
to supply every demand for any purpose of this kind whatever. The above
calculation, at a dividend of 12 per cent. per annum, is equal to a capital of
L. 523,850; but, calculating the most moderate increase of population, the toll
will increase, even on this capital, one per cent. per annum; until it amounts
to the limitation, in the act of incorporation, and then the toll will be
subject to a reduction according to law.

Delaware and Schuylkill Canal.
This Canal is intended to answer the double purpose of forming a capital link
in the great chain of western navigation, from the Ohio and lake Erie to
Philadelphia, as well as for an abundant supply of wholesome water to all parts
of the city. The canal will connect the navigation of the Schuylkill with the
Delaware, and is carried on a level of 49 feet above the high water mark of the
Delaware, for about 16 miles to Broad-street; and from thence is conducted into
the Delaware above Callow Hillstreet, through six locks, the distance being
about one mile. The report of the deputy engineer states, that By a rough
calculation, which is by no means exaggerated, I find we have blasted with
powder and quarried, five millions four hundred and forty five thousand cubic
feet of rock, and have mounded up, between the towing path of the canal and the
river, a bank with the stone and rubbish, from 20 to 25 feet high from its base
in the river. We have made at our brickyard, last summer, about three hundred
thousand bricks.

At the lower end of the canal, in the vicinity of the city, through the
distance of two miles and three quarters, there have been two hundred and fifty
thousand cubic yards of earth and gravel and partly rocks, removed out of the
bed of the canal, and ten culverts built and completed.


one third of the work is finished, and that contracts are formed and forming
for a vigorous prosecution during the present year; and the committee with
confidence can assert, that a proper attention of the stockholders to the
punctual payment of the moneys when called for by the President and Managers,
will enable the Board to draw a toll for part of the distance in the year 1796,
and to complete the whole in three or four years.

The following estimate of revenue the stockholders may, with safety, calculate
on when the work is completed.
All the produce passing through the upper canal, and supplies returning must
pass through this canal; the estimate of the Susquehanna and Schuylkill canal
is fixed at L. 62,862 for 35 miles; the Delaware and Schuylkill draw the same
toll per mile in proportion to the distance, which will amount to L. 31,431 0 0
The probable toll, from the produce of the lands bordering on the Schuylkill
and waters thereof, not estimated in the above, will at least produce one half
the amount, 15,715 0 0 The canal passing for about 5 miles through a variety of
marble free stone and lime stone quarries, from which the city is supplied with
materials for building and ornament, will, by calculating the number of wagons
now employed in transporting those materials to the city, produce at least
15,000 0 0 Total L. 62,146 0 0

The stock of the company, as already subscribed, amounts to L. 150000, which,
from the costs of that part of the canal already cut, will be sufficient for
the completion of the work necessary for the transportation of produce; the
toll of which will amount, agreably to the foregoing estimate, to L. 62000 per
annum, making a dividend of upwards of forty-one per cent. but, agreeably to
the charter granted to the company, the toll is to be so reduced every ten
years, as not to afford more than a dividend of 25 per cent. per annum.

In addition to the L. 150000 subscribed, a further sum of about L. 50000 will
be wanting to complete the watering of the city, on which the stockholders, by
law, are allowed a further dividend of 10 per cent. per annum. This great
object is of such immense consequence to the health of the city, and to the
extinguishing of fires, that the citizens of Philadelphia will cheerfully pay,
for the use of the water, a sum more than adequate to the payment of the 10 per
cent. allowed by law.

In addition to the advantages already stated, great revenues may be drawn from
the application of the surplus water passing through the canal, which, from
Broad-street to the Delaware, affords a fall of near 50 feet. Dry docks are,
also, contemplated by the law, and will, when the resources of the company
become ample, be carried into effect.

Respecting the dimensions of this canal, it has been determined:

1st. That the width of the bottom be twenty feet.

2d. That the depth of water be three feet and an half.

3d. That the width of the canal be thirty feet and an half.

4th. That the width of the towing path be ten feet.

5th. That the towing path be not less than one foot above the surface of the
water in any place.

6th. That the locks be constructed to admit boats of sixty feet in length and
nine feet in width.

7th. That the descent of the canal be at the rate of two inches per mile.

(N. B. The new river canal, for conducting water to the city of London, has
three inches descent per mile, but this has been sound more than necessary, and
increases the expense of maintaining the bank.)

On the petition of the President and Managers of the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna canal company, the Legislature have been pleased to pass the
following supplement: --
A supplement to an act, entitled, "An act to enable the Governor of this
commonwealth to incorporate a company, for opening a canal and lock navigation
between the rivers Schuylkill and Susquehanna, by the waters of Tulpehocken,
Quittapahilla and Swatara, in the counties of Berks and Dauphin."
Section I. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted
by the authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful for the
President, Managers and Company of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna navigation,
when any part of the said canal and lock navigation shall be in use, to demand
and receive of and from the persons having the charge of all boats and vessels,
rafts of timber, boards, plank or scantling, passing through the said canal and
navigation, and the locks thereunto belonging, at the rate of one sixteenth of
a dollar, by the mile, for every ton weight of the burden of said boats and
vessels, to be ascertained as provided for in the act to which this is a
supplement, and in like manner one sixteenth of a dollar, by the mile, for
every hundred feet, cubic measure, of boards or timber, and the same sum, by
the mile, for twelve hundred feet, board measure, of boards, plank or scantling
in rafts, and in proportion for rafts of a greater or less size.

Section II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful, to and for the said President, Managers and Company,
to open a subscription, for such additional number of shares, in such manner,
and at such times, as they may judge necessary, to complete the said canal and
lock navigation.

Section III. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful, to and for the said President, Managers and Company,
if they shall think it necessary and for the interest of the said company, to
negociate and borrow, upon the credit of their capital stock and incorporation,
and the tolls and profits of the same, such sum or sums of money, from time to
time, as they may be able to procure, and shall deem expedient and necessary,
for carrying on and completing the said work.

GEORGE LATIMER, Speaker of the House of Representatives. WILLIAM BINGHAM,
Speaker of the Senate.

Approved, February the twelfth, 1795. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

APPENDIX.
IN a historical view, according to the order of time, the following papers
should have been inserted immediately after page 47 of the preceding sheets. As
soon as the subscriptions were completed, and the several canal companies
organized by an election of a President, Managers and other officers;
committees were appointed to lay off and level the proposed tracts of the
canals, and to report to the Boards of Managers.

The summit level, or middle ground, between the head waters of Quittapahilla
near Lebanon, and those of Tulpehockon near Myer's town, (a distance of about
four miles and a half) had been examined and levelled, about twenty-five years
ago, by a committee appointed by the American Philosophical Society, viz.
William Smith, D. D. then Provost of the college of Philadelphia, John Lukens,
Esquire, Surveyor General of the province (now state) of Pennsylvania, and John
Sellers, Esquire. The same ground was afterward examined and levelled, under
legislative sanction, by sundry skilful persons, and among others by the
celebrated philosopher and mechanic David Rittenhouse, Esquire, L. L. D. his
brother Benjamin Rittenhouse, Timothy Matlack, John Adlum, Esquires, and
others, all agreeing in the results of their work, respecting the proper tract
of the canal, for a junction of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna; -- extending
their prospects still further to the great plan now in operation, viz. the
junction of the tide-waters of Delaware with the Ohio and western lakes. But
the dark and distressing period of the revolution necessarily suspended all
improvements of this nature, in every part of America, until the glorious era
of the peace and independence of the United States, when they were first
resumed in the states of Virginia and Maryland, upon the Potomack, under the
auspices of the illustrious WASHINGTON, during his short recess from his public
labors; next in the state of PENNSYLVANIA, as set forth in the last page of the
Introduction to these papers; and speedily afterward, with a noble emulation
of public spirit, in most of the other states, according to their natural
advantages, as New York, Connecticut, Massachuset. the Carolinas, etc.

The company of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna navigation being (as above
mentioned) the first organized in Pennsylvania, a committee, viz. Dr. Smith and
Timothy Matlack, Esquire, were appointed to repair to the summit ground near
Lebanon, and finally to re-examine the levels, to ascertain the exact route of
the canal, the sources and quantity of the waters which could be brought to
supply the reservoir on the summit, and the locks at each end; with an account
of the lands and waters necessary to be purchased as the great basis of the
work. The same committee were also appointed to level and lay out the Conewago
canal, and finished their work in July, 1792. A committee was also appointed to
lay out and level the Delaware and Schuylkill canal, from Norris town to
Philadelphia, viz. Dr. Rittenhouse, Dr. Smith and Samuel Powel, Esquire. There
is a responsibility attached to the companies and their Managers, as well
concerning their own diligence as that of their committees, which is the only
apology for the mention of these appointments. But the President and Managers
did not think it proper to depend wholly on their own judgment, or the judgment
of their committees, in works of such magnitude and immense public consequence.
They, therefore, determined to engage one of the ablest engineers that could be
procured from England, to superintend and direct their works; and in the mean
while, that there might be no unnecessary delay, they commenced their
undertakings at such places, on the three canals, as appeared to them to leave
no room for the choice of better ground, or for any error which could
materially affect the work; -- the Schuylkill and Susquehanna canal under the
superintendance of John Bull, Esquire, the Delaware and Schuylkill canal under
Mr. Jonathan Robeson, and the Conewago canal under Mr. James Brindley.

Early in the month of January, 1793, arrived from London WILLIAM WESTON,
Esquire, the engineer engaged by the companies; a gentleman who had directed
the execution of some of the principal canals in England, whose great
abilities, activity and experience in all the branches of his department, have
merited and obtained the perfect confidence and esteem of the Managers; and
whose advice and assistance, which have been solicited and given as occasion
might permit, will be of the utmost importance toward the facilitating
improvements of a similar nature in the neighboring states.

After some necessary arrangements with the President and Managers of the
several canals, Mr. Weston, accompanied by one of the committee who had
assisted in laying them out, left Philadelphia February first, and proceeded to
that part of the canal begun at Norris town, arriving at Lebanon February
fourth. He found more than six hundred men at work, viz. upwards of two hundred
at Norris town, and about four hundred at the summit or middle ground, between
Lebanon and Myers town. The following abstract of his report made to the
companies on his return, gave them great satisfaction, viz.

"From such a view as the time and the season of the year would permit me to
take of the canal through the middle ground near Lebanon, I have little doubt
but the most favorable line has been adopted.

"The first and most important object is a due and adequate supply of water. I
judged it expedient to examine the various springs which are to supply the
summit of the canal, but not with intention to ascertain the quantity they
afford (this being an improper season for that purpose) but to view their
situation with respect to the summit level. It is very apparent they may be
conducted into the canal with great ease. The springs were lower than when
gauged last summer. It will be needless to say any thing further on this
subject, as Dr. Smith will deliver to the committee a calculation of the number
of lock-fulls of water they yield in twenty-four hours; which seems to have
been made with great care and attention. This I apprehend will be adequate to
the trade that may reasonably be supposed to pass over the summit, making
proper allowance for exhalation and leekage. Suppose the crown level 3 1/^;
miles in length, the extra depth 4 feet, the mean width 32 feet, it will
contain 2,365,440 cubic feet of water, which, at 3420 cubic feet to a lock,
will give 691 locks full.

"The Delaware and Schuylkill canal appears to be judiciously laid out, by
keeping as near the banks of the river as the nature of the ground would admit.

"The fault of this canal, supposing the dimensions perfectly right, as formed
by persons intimately acquainted with the state of the waters and the boats
navigable on them, I observe to be this, viz. that the proposed depth of water
being 3 feet, and the width at bottom 20 feet, the surface with the proper
slope should have been 30 feet, whereas I found it but 27, the angle of the
slope being 45 degrees; whereas the present practice is an angle of 33 degrees,
and the bottom and top as 2 to 3.

"The result of a conference with Dr. Rittenhouse, respecting the fall it may
be necessary to give the canal, in order to supply the city with water, will be
explained to the Board by Dr. Smith, together with other matters necessary to
be known, but which do not come immediately in my department.

"WILLIAM WESTON."

An abstract of the REPORT of Dr. SMITH, respecting the Schuylkill and
Susquehanna canal, so far as above referred to by Mr. WESTON.
"On Tuesday, February fifth, 1793, I accompanied Mr. Weston, from the main
body of the canal where the workmen were employed, to view the several springs
and waters at their sources and heights, from whence they are proposed to be
conducted to the canal at the summit level, and where they had been gauged by
Mr. Matlack and myself, as a committee of the company, in July last.

"Mr. Weston, in his Report, has stated to the Board the reasons of our not
considering it necessary to make any new estimate of the quantity of those
waters, and his present idea of their competency to a full supply of the locks,
"adequate to the trade that may be reasonably supposed to pass over the summit,
making the proper allowance for exhalation, oozing and leakage." He has
examined the calculations, and having given them his sanction, as appearing to
have been made with care and accuracy, I now report them to be entered among
the proceedings of the Board, as materials for the engineer to proceed upon,
and to be examined in other states of the water.

Estimate of the water and springs to supply the locks of the grand canal
between the water of Tulpehocken and Quittapahilla, at the rate of 3420 cubic
feet, to be expended in passing a set of locks.
Kantner's mill stream.
Breadth, Depth, Length, in inches. Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Time Cub. ft. pr.
day. Locks per day. 48x3,96x396 =75271,68 =43,61 in 17" =221641,44/3420 =64,5
or one lock full in 22 minutes.

Breckhill's spring and waters, measured at the road a little below the spring
house.
Breadth, Depth, Length, Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Min. Cub. ft. pr. day. Locks
per day. 43x5,41x396 =92121,48 =53,31 in 1" =76766,4/3420 =22,4 or about one
lock in 1 hr. 4 min.

Baylor's spring, measured at the road below his meadows, -- two thirds of the
water, which issues from the great spring near his house, being then spread
over the meadows or flowing in the water courses.
Breadth, Depth, Length, Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks.
24x3,1x396 =29462,4 =17,65 in 73" =20179,74/3420 =5,9; but if taken at the
spring head, and conducted in pipes or a trunk, without wasting, would yield +
11,8 locks, or 17,7 locks per day.

I. Punch spring, measured by making a dam at the spring head.
Breadth. Depth. Length. Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks.
141,6x5,38x396 =301675,968 =174,563 in 8" =31421,34/3420 =9,33 per day.

Punch spring, measured by making a dam at the spring head.
Breadth. Depth. Length. Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks. N.
B. The measurement where the dam was first made, being the lowest, it is
probable that the water had not risen to flow over the dam at its full height,
or to the same height which it had when the water was measured below. The mean
of both will give Locks.
10,5 9,33 11,16



Ditto, measured lower down, in the natural channel, without a dam.
Breadth. Depth. Length. Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks.
36,07x1,5x240 =12985,2 =7,514 in 17" =38188,8/3420 =11,16 per day.

Upper Punch spring.
Breadth. Depth. Length. Cub. inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks.
24x1,73x396 =16441,92 =9,55in 70" =10787,333/3420 =3,154 per day.

Martin Light's brook, or run, to be united with the two Punch springs, and
carried on the level of the lower Punch spring, to the reservoir.
Measured at a deep and wide place below a ford. Breadth. Depth. Length. Cub.
inches. Cub. feet. Cub. ft. per. day. Locks. Mean locks perday. 12,122
89,06x6,9x360 =221545,656 =128,2 in 4" 15" =43436,4/3420 =12,7 per day.
Measured at a shallowandnarrow place with greater veloc. 76,44x2,64x360
=72648,576 =42,042 in 1" 32" or 92" =3948292/3420 =11,545 p. Day. The amount of
the whole is upwards of 130 locks per day, which will ascend and descend 75
boats of from 7 to 10 ton each

At the season of the year in which these springs and waters were gauged, the
weather was extremely warm, the evaporation great, and many of them gauged
after having passed over large meadows. I have therefore no hesitation in
declaring, that the quantity given may be safely taken as rather under than
above the mean quantity, at the driest and warmest times of the year; and I
trust this will be verified by Mr. Weston's future examinations; and if any
deficiency should, upon an increased state of the trade, be found in the
quantity of those waters, it may be supplied, as I hinted in a former report,
by the introduction of Furnace creek, and even the Swatara and some of its
branches; and the increased trade will enable the company to make use of all
these auxiliary supplies when necessary. But, without these, Mr. Weston's
abilities, even with the present waters, will introduce constructions in the
locks, at a small expense, whereby one third of the quantity of water in each
lock may be saved, exclusive of the Reservoir on the summit level, which may be
constructed, according to his report, to contain 691 locks full of water, to be
accumulated by occasional rains at all seasons of the year, and by the natural
supply of the springs on such days as the number of boats, passing the locks,
may be short of the number calculated upon, which will probably be the case for
a long time to come.

WILLIAM SMITH.
" February 19 th. 1793."
RECAPITULATION.
MORE than two years have elapsed since the engineer delivered his first
report, approving the general plan of the works, as projected by the companies,
and in considerable progress before his arrival. His experience and labors
during that period, have fully justified the accuracy of the calculations, and
the easy practicability of all the projections. Upwards of fifteen miles,
including the work on both canals, commenced before his arrival, are in general
nearly completed or finished, with the necessary locks, and through the most
difficult grounds; a distance of more than four miles and a quarter of which,
were finished in about seven months of the last summer and autumn; the actual
expenditure on which fell short of the estimated one at least three thousand
pounds, -- yielding a favorable presumption, that, in the progress of the
works, the expense will rather be proportionably diminished than increased.
[See his reports for 1793 and 1794, particularly the latter, page 58 of the
preceding papers.]

Upon the whole, it appears demonstrably evident, that this grand canal
navigation (through a course of seventy miles distance, joining the Schuylkill
at the mouth of Tulpehocken, with Susquehanna at the mouth of Swatara, whereby
the carrying trade, between Philadelphia and the western waters of the Ohio and
great lakes, will be commenced and proceed in operation) may be completed, on
a secure and permanent foundation, for the sum of L. 450,000 But by the lowest
calculation of the trade which may, at present, be expected through this
distance of seventy miles (without estimating its immense future increase, by
the increase of population, through an extent of country of more than two
hundred miles square, whose waters will communicate with this canal) it would
yield a dividend of 12 per cent. per annum to the stockholders, which is equal
(see page 63) to a capital of L. 523,850 So that there would be a present
surplus of a toll of 12 per cent. (increasing annually) equal to a capital of
L. 73,850, beyond the capital necessary for completing the work. This surplus,
with a dividend of 12 per cent. yearly increasing, (setting aside for a moment
the incitements of public spirit) is certainly more than sufficient to incite
the most active perseverance in the great undertaking, and every effort of the
company to increase their capital to the amount, which, as stated above, is L.
450,000 Of this sum, the subscriptions of the stockholders, according to the
original act of incorporation, amount to 150,000 Deficient, about L. 300,000

There are but two ways of supplying this deficiency, as was stated in a
memorial to the Legislature, (see page 49) viz.

1st. Either by enlarging the present capital by the increase of shares and new
subscriptions, on the terms of the act of incorporation; or,

2d. By the company's negociating and obtaining an effectual loan; or, perhaps,
partly in both these methods.

But by reason of the large sums of money already invested in the various
stocks of this state and of the United States, such as banks, insurance
companies, roads, canal and other companies, and the growing demands of capital
for our increased domestic and foreign trade among our monied citizens; there
appears but little prospect either of obtaining a loan or an increase of shares
to any considerable amount among individual capitalists in this country, nor a
prompt payment of a considerable number of the shares already subscribed
according to law.

And although it might be possible, and perhaps probable, in the present
fluctuating state of property among capitalists in Europe, to obtain a foreign
loan, upon the ample prospects, which the magnitude of this undertaking holds
forth, of a speedy and secure return, either of the capital, or liberal profits
on the footing of stockholders; yet the length of time, and expense attending
the negotiation, would give a damp to the work, and occasion such a stop or
suspension of it, as would be dishonorable to the state and fatal in the issue;
considered not only as a check to our western population, and a grievous
prolongation of the time in which the present stockholders might expect some
returns for their money advanced, not to mention the bad policy of vesting such
a large proportion as two thirds of the stock and profits of so great an
undertaking, in the hands of foreigners; although one third might be prudently
vested in this way, while the state might hold the other third.

This distribution of the capital into three parts, the commonwealth and
original stockholders being invested with two, would undoubtedly secure the
raising of the other third part, upon an advantageous loan, or new
subscriptions for shares, either at home or abroad, and thereby likewise ensure
the speedy and complete success of the work.

The finances of the state are in a flourishing condition; and it is submitted
to the wisdom and feelings of an enlightened Legislature, to what nobler
purposes they can be applied (in part at least) than to the improvement of our
country, and the encouragement of arts and manufactures, even if no monied
return were to be expected, on the capital to be expended; for, can an interest
of 8 or 10 per cent. on the monied capital of a great commonwealth be
considered as an equivalent for suffering the improvements of a happy and
fertile country to languish and decay? But when it is considered that even in a
monied view, the stock to be (...) in the (...) of this canal will produce a
larger and more growing interest or dividend than can be contemplated on any
other species of stock, besides the additional interest, in point of revenue,
from an increase of population and of the wealth of our citizens, it is hoped
the Legislature "who have already put their hands to the plough (by the liberal
benefactions and grants which are stated below) will not look back," (...)
their former liberality to be lost to the public, by any abatement of their
(...) and encouragement.

Grants of public money for the improvement of roads and waters by the
Legislature of Pennsylvania.
APPROPRIATION of L. 5000 (part of L. 10,000 appropriated by a former act for
claims and improvements) yearly.

A sum, not exceeding L. 2500, shall be expended and laid out, under the
direction of Council, for clearing and making navigable certain parts of the
river Susquehanna, above Wright's ferry and the Juniata, and their waters, etc.
viz.

L. 1000 for clearing and making navigable the Schuylkill and its waters.

L. 1500 for clearing and making navigable the Delaware, Lehigh and their
waters.

Appropriations -- April 13th. 1791.

Rivers, viz.
For the river Delaware, L.3500 Lachawaxen, 250 Lehigh, 1000 Schuylkill, 2500
Susquehanna, from Wright's ferry to the mouth of Swatara creek, inclusive, 5250
From the mouth of Swatara to the mouth of Juniata, 300 From the mouth of
Juniata to the mouth of the west branch, 300 Amount carried forward, L.13100
Amount brought forward, L.13100 From the mouth of the west branch to Starucca,
at the great bend, 440 For the west branch of Susquehanna, from the mouth
thereof to the Sinnamahoning, 160 For the Sinnamahoning to its north branch,
200 For the north branch of the Sinnamahoning as far as the place called
Driftwood, 300 For the river Allegheny, from the place where the road from
Driftwood will strike the same, down to the mouth of Conewango creek, 150 For
French creek, from its mouth to the portage leading to Presqu' Isle, on Lake
Erie, 400 For the river Juniata, from the mouth to Water-street, 820 From Water
street to Franks-town, 1500 For the Conemaugh, from Stoney-point to Richard's
run, 400 From Richard's run through Chesnut-ridge, 2000 From Chestnut ridge to
Loyal Hanning, 400 From the river Kiskiminetas, to the second falls inclusive,
250 From the (...) to the river Allegheny, 100

Roads; April 13th. 1791.
From Stock Port, on the river Delaware, to Harmony on the river Susquehanna,
400 From Drift-wood, on the Sinnamahoning, to the river Allegheny, 460 From
French creek, to Presqu' Isle on Lake Erie, 400 Through the Canoe Narrows and
from Daniel Titus's to Poplar run 300 From Poplar run, to Conemaugh, 360 From
the forks of Little Conemaugh, to the mouth of Stoney creek, 180 For a road
from the town of Wilkesbarree, to the Wind Gap, 500 From Harrisburgh, through
the narrows, at the end of Kittatiny mountain and Peter's mountain, and from
thence the nearest (and best course to the place where it will intersect) to
the road leading from Harrisburgh to Sunbury, at or near Halifax, 600 From
Franks-town to Pittsburgh, 300 From Bedford to Pittsburgh, 500 From reading to
Sunbury, 300 From Bedford to the west side of Laurel-hill, 400 From the mouth
of Juniata, to David Miller's on the Juniata through Dick's Gap, 300 Through
the Long Narrows, 180 Through Jacks and Igows narrows on the Juniata, 120 From
near Catawessy, on the north branch of the Susquehanna, to Hamburg on the river
Schuylkill, 300 From York-town to Cooper's ferry, (to be applied between Muddy
creek and the said ferry) 100 From Fulton's ferry on the Susquehanna toward
Newport, 300 From Callender's mill over Croghan's Gap in the Blue mountain, to
West's mill, 200 Amount carried forward, L. 26420 Amount brought forward, L.
26420 Through the upper part of Berks county down to Schuylkill, 300 From
Keplinger's mill, on Little Schuylkill, to the Susquehanna, 300 Through
Nicholls Gap, over the South mountain, 250 From Middle creek, to Grubb's
furnace, 200 Through Black's Gap, over the South mountain, 100 From Buchanan's,
on the east side of the South mountain and through the Great Cove, to the foot
of Sideling-hill, 200 From Fort Penn, on the east side of the north-west branch
of Broadhead's creek to Wallenpaupeck, near the great falls, and from thence by
or near the Indian orchard, between the river Delaware and Shohocking creek, to
the river Susquehanna, 400

April 10th. 1792.
The moneys appropriated by the act of April 13th. 1791, for opening the road
from Poplar run to Conemaugh, and from little Conemaugh to the mouth of Stoney
creek, and also from Franks-town to Pittsburgh, are resumed and applied as
follows, to wit, From Franks town on Juniata, to Conemaugh, at or near Stoney
creek, the sum of 530 And the remainder, from Conemaugh, at or near the mouth
of Stoney creek, to the west side of the Chestnut ridge at or near Thomas
Trimble's, 310 From Bedford to Pittsburgh, to be laid and applied to that part
of the road between the east side of Allegheny mountain, and the west side of
Laurel-hill, 800 From the east side of Sideling-hill to the town of Bedford,
150 From Lehigh Water Gap, across the Matchunk mountain, to intersect the
Nescopeck road made by Evan Owen, 200 Through Shippensburgh Gap over the South
mountain leading toward York town, 200 Through M'Allister's Gap, to the Burnt
Cabbins, 300 From Hughes's incampment, at the foot of the Dry ridge across the
Allegheny mountain, 200 From Cherry's mill, on Jacob's creek, across the
Chestnut ridge, thence to the top of Laurel hill, etc. 200 From the west end of
High street, of the city of Philadelphia, through Blockley to the line of the
county of Delaware, 300 For Vandering's hill, Roxbury township, 300 From
Lancaster to Harrisburgh, beginning at the Bear, 500 From Shippensburgh to
Bedford, over the three mountains, 200 From Mount-rock, near Carlisle, to
Rankin's ferry on Susquehanna, 150 Across the Blue mountain at Smith's Gap,
between the Wind Gap and the Lehigh Water Gap, 200 From Peter's mountain, on
the east side of Susquehanna to Sunbury, (in addition) 150 Amount carried
forward, L. 32860 Amount brought forward, L. 32860 From Wilkesbarre or
Wyalusing or Mushoppen creek, and to intersect Ellicot's road at or near Tioga
point, 100 From Loyalsock creek, to the Tawanisco branch of Tioga, etc. 100
From Stock Port on Delaware to Susquehanna near Mushoppen creek, 100 Rivers;
April 10th. 1792. Monongahela, from the mouth thereof to the Virginia line, L.
1200 Youghiogeny from its mouth, to the mouth of Saltlick creek, 1200 Juniata
Rays-town branch, from the mouth thereof to Magaughey's mill, about three miles
above Bedford, and Dunning's creek from the mouth thereof to the Big-fork, 600
Total L. 36160

Note. These three sums, amounting to L. 3000, are taken from the sum of L.
4000 by the former act appropriated toward improving the navigation of the
Little Conemaugh; but the faith of the state is pledged to make good the said
sum of L. 3000 whenever the Governor shall be of opinion, that the navigation
of the Kiskiminetas and Conemaugh shall be so far improved, as to render the
navigation of Little Conemaugh a necessary link in the chain of water and land
communication between the eastern and western waters of the state.

Roads; April 11th. 1793.
From Philadelphia to York-town, through West-Chester, Dollars, 400 From M'
Call's ferry on Susquehanna, to the line of the Delaware state, by the way of
the cross roads, 300 From Prather's, on the top of Allegheny mountain in
Bedford county, through Berlin, to the west side of the Chesnut-ridge, 300 From
Spiker's, at the foot of the Allegheny, to Cherry's mill on Jacob's creek, 200
From Reading to Presqu' Isle, 1333 From Strasburgh in Lancaster county, to the
line of the state of Delaware toward Newport, 300 From the west end of High
street, Philadelphia, through Philadelphia county to the line of Delaware
county, 200 From Perkioming to the Swamp meeting house, 200 From Tohiccon to
the Spring Field meeting house, 200 From Brackenridge's, to the Northampton
county line, 80 For a bridge over Perkioming creek, 2300 For a bridge over
Clark's Creek and Powel's creek, and for a road over Peter's mountain from
Ayre's farm to M'Call's tavern, 720 Road over Black's Gap and a bridge over
Conegocheague creek, 300 Bridges over Conegocheague creek and Conedog^vinet
creeks on the state road from Shippensburgh to Bedford, 300 From Burnt Cabbins
to the east side of Sideling hills, 200 From Philadelphia to Sunbury (improving
and completing) from the Broad mountain to Titeworth's tavern, 800 Amount
carried forward Dollars, 8133 Amount brought forward, Dollars, 8133 Over
Trent's Gap in Cumberland and York counties, 300 From Carlisle to Sherman's
Valley to cross the north mountain near Hurley's Gap, 300 From Buffaloe hill,
in Greenwood township, to the mouth of Wild Colt run, 200 From Spiker's to
Cherry's mill, 300 From the top of Winding-ridge on the Maryland line, to the
west side of Laurelhill near Union-town, 500 From near the line dividing the
counties of Lancaster and Chester, on the northside of the Welsh mountain in
the Paxton road, and from thence to the road leading from Philadelphia to the
borough of York, 400 From M'Call's or Newberry's ferry, on Susquehanna, to
intersect the road leading from Yorktown to Peach bottom ferry, 200 From
Bedford to Pittsburgh, 500 From Franks-town to Pittsburgh, 500 From Wilkesbarre
to Wyalusing, 700 From Fort Penn to the portage between Delaware river and
Shohoking creek (in addition) 400 From Lehigh Water Gap, across the Matchunk
mountain, to intersect the Nescopeck road (in addition) 400 From George
Brown's, through the Little Gap of the Blue mountain, 200 Between Lewis town in
Mifflin county and Huntingdon town, 400 From Lewis-town to Penn's valley, 400
From Peach bottom ferry, on Susquehanna, to the Maryland line toward
Christiana, 500 Total, Dollars, 14333

L. 200. appropriated by a former law toward opening and improving a road from
Cherry's mill to the top of Laurel hill -- applied toward opening and
improving the road from Spiker's to Cherry's mill.

An act to enable the President and Managers of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna
navigation, and the President and Managers of the Delaware and Schuylkill canal
navigation, to raise, by way of lottery, the sum of four hundred thousand
dollars, for the purpose of completing the works in their acts of
incorporation mentioned.
WHEREAS the companies incorporated for opening a canal and lock navigation,
between the rivers Schuylkill and Susquehanna, and between the rivers Delaware
and Schuylkill, have, from the novelty of such extensive and arduous
undertakings, in a young country, experienced numerous difficulties beyond what
were ever contemplated by the Legislature, at the time of passing the acts of
incorporation, or by the subscribers to the said works, at the time of
subscribing thereto: And whereas large sums of money have already been expended
on the said works, and there is every reasonable expectation that a canal
navigation, connecting the eastern and western waters of Pennsylvania, may be
effectually completed if efficient funds can be provided for the same, to the
great advantage and increase of the agriculture, trade and manufactures of the
state at large:

Section I. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General Assembly met, and it is hereby enacted
by the authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Presidents and Managers, for the time being, of the said companies to raise, by
way of lottery, a sum not exceeding two hundred and sixty-six thousand, six
hundred and sixty-six dollars and sixty seven cents, to be applied to carrying
on the works of the Schuylkill and Susquehanna navigation, and one hundred and
thirty-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-three dollars and thirty-three
cents, to be applied to carrying on the works of the Delaware and Schuylkill
canal navigation. Provided always nevertheless. That nothing herein contained
shall be construed or held to authorize the said Presidents, Managers and
Companies, or either of them, to form the said sum or sums into capital stock,
or to consider them, or either of them, as any part of their capital stocks
upon which a dividend of profits can be made.

Section II. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
Presidents and Managers, previous to selling any tickets in the said lottery,
shall lay the scheme thereof before the Governor of this commonwealth, to be
approved of by him, and shall also enter into bonds to the Governor, for the
due and faithful payment of all prizes that may be drawn in the said lottery,
when the same shall be demanded, after the drawing of the said lottery shall be
completed.

Section III. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That as
soon as the said tickets shall be sold, the said Presidents and Managers shall
certify the same to the Governor of the commonwealth, and, upon such
certificate being presented, it shall and may be lawful for the Governor to
appoint five Commissioners to superintend the drawing of the said lottery,
which said Commissioners shall take an oath or affirmation, diligently and
faithfully to perform the duties entrusted to them.

Section IV. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
said Commissioners, or any three of them, shall attend at the drawing of each
day, and, when the whole is completed, shall cause an accurate list of the
fortunate numbers to be published, in at least three newspapers in the city of
Philadelphia, and the said Commissioners shall receive, of the Presidents and
Managers of the said Companies, two dollars each for each day's attendance on
the duties enjoined on them.

Section V. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all
prizes not demanded within twelve months after publication as aforesaid, shall
be applied as aforesaid to carrying on and completing the works of the said
companies.

GEORGE LATIMER, Speaker of the House of Representatives. ROBERT HARE, Speaker
of the Senate.

Approved, April 17 th. 1795. THOMAS MIFFLIN, Governor of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.




