A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED IN THE COURTHOUSE OF PRINCE GEORGE COUNTY, VIRGINIA;
ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4th, 1794.

BY JOHN JONES SPOONER, A. M. RECTOR OF MARTIN'S BRANDON -- FELLOW OF THE
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES -- AND HONORARY MEMBER OF THE
MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

PETERSBURG: PRINTED BY WILLIAM PRENTIS. M, DCC, XCV.

To EDMUND RUFFIN, Esquire, President; CARTER B. HARRISON, Esquire,
Vice President, and the other Citizens, who were assembled at the Courthouse
of this County, to commemorate the Independence of the United States, on the
4th of July, 1794 --
The following production, delivered under their patronage, and now published
at their request, is respectfully inscribed. Not doubting, it will receive the
same candor in the perusal, that attended the delivery; and with a sincere
wish, that it may in some degree promote, the temporal as well as eternal
interests, of those whose welfare is so dear to

The AUTHOR.
Prince George, Virginia, July 18, 1794.
"Mr. S -- laments that the patrons of the following discourse, have been kept
so long from the perusal of it: -- He can however take no blame to himself, as
the copy was ready for the press in August last. To explain the reasons of this
delay would lead to a discussion, by no means pleasant. It being now placed
with a printer who will fulfill his engagements, he trusts it will soon be in
their hands."

APRIL, 1795.
A DISCOURSE ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.
THE respectable appearance of this crowded audience, and the animated joy
which I discover in the countenance of this assembly, hasten me my friends, to
congratulate you, on the return of this anniversary. Permit me, on this
occasion, to bespeak your candor for the part I am to act, and to request your
attention to the observations which may be made, from the words which are
recorded, in the 98th Psalm and 1st verse: "O sing unto the Lord a new song,
for he has done mavelous things, his right hand, and his holy arm, has
gotten him the victory."

In these words, the Psalmist acknowledges the deliverance of Israel, to be
peculiarly owing to the smiles of Heaven, and thereby he is led to ascribe the
glory to the Supreme Being, and to sing praises to his name. I propose from
these words --

1st. To make some observations on the general government of an Almighty Ruler,
this will clearly discover to us, the duty of gratitude and praise to him, for
any mercies received as a people.

2dly. To endeavor to show, that the only way for a people to secure to
themselves the Divine superintendance and blessing* is by the universal
practice of holiness and virtue: -- And then I shall apply myself, more
immediately to the design of our present meeting*

1st. I am to make some observations on the general government of an Almighty
Ruler, this will clearly discover to us, the duty of gratitude to him, for any
mercies received as a people.

We are all of us impelled by that vanity which rules in the breast of man, in
a time of prosperity and success, "to sacrifice to our own skill, and burn
incense to our own valor." In the tumult of self-applause, we exclaim in the
language of an ancient King, "By the strength of my hand, have I done it, and
by my wisdom for I was prudent."

The Almighty Governor of the universe, claims it as a prerogative annexed to
his royalty, to govern all the events that take place; "To do his pleasure in
the armies of Heaven above, and amongst the inhabitants of this lower world" --
He sends war, and he creates peace. He saves and he destroys. This
government and superintendance of the world, is but the exercise, of those
perfections, which are inherent in him* and the necessary and certain
consequence of those essential attributes, which properly belong to Deity. Else
why do we so often see the finger of an Invisible Being, deeply imprinted on
the affairs of the world; unless we suppose those perfections, and those
attributes, are exerted to govern this immense system and to preserve the order
and harmony thereof?

We cannot presume with any reason, or propriety, that a Being infinitely
great; in possession of the most glorious perfections, all powerful and all
wise; can remain without any concern in the management of the world* and an
indifferent spectator of the mighty scene. The rise and fall of empires, the
revolutions of states and kingdoms, the desolating miseries attendant on a
state of warfare, and the inestimable advantages that flow from a peaceful
situation, are of too high consequence to be unnoticed by him, and left to the
operations of time and chance.

Even the lowest works of his creation are (...) the notice of his all
inspecting eye, nor of too little consequence to feel the influence of his
governing hand: For whatever is worthy of his creative power and goodness,
cannot be supposed undeserving of his providential dispensations. The ancient
epicurean sect of philosophers, had an opinion, as idle as unfounded,
respecting the Supreme Being: They supposed that the greatest happiness
consisted in freedom from care and pain; and of course that if he interfered in
the management of human affairs, and was so attentive to the concerns of his
creation, it would disturb his divine composure and felicity; be unworthy of
his dignity; and render him less happy than the meanest of his creatures. But
this idea arose from very dishonorable conceptions of the Deity; by comparing
the infinite nature of the divine mind, with our finite and limited capacities;
and without considering the immeasurable distance between the creature and the
Creator. Vain man! who boasts of being lord of the creation; reflect what thou
art, and whence thine origin: But a mere atom in the universe, sprang from the
dust on which thou treadest -- compared with creation, small as the insect
which floats in the sunbeam. Reflect and believe that the same Almighty Power
which first produced this stupendous fabric* still preserves and governs it;
together with the myriads of beings, which inhabit therein -- pretend not then
to set limits to the inscrutable ways of Providence, or to bound his universal
government; "Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection?" It is so obvious to an impartial observer, in many
instances, "that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong*"
that every unbiassed mind must acknowledge the influence of a superintending
Deity, that if he had not in a mavelous manner interposed, events would have
terminated in a very different manner.

Human reason stands confounded at the means by which his purposes and designs
are often accomplished. We calculate upon measures that have been heretofore
prosperous; we anticipate success from our wise and prudent efforts; and in
imagination behold the triumph of our boasted schemes, and the full completion
of our fond expectations. Soon these airy dreams are necessitated to give
place, to affecting realities; the fallacy of our short-sighted calculations
are visible; unwillingly we acknowledge the weakness of our mental powers; and
are ready to allow, "that there is a God who judge in the earth." In order to
effect the wise purposes of his government, HE gives resolution, firmness and
valor, to the weak, pours contempt upon princes, and reduces the strength
of the mighty.

The hearts of all are in his hands, and are so disposed by him, as to answer
his designs, and to bring about the ends of his administration. The politicians
of the world, the great and the wise amongst mankind, cannot accomplish any
thing against him, "who is wonderful in council, and excellent in working:"
Their wisest measures are disconcerted and their most prudent and favorite
schemes, are laid low in the dust -- thus does he defeat the fallible councils
of men -- thus does he prove the uncertain dependence on human efforts. All
human power and finite causes are limited in their effects also, by him who
governs all things -- "Hitherto shall thou go and no further;" is a language
that becomes none, but the God of Heaven. In vain do the men of the world,
project schemes of ambition and conquest -- In vain do they pour forth their
mighty men for the battle -- In vain do they make their immense preparations.
If God sees fit to counteract the tendency of their exertions, and to deny them
success; they will end

-- "like the baseless fabric of a vision,
And leave not a wreck behind."
This view of the providential dispensations of the Almighty, discovers to us
the propriety of the Psalmist's ascribing the glory of the deliverance of
Israel to him, and singing praises to his name therefore. It is a duty, which
addresses itself to the interests and feelings, of individuals and a people;
when they are successful in their just undertakings, when relieved from any
impending calamities, and when established in the enjoyment of any blessings,
should thankfully acknowledge the goodness and kindness of that Omnipotent
Being -- whose right hand, and whose holy arm, has been extended in their
favor.

I now proceed to show, 2dly -- That the only way for a people, to secure to
themselves, the Divine superintendance and blessing, is by the universal
practice of holiness and virtue.

It has been an observation handed down from the days of Solomon, and all
experience has confirmed the remark that "righteousness exalts a nation, but
sin," or prevailing vice, "is a reproach to any people." As naturally as a
proper regimen conduces to the health of the human body, does the exercise of
the christian virtues contribute to the welfare of the body politic; so on the
other hand as certainly as an unrestrained indulgence of appetite and passion
will produce the dissolution of the corporeal system; so also will vice and
luxury inevitably prove the ruin of any nation.

In a conformity to the Universal Father consists the happiness of the rational
creature. That temper, and those manners which most resemble his, will render
happy an individual, and the universal exercise of the same will render us
collectively happy.

The history of every age of the world, will show the connection between an
unfeigned practice of virtue and piety, and the general prosperity; as well,
that disobedience to the Divine laws and commands will bring down as a
necessary consequence, the just judgments of an incensed Deity. To the
posterity of Abraham was promised, on the condition of their "hearkening unto
the voice of the Lord their God, to do his commandments;" all the success and
happiness they could desire individually or socially -- "Blessed shall thou be
in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the field, blessed when thou come
in, and when thou go out -- The Lord shall cause all thine enemies that rise
up against thee, to be smitten before thy face." As long as Israel continued to
obey the laws of their God, they were a prosperous and happy people. "Happy
were thou O Israel, who was like unto thee O people, saved by the Lord, the
shield of thy help, and who was the sword of thine excellence." But mark the
reverse! It is a solemn warning, recorded for those, who should succeed in
future times.

When they rebelled against the God of their salvation, when they swerved from
their duty to their Maker, calamities grievous to relate, miseries of the
greatest kind and degree, were their bitter portion; the fatal effects of
which, have continued even to the present day.

We find the prosperity of nations in every successive age, has been
proportioned to their attention to the laws of the Great Governor of the
universe: -- Even amongst the Heathens (who were ignorant of the true nature of
God,) their public affairs were prospered, according as they observed the rites
of their religion, for these had a tendency to preserve within due bounds,
their tempers and passions, to heighten their morality, to increase their
moderation and temperance, and thus to render them, more worthy of the Divine
favor. At no period of their existence, were the ancient republics of Greece
and Rome, so flourishing and so successful as when they practiced most
assiduously those duties which their religion (erroneous as it was) enjoined
upon them.

Is it not then, of the highest importance to us, as individuals wishing the
smiles of Heaven upon our personal affairs; as members of a community* for
whose general prosperity our ardent aspirations ascend to the Great Lord of the
system; that we are found in the practice of all the virtues which can dignify
and adorn human nature, which will render us great and good as men and as
citizens, and which shall lead us to the enjoyment of eternal glory in a future
world? Struck by that monitor within; let us each make a solemn pause, and ask
in sincerity our own hearts. -- Do we possess and practice the true principles
which our holy religion inculcates? Do we reverence the Great God, whose
almighty fiat spoke us into existence, and at whose nod the nations of the
earth rise or fall? Do we humbly supplicate the pardon of our sins, through the
intercession of the Atoning Sacrifice, and also for needed mercies? Do we offer
up our sincere and thankful acknowledgments for any mercies received? And do we
endeavor to lead lives void of offense, toward God, and toward man?

If upon serious reflection, we find this is not our case, then may we be
assured that the divine benediction cannot follow us, and that we are
accountable in our proportion, for all the ills that may befall our land. "But
if our hearts condemn us not, then we may have confidence toward God our
Father: And were this universally our truly acceptable condition* we might
assuredly look for blessings from above; then we might anticipate the joyful
sight of a profusion of excellencies to be showered down upon this inheritance;
our American "Israel shall then dwell in safety alone: The fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; his Heaven also shall drop down dew." I
shall now apply myself more immediately to the design of our present meeting in
the application of the subject.

Whoever reflects on the great revolution which we at this time commemorate in
the commencement, progress, and final completion of it; will clearly discover,
the marks of that right hand, and that holy arm which gave us the victory.
Whilst the wonder and admiration of the world, is raised hereby, methinks it
cannot fail to excite religious sentiments in every serious mind, and animate
the devotions of every pious breast. Surely it will have the effect, upon those
who are so deeply interested in the event as this assembly, and the people of
these States, to sing unto the Lord, new songs of gratitude and praise.

Obliged by repeated and unprovoked attacks upon our rights as men, to stand
forth in the defense thereof; and at length "to jeopard our lives in the high
places of the field;" relying still on the justice of the parent state for
redress of injuries received; and still brooding with eager fondness over our
former friendships; none wished to dissolve a connection which heretofore had so
happily subsisted; (but on the contrary, it is within the recollection of many
now present how anxiously we supplicated the God of Heaven, that the hearts of
our brethren might be again turned toward us:) none even then ventured to
anticipate the memorable era we now celebrate, or dared "to cut the gordian
knot," which linked us to an unnatural parent.

Roused at last by repeated provocations; thrown from the protection of her
arms; whole hosts of mercenaries transported from the plains of Germany, and
landed on our shores in hostile array -- In the face of these dangers untried
and unknown, confiding in the smiles of Heaven, upon our righteous cause, did
the august fathers of our land, as on this day, "lay the perpetual foundations
of peace, liberty, and safety."

Welcome, auspicious day! we welcome thy return: And may this anniversary
continue to revolve, rich laden with additional blessings to the people of
these States; 'till time itself shall be lost in the ages of eternity, and the
Prince of Peace shall reign triumphant.

The wonderful train of consequences which succeeded this event, and which
finally terminated in the establishment of our independence, could only be
foreseen, by that Being, whose providence is a "wheel within a wheel;" and
whose eye pervades the universe at once. The superintendance of that Being, it
becomes us thankfully to recollect, and gratefully to acknowledge; for we can
now look back, on the dangers we escaped, the hazards we encountered, and the
difficulties we struggled through, with the pleasing reflection, that by his
holy arm, and his right hand, he has gotten us the victory. Permit me to
enquire, my friends, when unaccustomed to the reports of battles, and of fellow
citizens slain; what were your feelings, when first you heard the alarms of
war, and received the tidings of your brethren slaughtered, on the plains of
Lexington? What were the dire sensations of your souls, when you saw your first
maritime town wrapped in flames, and heard the sound of contending armies? A
recollection of these, will carry your minds, through all the eventful and
dubious periods, of the arduous conflict -- The storms and sunshine, the glooms
and brightness; the doubts and hopes; that alternately succeeded, through a
long and tragic war. You will thence be led to contrast the present happy and
flourishing state of our country, with that trying and distressing season; and
be induced thereby to offer up the songs of gratitude to the Great Jehovah,
that such afflictive scenes are passed; and also for the measure of tranquillity
we now enjoy, while the eastern hemisphere is rent with destruction; involved
in misery and bloodshed.

It is a remarkable circumstance in the history of the revolution, that the
most important and interesting events, on the part of these States, happened
each at the very time, when their prospects were most gloomy and most
distressing. This was so evident* that the annals of mankind previous thereto,
will perhaps be unable to produce a parallel instance. It appears as if the
Almighty intended hereby, to stamp irresistably on the minds of all, the
clearest conviction of a Superintending Providence: and that if he had not
wonderfully interposed with his holy arm* we had been reduced to misery and
ruin. One particular instance which cannot be passed over, occurred within this
State and your own knowledge. When the boasted conqueror of provinces, the
pride of Britain; who had carried desolation and distress through the southern
States, and was ravaging this part of the Union, bearing down all opposition
like a mighty torrent, producing sad scenes of ruin, in his extensive progress;
you well remember how pitiable your condition* how gloomy and distressing the
prospect: Yet all his boasted success, did but prepare him for a more signal
reverse, and in the end, heighten and grace our triumph. By an happy and
well-timed exertion, this desolating army was compelled at yonder town, to
resign themselves and all their implements of war to the allied forces of
America and France; and all their vaunting boasts, of provinces conquered by
their arms, vanished like the morning cloud, or like the early dew.

That memorable siege will long hold a place in your memory; as it delivered
you in particular from the ravages of an incensed foe; and no doubt many of you
were personally engaged in the toils and dangers, the success and triumph of
it; and this remarkable event was probably an influential mean, in giving peace
to our country, and establishing her independence. The important events to
which I have only referred, show with how much reason and propriety, we may use
the language of our text; and the propriety of adopting it, will appear in a
still more forcible light, if we reflect on the goodness of Heaven in
disappointing the secret arts, and treacherous designs of our internal enemies,
and notwithstanding the combined attempts of open force, secret treachery, and
false pretended friends; enabling us to struggle through every difficulty,
leading us to an honorable treaty, and giving us a place amongst the nations of
the earth.

Since the acknowledgment of our independence; our land has been generally
prospered under the smiles of Peace, that meek eyed deity -- Hail Heaven
descended visitant! Long may thou still wave thine olive branch, over this
highly favored land; long may the dogs of war be fast bound in chains, and not
let loose to fill this hemisphere with havoc and destruction. But, my friends,
such is the pride and ambition of the human heart, such the lust of plunder and
domination, that rules in the courts of Kings and Princes: that we must not
always expect to be free from those baneful ills, which their avarice and power
have spread over the face of the earth. We must not imagine that we have "put
off the harness," and may indulge in ease and security; but are yet to use the
means in our power, (under the auspicious influence of Heaven.) to place
ourselves in a posture of defense. For the despots of the earth, have long
viewed us with a jealous eye; and perhaps upon the final success of their
present attempts on the Rights of Man in the eastern world, depends the peace,
the safety, the independence of these States. In this event; which however I
trust the God of Heaven will never permit, for surely he must look down, with
an approving eye, upon the wonderful efforts of his offspring, for the recovery
of their long lost rights: -- In this (I say) or in any event, we should be
prepared for the last resort, and be ready to play the man, for the cities of
our God. To this end, a firm and indissoluble union of the states, is
indispensably necessary; and let not the black design of a separation, be ever
harbored in the breast of any American; for in this case, it does not require
the spirit of prophecy, to predict the fate of unhappy Poland Poland, which is
empa^ically styled the ^ranary of Europe, has been subjected to two partitions
from the neighboring powers; each taking to itself those provinces, which best
suited their convenience; in virtue of superior force, without any regard to
the sentiments or dispositions of the inhabitants. A fatal example.
to these States. Next to this, it is essentially necessary, to be in a state
of military preparation: No people in in the present situation of the world,
can long support their rank and independence without a military force of some
kind, a standing army or a well disciplined militia. The former has eventually
been the bane of Republics, in every age and in very clime. Witness, ye
Republics, who once were free, now doomed to to suffer the extreme of
despotism. With such as these, usurping Caesar passed the Rubicon -- With such
as these he humbled the mighty commonwealth of Rome, and forced the Mistress of
the World to own a Master in a Traitor. And these are the men, whom the
sceptered monarchs of the east, are now employing to frustrate the designs of
God to man, and reduce again to the dominions of a tyrant, millions of people
who have never injured them.

A well disciplined militia will afford you ample security against any attack.
It is the most natural resort, in a community like this, whose inhabitants are
by nature brave, and are laudably tenacious of their freedom. From this you
have nothing to fear; their interest is the same with the State. When a country
is invaded, they are ready to appear in its defense. They march into the field
with that fortitude, which a consciousness of the justice of their cause
inspires; they fight for their houses, their lands, their wives and their
children, for all who claim the tenderest names and are held dearest in their
hearts; they fight for themselves, for their liberty, and for their God. But,
my friends, bravery without arms, is of no avail* numbers without discipline,
will never defend a country. Permit me then to impress on the minds of all who
hear me, the absolute necessity of your being well armed, and well trained, to
your own safety and the security of your independance.

To you, my respected friends, in particular, the Officers The Officers of the
brigade Cavalry and Artillery, and also of the 62d regiment of militia, were
then present, having marched thither in procession.
of the militia now assembled; to you, with all deference and respect, would I
now address myself in a few words. (Nor do I depart from the line of my duty,
whilst I endeavor to inculcate a disinterested love of our country, with which
is connected its defense; for this has been held in high estimation, by the
wise and good in every age; and I trust it is in perfect consistence with the
genius of the gospel.) To you is committed the sacred deposit of disciplining
the militia, agreeable to the laws of the land. Upon your exertions in this
important trust, depends (under Providence) the safety of our common country.
Guard the deposit with an anxious care. Let your exertions be such as shall
redound to your own honor, the welfare and security of the land of our nativity.

And this will best be done, by a prompt and ready obedience to the orders of
your superiors in command; by carefully and diligently instructing in the use
of arms, those who are placed under your care; and by a firm but temperate
execution of the laws. Your trust is too important (independent of the
solemnity of the oath you are under) to be frittered away in useless ceremony
or idle parade; nor can it be expected by any one, that you will permit the
time which is appropriated to improvement in martial exercises, to be thus
expended. You will seriously reflect, that if in the course of the
dispensations of Providence, you should be called to the defense of your
country, the lives and limbs of those under your command are in your hands;
that they will depend (in a degree) on your skill in your profession, on your
knowledge in tactics, on a proper display of your bravery or conduct according
to existing circumstances.

An Officer with these impressions on his mind, will studiously cultivate the
essential parts of his duty; nor will he give himself leisure, till he becomes
acquainted therewith. He will strive by every method, to induce those who are
under him, to be properly and completely equipped, and to submit to temporary
inconveniences for the sake of permanent advantages to themselves and their
country.

Methinks I may congratulate my fellow-citizens on the rapid improvement which
I observe to be spreading amongst you. May it continue to increase, till this
palladium of our security shall be established upon the most respectable
footing, and be fully equal to our complete defense. Pardon me, my friends, for
this digression; the anxious concern I feel for the welfare and happiness of my
country, must plead an apology for the liberty I have taken.

I have the most animating confidence that the cloud which at present hangs
over us, will ere long be dissipated; and that these unfortunate prospects will
terminate honorably for America. But it is an incumbent duty, to use the means
which Providence has placed in our power, to be prepared for whatever may be
the issue of this important crisis, and humbly commit our righteous cause to
the great Lord of the Universe.

Having by every just and honorable mean, endeavored to preserve the
inestimable blessing of peace; should we be forced into the war which now
desolates the fairest countries in both hemispheres, we can appeal to Heaven
for the rectitude of our intentions; we can justly look to him "who resides on
the Heavens," for a benediction on our arms, and I trust our united efforts
shall be crowned with success.

To conclude -- As the revolution we now commemorate, has been rendered a
distinguished blessing, by the advantages which have resulted to the world
therefrom, and which may still be expected; so may the citizens of these States
never show themselves unworthy of those favors which the kindness of Providence
has bestowed upon them, and placed within their reach; but by improving them
to the best of purposes, and by the practice of the virtues of christianity,
may America rise to the most exalted height of felicity and greatness, and long
continue the feat of freedom and of arts, a refuge to the persecuted and
distressed of every nation.

Finally -- As we, my friends, have assembled THIS DAY, to commemorate the
great events I have hinted at; let it not be tarnished by any discordant
passions operating on your minds; let nothing unworthy this memorable day,
interrupt the harmony which ought to prevail -- But throwing aside all party
piques, and private quarrels, as inconsistent with the design of our meeting;
like a band of brothers united in our country's cause, let each of us strive to
add to the pleasure and to the happiness of it. And may the eternal God, from
Heaven, look down with approbation on our conduct, and bless us personally and
as a people.

And now unto the King eternal, etc.


