REMARKABLE NARRATIVE OF MARY SPAULDING, DAUGHTER OF Benjamin Spaulding, of
Chelmsford.

SHE has been visited with frequent Sicknesses, and obtained remarkable
Recoveries; and the whole Account is taken from Records kept by herself, and is
now submitted to the Public.

The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and
brings up; he brings low, and lifts up. --

1 Samuel ii.6, 7. BOSTON: Printed and sold by MANNING and LORING, in
Spring-Lane. -- 1795.

PREFACE.
THE following Narrative cannot, we conceive, be injurious to any person, and
to many it may be useful and edifying. The simplicity and frankness with which
it is given, ought to be numbered among its recommendations.

The regular and respectable family to which the young woman belongs; and the
wishes of her connexions, claim our attention, and induce us to give these
testimonials. Her life and conversation well agree with her Christian
profession. The bodily disorders under which she has labored, and the
exercises of her mind, have at times been very powerful and violent: But under
every calamity she has been remarkably patient.

It is not incumbent on us at this time to trace the efficient causes of her
illnesses and recoveries, nor to give any direct testimony with regard to her
mental exercises; but to afford such evidence to the truth of her narration as
lies within our power. And we are willing to embrace this opportunity to
affirm, That the account which MARY SPAULDING gives of herself well corresponds
to our own observation in cases within our knowledge, and with the declaration
of the family and neighbors in other instances. But with regard to her
exercises of mind, we do not pretend to determine. These lie beyond our reach.
She must stand or fall before her own Master. But from the character she has
sustained, and from conversation with her, we are led to believe that she is a
person of real piety, and that she means to speak the words of truth and
soberness.

We hope this narrative will answer all those good effects which it is designed
to produce, and that she will enjoy the favor and blessing of God, in whose
hand our breath is, and who in the midst of judgment remembers mercy.

HEZEKIAH PACKARD, TIMO. HARRINGTON.
Chelmsford, January 17, 1795.
A Remarkable Narrative, etc.
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to visit me in years past with much
sickness, pain and distress, at different times and in various ways, it becomes
me to be humble before him, and to notice all his dealings with me. And as He
has seen fit again to restore me to health and strength in a very remarkable
manner, it is my desire to make mention of his kindness, and to give glory to
his great Name.

That I might not forget the wonderful things the Lord has done for me, I have
kept an account of the chief events which have happened to me for a number of
years past. Many of my friends and acquaintance have expressed a desire to have
the account made public; and having taken the matter under serious
consideration, I now think it to be my duty to let the world know what God has
done for my body, and what he has done for my soul. I shall therefore proceed
to give some account of my sickness, and of the exercises of my mind; but shall
confine myself to the particulars, lest I should be thought too lengthy. --

WHEN I was about ten years old, I dreamed a very uncommon dream, which put me
on serious inquiries, and led me for a while to consider on my ways. But being
young and gay, my mind was soon lightened of its burden, and my seriousness
almost left me. The young company I kept, engaged much of my time and
attention, and I was led step by step into the follies and vanities of the
world. I had many calls, but I turned a deaf ear to them.

On the 5th of July, 1786, (being that day 17 years old) I was taken with a
severe fit of sickness, of a nervous kind. I was reduced so low by this
illness, that I did not expect to recover; and several times the family thought
I was dying; one night in particular they could not perceive (as they have
since told me) that I had life in me. I have often been told that for above
forty nights together I was not known to sleep so much as one hour.

When I had my reason, I thought death was very near, even at the door. I was
told that, if I believed in Christ, I should be saved; and I did believe that
there was a God, and a Christ, and hoped that I should be saved; but I did not
know that I must first have a new heart. It however pleased God to raise me
from that sickness to a comfortable measure of health.

About this time there was a reformation in Westford, and I was greatly
desirous that there might be one in this town, and among my mates, and then I
thought I would engage in religion. The thought of being first was painful to
me, because I supposed others would condemn and despise me for it. And
therefore I concluded to put it off till a more convenient time, hoping that
something would awaken the attention of people to the great things of religion.
But before a more convenient season arrived, I was again seized with a severe
illness which soon deprived me of my reason. But although my reason after a few
days was again restored in some measure, I was entirely deprived of the use of
my limbs. I was unable to move hand or foot. My constitution appeared to be
fast debilitating, and I was in great pain and distress. The family once or
twice thought I was breathing my last, and called in the neighbors to see me
expire. Although I expected in a few minutes to be in eternity, death did not
appear to be dressed in terror. But all this time I did not know the nature of
the new birth. Had I then died, what would have become of me!

But God was pleased to raise me from this sickness, so that I was comfortable,
although very weak and feeble. My mind dwelt much upon the following words --
Now is the accepted time. And considering the state of my body, I thought I
must comply with the conditions of pardon now or never; that I must make my
peace with God now or never. And I often thought on those words of our Savior
-- Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. John iii.3.
And I did greatly desire to know what the new birth was, and I was much in
prayer, and hoped to be accepted on that account. But on the 29th of October, I
was again seized, and confined to my bed, and was so delirious that I knew but
little of my sickness. At length, my reason having returned, I heard my Nurse
reading these lines, in which Christ speaks to Youth: -- Unto thyself I will
thee leave,
That Satan may thee wholly have:
Thy heart in sin will hardened be,
And blinded in iniquity.


These words sunk deep into my heart, and led me to a sense of my sinful state,
to which I had been almost a stranger. My mind was in great distress. My sins
appeared very numerous and aggravating, on every side. I looked back upon the
precious time I had spent in vanity, and considered how many calls and warnings
I had received and slighted, the gracious offers of pardon I had neglected and
had refused to comply with, that I might have life. I was afraid that the
offers which I had rejected would never again be renewed. For some time I read
and studied my bible; but every thing I found was against me, and I laid it
aside. I then took up a book, on the great concern of a preparation for death,
but it would not impart any comfort. My distress and agony of soul were too
great for language to express. Those who have experienced the same can feel
better than I can describe them. When I looked up for mercy, it seemed that God
and Christ were turned against me. The gate of heaven appeared to be closed,
while the doors of hell stood wide open to receive me. My life appeared to be
very short, and my mind was heaviness, and my heart was sorrow.

Reading nothing but the Dialogue between Christ and Youth, referred to above,
and being in a very gloomy frame of mind, my parents wished to know the cause
of my trouble, and what it was that took such hold of me; but I was unwilling
to explain the matter, and put them off. However, the young woman who slept
with me insisted one night that I should tell her what labored so much in my
mind. Then I opened my mind to her by asking this question -- If you was in a
dungeon, and never expected to come out again, could you take any comfort? She
replied, "I suppose I could not." I told her then she need not think strange
that my mind was in such a troubled state. She said -- "You will not always
think so; put your trust in God and go to sleep." -- These words increased my
distress, and I was thrown into great temptations. The chief I attempted to say
was, "Lord be merciful to me a sinner." In this unhappy condition I remained
for some time; but at length it pleased the God of all comfort to open my eyes,
and give me such a view of divine things as I never before experienced. O what
sweet views I had of Christ and of divine things! The passages of scripture
which crowded themselves into my mind came with peculiar sweetness and melody;
they brought joy and gladness to my heart. And if, Reader, you wish to know
what portions of holy writ had such a powerful efficacy upon me, you may at
your leisure turn to Matthew. vii.7, 8. and to Isai. lv.6. You may also examine
Matthew. xi.28, 29. And these texts are adapted, it seems to me, to fill every
thirsty, longing soul with joy and comfort.

My heart was filled with love to God and to Christ. When I considered what
great things had been done for me, my thankful joy was greater than I can
express. I compared myself to a brand taken out of the burning. At once I was
set at liberty and ease. And I have often compared my situation to that of a
person kept in a dark dungeon, without ever seeing the light, and after many
years is brought suddenly into a clear and bright sunshine. By attending to
this comparison, any one may form some opinion how things appeared at that
joyous moment. But all the glory is due to God for it.

On the 29th of December, I was taken with a fever, attended with nervous
symptoms, whereby I was confined till March following. And during this sickness
I was brought very low, so that I was unable to speak a loud word for several
weeks, and my physician thought me very dangerous. But though he and all my
friends almost despaired of my life, I had inward joy, and it was my prevailing
belief that I should recover. For though at some particular hours I felt almost
discouraged, yet in general I was confident that I should be raised from my bed
of sickness and distress. After my first sickness, I had a strong impression
made upon my mind, one day when I was alone, that I should be sick several
times, and at last should recover my health. And afterward I twice dreamed
that I must go through many trials, and that I should frequently be sick, and
then recover perfect health. But the impression made by these things was not
sufficiently deep and lasting. I could not bring my mind to the firm belief
that all this would happen to me. But at length my mind labored through all
the difficulties which it found in its way, and I was satisfied that I should
again recover strength. And all the rest of my sickness excepting a few hours,
I felt persuaded that I should be raised to health before I left the world. And
glory be to God, I have realized what I then expected.

The design of my history does not require me to descend to particulars; and
therefore I would mention in general, that from July the 5th, 1786, to July
10th, 1794, I was confined on the irksome bed of sickness fourteen times, and
several times I was viewed as a dying person, and more than once it was said of
me, as I have been since told, that my breath was gone. On the 11th of August,
1787, I was seized with the cramp in my stomach, with other complaints. I was
soon so feeble and relaxed that I could not even whisper, and by moving in the
most gentle manner my bones left their sockets. If a person shook or even wiped
my hand, the jar would displace the bones of my fingers. But almost the whole
time during this severe illness I expected to recover. In the year 1788, on the
17th of April, a sore began to discover itself in my side; and in the course of
ten weeks it gathered and broke several times, not externally, but by
discharging large quantities of purulent matter through the urinary passages.
This sickness was the most severe and painful that I had ever endured, and it
continued about three months. Eight or nine weeks of the time I was rocked in a
cradle day and night. It seemed that sleep had almost departed from me.
Sometimes I could sleep a few minutes in the morning, but I was not known to
sleep one minute in night time for several weeks. But though I was extremely
weak and feeble, I expected to recover, except one day when the inward sore in
my side was at its greatest degree of soreness and pain, and when, as the
Doctor has told me, my disorders were at their crisis. At this time my belief
of recovery was somewhat weakened; for I was unable to open my eyes or move my
lips, and all the nourishment I took was given me upon the end of a feather.
But at all other periods of my sickness, I was persuaded that I should recover.
And I have often thought that if a jury of Doctors and all my friends had told
me there was no hope of getting well, my confident persuasion would have
remained. Some of my friends plainly told me there was no prospect of my
restoration, and thought it wrong in me to indulge such an idea. They said, I
must not think that because the Lord had done great things for me, he would do
greater. To this, reply was made by signs; and I replied that I was sensible
that God had really done great things for me, and I believed he would raise me
to health: but I felt myself unworthy of the least favor from him, and I could
hardly account for my belief. For I often thought that, if I was prepared for
an exchange of worlds, I should prefer death to life. I was afraid, that in
case I recovered, I should be led into sin and wickedness; and the thoughts of
sinning against God, were more distressing to me than all the pains I bore. I
desired, however, to be resigned to God's holy will, and feit grateful to him
for that degree of submission which I experienced in the course of my sickness.
But on a certain night, (and I hope I shall always remember it with humility)
my bodily pains increased to the keenest torture, and I began to murmur and
complain. I inquired of myself what I had done, that I must suffer so much more
than others round me.

In suffering such pain and distress, without ease and sleep, I thought my
affliction greater than I could bear. Then was I unwilling that God's will
should be done. When in this state of mind, the following lines, in a sudden
and powerful manner, darted into my mind: Why are you now in this distress,
For in my bosom there is rest;
It is a place prepared for thee,
Now let your heart contented be.
My mind was then carried to these lines: Be patient, then, frail flesh,
In patience hold thy tongue;
And murmur not against the Lord,
As if he did thee wrong,
Justice can do no wrong,
Nor mercy cruel be,
Wisdom sees thy sad estate
To be the best for thee.


Then I thought I could say, Lord, thy will be done. From this time I remained
in a feeble state for a long time. I was so weak and relaxed, that for two
years I seldom or ever dressed or undressed me, or turned myself in bed,
without putting some bone out of joint. My surgeon affirms that he replaced one
of my shoulders nine times in one evening, which was dislocated by spasms.
But the Lord was pleased to be with me, and to give me great comfort in
distress. My comfort was so much greater than my distress, that I never was
more contented and resigned in all my life! And I desired to give glory to God
for it, for I was as much indebted to him for my patience as I was for my
breath.

In the year 1791, I was some better, and began to gain strength, and do some
light work. And in 1792, I was so well as sometimes to do a day's work in a
day. In this time, however, my side was daily painful. When I took any cold, or
overdid myself, it would swell and be very troublesome to me. During this time
I was too much taken up with the world, and did not live in such nearness to
God as I ought. Engaged in vanity, I gave such a wound to religion as has
caused me many a sorrowful hour. But I hope I shall be forgiven both by God and
man. And my friends, I beg your prayers for me that I may live in greater
nearness to the great and glorious God. And may we all, who have named the name
of Christ, be careful that we resolve and do the same.

O, my friends; how can we bear
To live but even one hour here,
Without we live unto the Lord,
According to his holy word.
This world allures to Satan's snare;
Hence we must take the greater care
How we do live and walk therein,
Lest we be drawn to pride and sin.


In the year 1793, Nov. 26, I was again seized with the cramp in my stomach,
and was very weak and low through the following winter. But in April I rode out
for my health, and unluckily fell from my horse, and split the principal bone
in my right arm. On the 30th of April, I was taken with a violent fever,
attended with other disorders. Having my arm broken, and being infested with
various disorders, my outward trials and sufferings were very great. But I
thought I should be willing to undergo any thing, if it might be the means of
making me live in greater nearness to God. The internal sore in my side had
gathered several times, and was then worse than ever. For more than six years,
my side had been daily painful to me, and at this time the pain was very
distressing. At length the sore broke, and the pain abated, and I collected
strength enough to walk out and to ride several times. But on the 7th of July,
my disorders raged with more than double violence. I was seized as was
supposed, with the numb-palsy over my left side; and besides this, I had an
attack of the lock-jaw. My arm, hand and eye upon my left side were entirely
useless, and I was unable to move my tongue. But all this time my reason was
preserved to me. And, though in a great measure sensible of my situation, my
mind was impressed with these words, -- This sickness shall not be unto death,
but for the glory of God. And I expected, that in the use of means, attended
with the blessing of Heaven, I should recover, as I had often thought before.
Though I was under heavy trials, the Lord seemed near to me, and supported me
under them. During this time, all the food I took was of a liquid kind, and ran
between my teeth, which seemed to others as well as to myself to be firmly set.
Under these difficulties, the sustenance I took was next to none. My strength
failed, and the pain in my jaw increased very fast, and sleep almost departed.
In this unhappy condition I remained till the 10th day, when, early in the
morning, I gave some token to be raised up. I was then put into a chair, in
which I leaned back till my bed was made; but when I was laid down again, it
seemed that my strength and life were almost gone. But I still believed that I
should recover. And while I was thinking what means could with success be used
for my restoration, and of what use health would be to me, I was led to think,
(and the thought came with great power,) that Christ was as able to raise me
without means as with them, and that his power must be exerted in either case.
I thought that if I had faith in him he could raise me to health and ease, and
that I should rise suddenly and walk the room. But considering my disorders and
trials, I had no reason to expect any thing of this kind would take place; and
I was at times afraid it was a sin to hearken to such a thought, and therefore
tried to put it from me; but the more I made the attempt, the more it seemed to
be fixed and settled in my mind. I was led to the idea that all things are
possible to them that believe; and that if my faith did not fail me, I should
be set free from all pain and distress. My mind dwelt upon this text, -- They
that have faith as a grain of mustard seed, and should say to a mountain, Be
thou removed into the sea, nothing doubting, it should be done. And I also
thought of the woman, who believed that if she could touch the hem of Christ's
garment, she should be made whole. And other portions of scripture of this
import came to my mind with great power. And though great were the trials of my
faith, it pleased Him, who overrules all things, to bring me into a more
settled belief of a speedy recovery.

It then appeared plain to me what I should be raised for, and it was a solemn
thing indeed. It seemed to me that I should be raised, that I might speak to
those around me, to improve time better. But I was at first unwilling to do it,
and made a number of excuses. I thought I could not have a face to speak to
any, considering what a life I myself had lived. I was sensible that I never
could in any matter express my ideas as I should be glad to; and I knew I was
very ignorant, and so could not be capable of teaching others. My mind at this
time was deeply engaged on the subject.

My thoughts and excuses which then employed my attention may be found in the
fourth chapter of Exodus, from the 10th to the 13th verse, and in the first
chapter of Jeremiah, from the 6th to the 10th verse.

At length I was made willing, and felt resigned to God's will. And then I laid
waiting for the minute to come when I should rise. While thus waiting, I was
thrown into great distress for breath, like a person dying. I was asked whether
I was dying, and I made signs that I was not; and my faith and confidence
remained. My distress continued about half an hour, and when it was greatest,
my numbness, my pain and distress left me, and I immediately arose from my bed
of sickness, and seemed to be constrained to utter these words; -- In the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, I am commanded to arise from this bed of sickness,
and to walk and to praise him. I then felt free from all my infirmities. In a
moment I was, it seemed to me, in perfect health and ease. My heart was filled
with joy and with praise, to that great and glorious God who had appeared for
me; and I called upon all who stood by to praise the Lord with me. I desired
that my Minister and my neighbors might be sent for; and when they came, they
were struck with great surprise, and rejoiced with me in my recovery. I desired
them all to join with me in praising the Lord for his great goodness to me. I
wished all to unite in prayer and praise to God, and requested the Rev. Mr.
Packard to lead in our devotions. And after prayer, we sang the 116th psalm,
first part.

O how grateful and happy I felt! I can never express the exercises of my mind,
nor the grateful feelings of my heart. And I hope I shall never forget the
great things which God has done for me.

Thus, Reader, have I attempted to give thee a true, though short, account of
my various sicknesses and frequent recoveries. And my earnest desire and prayer
is, that thou may love and serve that God who has been thus kind and
gracious to me, and that thou may enjoy his favor and the rewards of his
heavenly kingdom.

I gladly embrace this opportunity, to return sincere thanks to my friends and
neighbors, for their attention and kindness to me, and I hope they will be
blessed with the best of Heaven's blessings. Come, my friends, behold and see
the wonderful things which a merciful God has done for me, who am a poor,
sinful, unworthy worm of the dust. His gracious dealings with me are more than
I can utter, and therefore I wish you would still join with me in praising his
holy name. And I humbly beg your prayers for me, that I may walk in the ways of
religion, that I may be weaned from every sin, and that I may daily grew in
grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. While I live, may I live
in the service and to the honor of my Maker, Preserver, and Judge.

I am unwilling to lay aside my pen, without writing a few words to my friends.
--

MY FRIENDS,
THOSE of you who have reason to think you have received the new birth, and who
have begun a Christian course, and promised to be for God, and to promote
religion, will permit me to use freedom and plainness with you. Do not let
pride and unbelief, nor the frowns and flatteries of the world, nor any
temptation, prevent you from being faithful to God, and true to your Lord and
Master. For if God be on your side, who can be and prevail against you? Let it
be your study and endeavor to bring honor to religion, and to glorify God.
Please to take an early opportunity to read 1 Corinthians. xv.58. and Ephesians
vi.10 -- 19. And may the God of grace be with you, and bless you.

And those of you, my friends, who are yet strangers to vital religion and real
holiness, and who have not received the new birth, will allow me to address you
in the words of truth and soberness.

Do consider what a state you are in. Remember what our Savior told Nicodemus
-- Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And it is
said, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die. May you soon turn, and break off
your sins by righteousness. Come unto Christ that you may have life; for he is
ready to receive you with open arms, on the terms of the gospel. And there are
many calls in God's word, and many invitations for sinners to forsake their
sins and to come to Christ. And how often are these calls repeated to youth!
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. They that seek me early
shall find me. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while
he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and
to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

May you daily search the word of God, which was given for our rule and guide,
and may God give you grace to understand it, and to behave according to it.
Delay not the great concerns of the soul. Improve the present time while you
have health and strength, and while your reason and understanding are preserved
to you. Should you be brought to a sick bed, and then look back and find that
you had dishonored God and neglected religion, what pain and distress would
fasten on your soul! Now live as you would wish you had, when you come to die.
Let it be your greatest concern to get an interest in Christ. Consider that you
are not certain of one day; and if you were certain of it, you might not have
the offer of salvation. For God says, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man. But, Today if ye will hear my voice, harden not your heart. Behold, now
is the accepted time; behold, now is the day, of salvation. As the word of God
calls you to attend to your soul's affairs today, how dare you put it off till
tomorrow! You know not but that tomorrow will be too late. Therefore, my
friends, do not put off this great work any longer. And may God grant, for his
Son's sake, that you may devote yourselves and all you have to the service of
God. And may you now resolve, that in Christ's strength, you will be for God
and for no other; and take the word of God for your rule, and cry earnestly to
him for his Spirit, to lead you into the right way, and keep you in it. And may
the God of all grace be with you, and guide you through time, and bring you at
last to his heavenly kingdom.

Mary Spaulding.


THE END.

