Professor SMITH's Sermon, PREACHED at the DEDICATION of the MEETING HOUSE, IN
THE VICINITY OF DARTMOUTH COLLEGE, December 13, 1795.

THE DUTY, ADVANTAGES, AND PLEASURE OF PUBLIC WORSHIP, ILLUSTRATED IN A SERMON,
PREACHED AT THE DEDICATION OF THE MEETING HOUSE, IN THE VICINITY OF DARTMOUTH
COLLEGE, DECEMBER 13, 1795. Published at the request of the Hearers.

By JOHN SMITH, A.M. Professor of the Learned Languages, at said College.

PEACE BE WITHIN THY WALLS. DAVID. HANOVER; PRINTED BY PUNHAM AND TRUE.
M,DCC,XCV.

To the Church and Congregation in the vicinity of Dartmouth College.
MY BELOVED BRETHREN AND FRIENDS!
IN the midst of constant and indispensable employment, in the line of my
profession in the University, I have, twelve years, served you in the gospel of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And, as I have had, during the whole of this time, the
most satisfactory evidence of your candor and friendship, it affords me
peculiar satisfaction publicly to assure you of my regard and best wishes.

I rejoice in the prospect of your increasing respectability.

Since, probably, it cannot be practicable for me, much longer, to perform the
agreeable services, which my present relation, as your pastor and public
teacher, requires, it gives relief to my anxiety for your happiness, that you
may soon enjoy the labors of a minister, who will be able to devote his time,
without interruption, to instruct and edify you.

That GOD may continue to bless you with prosperity in this world; and finally
grant you an inheritance among those, who are sanctified, is the sincere desire
of your affectionate friend.

JOHN SMITH.

PSALM cxxxiv. 3. The LORD, that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion
WHITHER shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
Psalm cxxx^x 7.


We know, that JEHOVAH is every where present, to hear the prayers of those,
who with sincerity and Godly fear invoke his name. He is however more
especially present, in the worshipping assemblies of the faithful.

Why is the Lord said to give his blessing out of Zion? because there was his
house, where his name was recorded. Of such solemn importance is a house
devoted to the purpose of public worship.

When GOD would express his love and kindness to his ancient professing people,
he informed them, that he would set his tabernacle in the midst of them. By
this he intended, that he would be near them, to hear their petitions, and
grant them his blessing.

And, when his people apostatized, and provoked him to manifest his great
displeasure, he deprived them of this privilege, which was, indeed, an awful
punishment.

To worship and adore the Creator is our reasonable service. To contemplate his
perfections, praise his name, and celebrate the wonders of his love to the
human kind, are employments grateful to the pious.

The public worship of GOD is our indispensable duty, both with regard to his
glory, and our own interest. By this we profess that we are his servants, and
that we ought to obey and glorify him.

As we depend upon GOD's blessing for our lives, and all the happiness we
either enjoy in this world, or hope for in the future, it is his will, that we
implore his favor in places where his name is recorded, and which are
consecrated to his honor.

Our Savior has promised, that where two or three are gathered together in his
name, he will grant them his presence. Matt. xviii. 20.
Will he not then (to apply the words of the Psalmist) give a gracious ear to
the prayers, which are made "in the great congregation? Psalm xxii. 25.


We should come to GOD's house, to unite with sincere hearts in prayer and
praise, and to hear the instructions of his word.

HERE, in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and with humble reliance on his
grace and merits, we should pray our heavenly Father to pardon our sins, which,
if not forgiven, will plunge us in everlasting ruin.

We should devoutly implore the quickening and sanctifying influences of his
spirit, without which we cannot please GOD, nor be prepared for heaven. Here,
we should render thanks to our adorable and merciful Creator, for those
blessings, which we have no reason to expect will be continued, when we are so
ungrateful as not to acknowledge them.

"If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting
or mildew, -- whatsoever sore, or whatsoever sickness there be: then what
prayer, or what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy
people Israel, when every one shall know his own sore, and his own grief, and
shall spread forth his hands in this place: then hear thou from heaven, thy
dwelling place." 2 Chronicles. vi. 28, 29, 30.

In the following chapter we are informed, "that GOD appeared to Solomon by
night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place
to myself. Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer
that is made in this place. Verses 12 and 15.
"

This is the place, where his ministers are to instruct the ignorant, alarm the
careless, and console the contrite in heart.

All, who desire and hope for the blessing of GOD, should, as they have
opportunity, wait upon him in public worship. And they should behave with
decency and reverence, considering they are in the presence of their Creator
and final Judge.

Were we to appear before a chief Magistrate, we should fear to insult him.

On the other hand, we should wish to behave respectfully in his presence, and
obtain his approbation. Were we to implore his forgiveness of an offense, we
should act with humility. Did we request a favor of him, we should address him
with submission to his good pleasure. Were we to present him our thanks for a
favor received, we should behave so as to appear sensible of our obligation.

GOD requires an outward as well as inward worship. He is displeased with all
indecent behavior in so solemn an exercise.

"A son,', says GOD, "honoreth his father, and a servant his master; if then I
be a Father, where is my honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear? And if
ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and
sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy governor; will he be pleased with
thee? Mal i. 6. and 8.
"

Thus, the Great GOD is very jealous of his honor, and displeased with such as
do not behave with reverence in his worship.

If we trifle, or behave indecently, he is displeased, as a father with the
disrespect of a son, or a master with the ill behavior of a servant.

We may also observe, that a decent and reverent behavior, in the public
worship of GOD, tends to solemnize the mind, and impress an idea of our
obligation to serve and adore him. Thus the priests were commanded to weep
between the porch and the altar, that they might be impressed in a manner
suitable to the offices they were to perform. Joel ii. 17.
Our bodies as well as souls are GOD's; and we are commanded to worship and
glorify him with both.

We should, however, remember, that no outward acts are pleasing to GOD, in his
worship, any further than they are expressions of holy exercises of heart, or
means to impress us with a sense of our dependence upon his grace and kind
providence.

In the house of GOD, we should attend, not only to the precepts and
instructions contained in his holy word, but also to his wisdom, power, and
goodness, displayed in the creation and government of the world.

"The heavens declare the glory of GOD, and the firmament shows his handy
work. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. Psalm
xix. 1. and 3.
"

The Great GOD is from everlasting to everlasting. To him pertains every
possible perfection. He walks in the circuit of heaven; his eyes run to and fro
throughout the earth. Hell itself is open before him, and destruction has no
covering. The clouds are his chariots, and the winds his messengers. All the
elements fulfill his commands. Darkness is his pavilion. The earth is his
footstool; and in the deep waters his wonders are seen.

All nature is his temple, and all space is his abode. Every creature is the
workmanship of his hands; and over all his gracious providence extends.

Creation is full of GOD. He has his way in the whirlwind; he sends abroad his
lightnings; he gives snow like wool, and scatters the hoarfrost like ashes. If
we ascend into heaven, he is there; if we go down into hell, he is also there.
In the former reigns his infinite mercy, in the latter his everlasting justice.

Let us, therefore, behave with reverence and godly fear, when in solemn
worship, we present ourselves before the omniscient Creator.

Great and important advantages arise from the practice of public worship, when
rightly performed. Were piety and devotion banished from the earth, justice and
fidelity would not long remain. Wickedness, could it escape human observation,
would prevail and triumph. Were men released from all apprehensions of a
supreme Being, to whom they are accountable, oaths would be insignificant, and
confidence amongst men entirely destroyed. In that case, a man could not safely
trust a friend; he would every where be in danger of injuries from his fellow
creatures. Thus, if the fear of GOD were removed from men's minds, human life
would be thrown into the greatest confusion, and the bonds of society unhappily
dissolved.

By what means can a suitable sense of GOD and his divine providence be so
effectually diffused, as by meeting together, and joining in the exercises of
public worship? since society could not subsist without religion, and this
could not be maintained without the public worship of GOD, it is incumbent on
every friend to mankind to encourage it by his influence and example. Such then
as habitually absent themselves from public worship, cannot answer, for the
neglect, to GOD, nor their neighbor. And they injure themselves; for sincere
and rational worship is both agreeable, and improving to the mind.

Do you wish to become wiser and better? do you desire to obtain the pardon of
your sins, through JESUS CHRIST? Would you increase in piety, which is the only
source of peace in life, hope in death, and happiness eternal? "Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of GOD."

Although neither the hearing of GOD's word, nor any means, of themselves, can
effect our salvation, yet, while we wilfully neglect them, we harden our hearts
in sin, and go far from GOD. The Holy Ghost is the efficient of the new
creation; he operates, however, on the minds of men, in the use of means.

To adore our Creator, as the universal Parent, will remind us of our near
relation to all mankind, and, thus, strengthen in our breasts the noblest
sentiments of humanity. By reflecting on his adorable perfections, if we
worship him in spirit and truth, our minds will be impressed with becoming
reverence.

If, with true hearts, and in full assurance of faith, we address him in
prayer, we shall improve in that resignation to his providence, and trust in
his power and goodness, which will support and animate us through the changing
scenes of life, and afford us consolation, when flesh and heart shall fail.

Frequently to repeat these exercises will tend to inspire us with such a sense
of the divine presence and inspection, as will, at all times, be a happy guard
to our innocence and virtue. Indeed, every part of public worship is adapted to
meliorate the heart, and, consequently, to exalt human nature.

Although we have reason to lament the profaneness and impiety of the present
age, yet there are many men of learning and influence, who labor to promote the
cause of piety and virtue. Religion has many friends of whom she is not
ashamed. These are the wise, the humane, and the virtuous.

Who are her enemies? they are the enemies of mankind; the idle and the vicious.

If you engage in the worship of GOD with sincere hearts, in the exercise of
faith and love, with your minds free from guilt and superstition, -- if you
believe in GOD, as the merciful Father of all, -- if, with humble dependence on
the atonement and intercession of CHRIST, you adore him with pious affections,
experience will teach you, that devotion affords the most exalted pleasure.

The human mind is never so much pleased, as when employed in viewing and
admiring great and sublime objects. What object is so great and sublime as the
eternal GOD? In contemplating him, we are presented with a view of the most
perfect glory and excellence.

And do we not experience satisfaction arising from a grateful sense of our
obligations to that Almighty and Merciful Being, on whom we ever depend?

Thus to adore our common Parent, the Parent of angels as well as men, the
governor of the universe, who will graciously reward his faithful servants,
must be a pleasing employment, and afford the most sublime entertainment to
pious and generous minds.

Thus exalted are the pleasures of devotion.

Society heightens every rational delight. The melody of sounds, the fair
prospects of nature, and our intercourse with each other, become more
agreeable, when the pleasure they afford is communicated from breast to breast.

In like manner, the pleasure of devotion, although highly satisfactory to one,
who adores GOD in private, may, however, be increased and more elevated, in a
worshipping assembly.

It is the character of an unsocial and sullen spirit to avoid the places of
public worship. A man of true benevolence enjoys peculiar pleasure in such
assemblies, in beholding a number of his species engaged in the adoration of
their common Creator and Redeemer, and the improvement of their minds.

A man of undissembled piety, worshipping with those of the same character,
gathers joy from every countenance.

To join, therefore, in public worship with the pious conduces to kindle and
enhance our own devotion. If here we experience not a divine satisfaction, we
have reason to fear, that our souls are devoid of piety.

I add, that devoutly to worship GOD in the assemblies of his people has a
happy tendency to fit us for the employments and pleasures of the world of
glory. When the soul shall forsake its present habitation, the pleasures which
depend upon the body will all vanish. The happiness of the heavenly state
depends on spiritual entertainments. It consists in the love and exercise of
virtue, and in the love, praise, and adoration of the source of felicity. May
we, therefore, purifying ourselves from sin, be prepared by devotion, and all
the means, which infinite wisdom has appointed, for the exalted state and
employments of the saints in light.

Impressed with these ideas let us attend to our situation.

Twenty five years ago the College was established, and measures were taken to
form a settlement, in this part of the town of Hanover. The first settlers were
few, and subjected to many inconveniences and difficulties, as this part of the
country was an uncultivated wilderness.

The twenty third day of January next will complete the term of twenty five
years, since this church was imbodied.

The public worship of GOD has been, without interruption, attended in this
vicinity, from the time of its first settlement.

During the late war, the progress of improvement was greatly retarded. From
the conclusion of that war, to the present time, by the blessing of GOD its
increase has been considerable.

Although we are not a large society, yet the consideration of public occasions
frequently occurring early led the minds of the settlers to view the
expediency, that a house for the accommodation of large numbers be spacious and
convenient.

This consideration, together with that of the smallness of the number of
inhabitants, occasioned the delay of measures for erecting a house for the
purpose of public worship, and to be used for those other public purposes,
until the last year.

When we consider how few have associated for the design of building this
house, which was begun but a little more than a year ago, and which is now, at
their request, and in their behalf, to be dedicated to the worship and honor of
GOD, we have reason to acknowledge his goodness, in granting success to the
undertaking.

As public, social worship is due from mankind to their Creator, it is
suitable, that houses erected for this purpose be consecrated to his service.
In them he has been pleased to record his name, and to honor them with the
appellation of his dwelling places.

Let us, therefore, my beloved brethren and friends, with united hearts, and
one accord, beseech the LORD GOD, who gives his blessing out of Zion, to be
graciously pleased to accept this our offering, WHICH WE DEDICATE TO HIS NAME.

Here, may a divine blessing attend his word, and the administration of his
ordinances, to his glory, and the salvation of the souls of multitudes, who
may, in this house, hear the joyful sound of the gospel, even glad tidings from
heaven for sinful men, who will accept of mercy through the Mediator, and, "by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality."

The LORD, that made heaven and earth, bless you out of Zion.

AMEN.

