MONTALBERT A NOVEL.

BY CHARLOTTE SMITH.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118, Market-street, Philadelphia, By GEORGE
KLINE, Carlisle.

MONTALBERT.
CHAP. I.
IN one of those villages, immediately under the ridge of chalky hills, called
the South Downs, where the soil changing suddenly to a strong clay, renders the
country deep, and the roads bad; there dwelt, a few years since, the rector of
a neighboring parish, of the name of Lessington. In the village where he
lived, he was only the curate; e^g his residence there, because the house was
larger and more commodious, the that which belonged to his own living, three
miles distant. His family consisted of a wife, two sons, and four daughters.

One of the sons had a fellowship at Oxford. The other was a younger partner in
a respectable tradesman's house in London.

The daughters were reckoned handsome. The two eldest had been, for some years,
the toasts at the convivial meetings in the next market towns. The third was
now a candidate for an equal share of rustic admiration, and her claims were
generally allowed. But the youngest, who was about eighteen, when this
narrative commences, though she was still considered as a child by her sisters,
and treated as such by her mother; was thought by some of the few persons who
happened to see her, to be much the handsomest of the four, though her beauty
was of a very different character from that of her sisters.

Perhaps in these days of refinement the imagination might be in some degree
assisted, by the romantic singularity of her name. She was called Rosalie at
the request of a lady of the Catholic religion, the wife of a man of very large
fortune, who sometimes inhabited an old family seat, about three miles farther
from the hills. Mrs. Lessington had been for some years her most intimate
friend, and accepted with pleasure her offer of answering for, and giving her
name, to the youngest of her girls. Mrs. Vyvian, the daughter of an illustrious
Catholic family, being born at Naples, had received the name of the female
saint so highly venerated in the two Sicilies; and before her marriage, had
lived a good deal alone with an infirm father at Holmwood House, which, having
descended to her mother from noble ancestors, became hers, and was part of the
great fortune she brought to Mr. Vyvian.

During the solitary years when she attended the couch of a parent, the victim
of complicated diseases, the society of Mrs. Lessington had been her greatest
consolation. It continued so till her marriage -- a marriage which she was
compelled to consent to, by her father's peremptory commands. Mrs. Vyvian
afterward passed some years on the continent with her husband; and returned to
England mother of three children, a son and two daughters. And whenever this
family inhabited the old mansion house of Holmwood, Rosalie passed all her time
with them. When young Vyvian was about thirteen, his sisters twelve and eleven,
the young ladies were so much attached to their companion, that Mrs. Vyvian, to
indulge them, took her with them to London, and afterward to their estate in
the North. Young Vyvian, the only son of the family, being sent abroad, Rosalie
remained with his mother and sisters above two years, making only short visits
at home. At the end of that period, Mr. Vyvian thought proper to have his
daughters introduced into the world, and in a style of life to which Rosalie
could have no pretensions. She therefore returned to the parsonage; and though
she could not but be sensible of the great change in her situation, her good
sense, and the peculiar mildness of her disposition, enabled her, if not to
conquer her regret, at least so far to conceal it, that, though generally
pensive, she was neither sullen nor melancholy; and entered with placid
resignation into a way of life, so different from that to which she had (she
now thought unfortunately) been accustomed. -- Her mother, who probably
remembered that she had been sensible of something like the same uneasy
sensation when she bade adieu to the society of her friend, then Miss
Montalbert, to marry Mr* Lessington, seemed to pity, though she forbore to
notice, the dejection which was occasionally visible in her youngest daughter,
in despite of her endeavors to hide it. As to her father, he treated her as he
did the rest, with general kindness, but no marked affection. Her sisters were
not unkind to her, so long as she affected no superiority, but seemed better
pleased to be considered as too young to be admitted of their parties, than to
make one, where she knew she should find no enjoyment: And they were, on their
parts, content to leave out, as long as they could, a person who would be at
least a formidable competitor for the prize of beauty. The eldest was courted
by a gentleman-farmer of considerable property in the county, the second by an
attorney in a neighboring town: And as these lovers were accepted, parties of
pleasure were continually man for the Miss Lessingtons -- sometimes to the sea
coast, or the races or cricket matches, Mr. Lessington attended his daughters
on these expeditions, till the eldest was married. The care of Miss Catharine
and Miss Maria, was then left to her; and the Vicar of Mayfield returned to the
duties of his parishes, and his farm.

On these occasions, Mrs. Lessington and her youngest daughter being left
alone, their conversation sometimes turned on the family of Vyvian. It was a
subject of which Rosalie was never weary, though it was not always that her
mother would indulge her with talking upon it. Rosalie was tenderly and
gratefully attached to Mrs. Vyvian, even more than to her young friends; and
frequently mentioned to her mother, how much she had been hurt at remarking,
during the latter part of her stay in the family, that this amiable and
excellent woman was extremely unhappy. One day when they were sitting at work
together, this conversation was renewed -- "You hear nothing, Madam," said
Rosalie to her mother, "of our neighbors at Holmwood Park, being to come down
soon." -- "Nothing," replied her mother coldly; "I suppose, from what Mr.
Allingham said," (Mr. Allingham was the Catholic priest of the neighboring
town), "that we shall not see them here this year." -- Rosalie sighed. -- "He
told me" added Mrs. Lessington, "that Mrs. Vyvian was so much indisposed when
he saw her in town, that the physicians talked of ordering her to Cheltenham.
It is more than two months since I have had a letter from her." -- Rosalie
sighed again. -- "It is her mind" said she, "that preys upon her frame; and
will I am afraid, destroy her."

"I hope not," replied Mrs. Lessington, "for I think her spirits have been
always much the same since I knew her. Perhaps they are not mended by Mr.
Vyvian's having renounced his religion, and by having her children brought up
Protestants, contrary to his promise, when he himself changed. Besides, you
know he is a harsh and hasty man, positive, violent, and ill-natured enough to
make a woman, like Mrs. Vyvian, unhappy, if there is no other cause."

"Ah! that other," said Rosalie: "I have heard a great deal about it."

"About what?" cried Mrs. Lessington in a tone of surprise.

"About the -- the -- the lover," replied Rosalie, blushing "that Mrs. Vyvian
was so much attached to before she was married to Mr. Vyvian."

"I don't know," said her mother, coloring as if by sympathy, "who could tell
you, child, of any such foolish story."

"Nay, dear Madam, but was it not so?"

"Was it not, how? I really know nothing about it; and yet I believe nobody saw
so much of my friend Mrs. Vyvian, as I did at that time; for though it was long
after I married, I used to be almost as much with her as when we were both
single."

"The gentleman is still living, Madam," said Rosalie.

"I again assure you, Rose," replied her mother, peevishly, "that I know
nothing of -- of any gentleman. But I think I heard your father come into his
study -- Do, child, ask him for the key of the closet above."

Rosalie obeyed. But she well knew her father was not in his study, and saw
that her mother only sent her to seek him, that she might escape from
conversation, which, for some reason or other, she was strangely unwilling to
continue. This was not the first time Rosalie had remarked, that her mother
solicitously avoided recounting any circumstance that used to happen in her
girlish days, at those periods when she was connected with the family of
Montalbert: and if ever she unconsciously began to speak of Miss Montalbert,
now Mrs. Vyvian, she either stopped as soon as she recollected herself, and
changed the conversation, or spoke in a manner particularly guarded, and only
of trifling occurrences.

"What can be my mother's reason?" said Rosalie, musing to herself as she went
to walk in their little garden. "There is some mystery certainly. Surely the
marriage with the man Mrs. Vyvian was so attached to, could not have been
broken off on her account? -- Impossible! for though my mother, I believe, has
been a very handsome woman, she certainly never could be compared to her
friend; who even now, in ill health, and half heart-broken, as she is, is much
more beautiful than either of her daughters."

Rosalie sighing when she thought of Mrs. Vyvian's illness, and regretting that
she did not this year come into the country, felt all the cold and blank
regret, which departed pleasure leaves. She wished now, that she had passed
less time in the Vyvian family, where she had been accustomed to the
conversation of Mrs. Vyvian, of which she was particularly fond; and to a
manner of life, very different from that which she was now in -- still more
different, from what it was probable she would be expected to enter into, when
her two elder sisters were both married: her father having lately said, half
laughingly, and as if he supposed it would please her, that she should then go
out with Maria; appear at assemblies, and try to get an husband too; for he
wanted to get his girls off his hands as fast as he could.

Rosalie felt, that she had an invincible aversion to this plan of dressing and
going out in hopes of getting as her father termed it, an husband. She was
convinced, that to be addressed by such men as the husband of her eldest
sister, or the man to whom the second was soon to be married, would render her
completely miserable; for it seemed but too probable, that her father would not
allow her a negative.

Youth, however, dwells not long on remote possibilities. But though no acute
uneasiness assailed her, the languor and dejection of Rosalie increased as the
Autumn came on. Solitude was infinitely preferable to the society, such as was
at present within her reach: But seclusion so perfect as that she was now
condemned to, depressed her spirits. In every other period of her being at
home, at this season of the year, her elder brother had been there also, who,
being very partial to her, delighted to instruct her. But now this dear brother
was gone unto the North with one of his college friends, and was to be at home
only for a few days before his return to Oxford. She thought every body was
gone to the North; for the Vyvian family were perhaps there by this time, if
Mrs. Vyvian's health had allowed her to leave Cheltenham; and never had she
felt so dejected and forlorn. The hill which arose immediately behind the
vicarage house, afforded a view even half way up, of a great extent of country;
and Holmwood Park, the old family seat of Mr. Vyvian, though at near three
miles distance, seemed to be within five minutes walk. Rosalie had now a
melancholy pleasure, in viewing it from the high grounds, as the setting sun
blazed on the western windows, while the characters of the inhabitants were
forcibly recalled to her mind.

Mr. Vyvian, a man of very extensive possessions, and the head of an ancient
Catholic family, had been rather received as an husband by Miss Montalbert,
because her father commanded her to receive him, than for any other reason;
(...) so far were they from having any sympathy, that their religion was the
only thing in which they agreed; and even that tie of union between them did
not long exist: for soon after the death of his wife's father, he renounced the
church of Rome, and going through all the ceremonies of reconciliation to that
of England, entitled himself to represent a borough that belonged to him, and
became a member of parliament. From that time, the tutors that had been
entrusted with the education of his son, were removed. His daughters, contrary
to the promise he had at first made to his wife, were no longer suffered to go
to mass, or to be instructed by the old priest, who had for a great number of
years resided in their mother's house. And Mrs. Vyvian* who was strongly
attached to the religion of her ancestors, was from that period a solitary and
desolate being in the midst of her family.

Mr. Vyvian was one of those men, wh^ n^turally haughty and tyrannical, had
never use because he never would endure, the least contradiction. His temper
resembled that of those reasonable beings one sometimes sees among the common
people, who not unfrequently beat their children till they make them cry; and
then beat them for crying. Just so he contrived to do exactly what he knew
would make his wife completely miserable; and then quarrelled with her because
she could not (though she endeavored to do so most sincerely), always conceal
her wretchedness. Till lately, she had found the estrangement of her daughters,
who too much resembled their father, compensated in a great measure by the
attentive gratitude of Rosalie, who used to pass much of her time at Holmwood,
while Mrs. Vyvian was there alone, and her family remained in London. But
lately she appeared to have lost all pleasure, even in visiting this favorite
seat; and though when she did write to Mrs. Lessington, or to Rosalie, her
letters expressed all her former regard, yet these letters became every day
more rare. At length she hardly ever wrote to Rosalie. An air of languor and
disquiet pervaded those parts of the letters addressed to her mother, that
Rosalie sometimes saw; for it now and then happened, that Mrs. Lessington
received letters which her daughter knew to be from Mrs. Vyvian, the contents
of which she never disclosed, and did not seem pleased to be questioned upon
them. -- These Rosalie concluded (...) filled with the murmurs of an oppressed
(...) that found a melancholy indulgence in view eve^ its hopeless sorrows into
the bosom of an old and faithful friend; though she herself had never heard one
repining sentence.

The venerable priest, now the only inhabitant, except servants, of the
solitary mansion of Holmwood, had been accustomed to walk over now and then to
Barlton-Brook, (the name of the parish where the Lessington family resided);
and Rosalie, who honored his character, and knew how highly Mrs. Vyvian
esteemed him, was never happier than when she was allowed to make his tea for
him, or to walk with him part of the way home. During the present summer,
however, these visits had become less frequent, and at length entirely ceased;
a terrible deprivation to Rosalie, though none of the rest of the family seemed
conscious that it had happened. Rosalie at length remarked it to her mother,
who answered drily, that Mr. Hayward was probably ill. "May I not walk over
some day to Holmwood Mamma, and see how he does?"

"I do not know when I can spare you, my dear," was the reply, and the
conversation dropped.

Another, and another week passed; and Mr. Hayward did not appear. Rosalie then
enquired news of him, of one of those itinerant fishmongers who travel round
the country, and who constantly carried his wares to Holmwood. The man assured
her, that he had that day seen Mr. Hayward in good health. Rosalie soon
afterward discovered, but with extreme vexation, that her old friend forbore
to visit her, because it had been hinted to him, that the suspicion of his
influencing her on religious subjects was likely to be very injurious to her
future prospects in the world: Mr. Grierson, who had married her elder sister,
and Mr. Blagham, the intended husband of the second, having declared their
apprehensions of her becoming a Papist; in which opinion two young men, who had
very much admired her, also agreed. The sisters of one of them protesting that
she was sure Miss Rose Lessington was disposed to that religion, which made her
give into such mopish ways, and always affect solitude, like nuns, and such
sort of people. Thus deprived of the innocent pleasure of conversing with a
man, whom, from her infancy, she had considered almost as a second father -- a
cipher at home -- and rather suffered as one of the family, than seeming to
make a part of it, necessary to the happiness of the rest, Rosalie had no other
resource than in her own mind against the unvarying medium of life. Her mother
though not more ignorant than the generality of women in middling life, had
received no better education than a country boarding school afforded, which,
five and thirty years ago, were much less celebrated for the accomplishments
they communicated, than they are at present. Since that period, she had studied
the utile rather than the dulce. Having, before her marriage, lived very much
in the family of Montalbert, though by no means in the style of an humble
companion (for she had a small independent fortune), she had accustomed herself
to undertake many little domestic duties for the friend she loved; and after
her marriage, she had a family which kept her constantly occupied; so that,
never having her curiosity raised in regard to books, and never having been
accustomed to read, she had now no relish even for books of amusement; and
wondered at the eagerness she sometimes heard her acquaintance express for
them. It may easily be believed, that thus disposed, she had no collection of
books likely to amuse her daughter; who had long since exhausted all the
information or entertainment afforded, by an odd volume of the Tatler --
Robinson Crusoe -- Nelson's Feasts and Fasts -- Hervey's Meditations -- a
volume of Echard's Gazetteer -- Mrs. Glass's Cookery -- and every Lady her own
Housekeeper.

The library of Mr. Lessington, though more extensive and occupying a room
dignified with the name of a study, was not better adapted to beguile the
solitary hours of a very young woman. It consisted solely of sermons --
Polemics -- such publications as related to Questions on infant Baptism, and
Elaborate Defenses of the Thirty-nine Articles -- Clarendon's History -- Rapin,
and bad Translations of Mezerai and Froissart -- an old History of Rome, in
black letters -- Josephus -- Thomas a Kempis -- Elucidations of difficult Parts
of Scripture -- and Treatises on the Nature of the Soul. Among all these it was
the history only that could attract Rosalie; and during this solitary summer,
she became a tolerable historian: though she did not find it either contributed
to enlarge her philanthropy, or furnish her with rules for the conduct of her
life; since she flattered herself, that beings so dishonest and despicable as
modern history represents, are found only in those elevated regions of human
existence where it was never likely to be her lot to move.

During her frequent visits to the family of Vyvian, where that language was
generally spoken, Rosalie had learnt to speak French fluently; could read well,
and speak a little Italian, which Mr. Hayward had taken great pleasure in
teaching her. These little acquirements were, she knew not for what reason,
more the object of her sisters' envy than any other of the advantages her being
with the Miss Vyvians might have given her over them. She saw with surprise and
concern, that though her sisters were as little, as she now was herself, in
company where to speak foreign languages, could be of the slightest advantage,
yet that her being qualified to do so, vexed and humbled them. She therefore
concealed what indeed there was now little merit, and less difficulty in
concealing; and having no books to read in either language, and no longer an^
opportunity of conversing with Mr. Hayward, she felt, with infinite concern,
that this source of amusement and of knowledge would very soon be lost to her.

The only pleasure she now found was in drawing; in which, though no great
proficient, she was far enough advanced to find herself improve very
materially, by following, and continually practicing the few rules she had
learned. To seat herself on the turf of the down above the house, on the root
of a thorn, or one of those beech trees which were scattered about the foot of
the hill, and make sketches of detached pieces of the extensive landscape
stretched before her; or of the old and fantastic trees that formed her shady
canopy, was now become her only enjoyment. And very sincerely did she regret,
and very reluctantly did she obey, the summons, she too frequently received to
return to the house, either to make tea for some accidental visitors of her new
brother-in-law's acquaintance, or to superintend a syllabub in the summer
house. -- These parties calling at the parsonage, now became frequent; for this
new member of the family lived in the vale, a few miles from Barlton Brook; and
the house of his father-in-law lay directly in the horse way to what is called
in tha^ country, "up the hills." Those hills (the South Downs) gradually
decline toward the sea. On the coast, within a few years, many bathing places
have been established, where the sick and the idle pass the summer or autumnal
months. The variety of people thus collected make a visit to the seacoast, a
pleasurable jaunt to the inhabitants of the neighboring country; and Mr.
Grierson, a man perfectly at ease in his circumstances, and lately married to
one of the most celebrated beauties in the county, failed not to amuse his
bride and her friends with many of these tours. His future brother-in-law,
Blagham the attorney, who lived at Chichester, was a great promoter of what he
called "a little sociability." He gratified at once two passions; the love of
what he called pleasure, and the prospect of future advantage, to which he
always looked forward with peculiar earnestness. While he was bustling about
with Grierson and his wife, together with his "own intended," as he chose to
call her, he was displaying his skill in ordering dinners, in hiring boats for
water-parties, in consoling " the ladies," when they were sick, and, " cutting
jokes upon them when they got better" -- in making sure bets at Broad A down in
Hampshire, on the borders of Sussex, the resort of both counties for cricket
matches.
Halfpenny, for "Egad, Sir, he always knew what he was about" -- and in hedging
well at poney races. And while this went on, "Egad, Sir, he never lost sight of
the main chance -- not he. Egad, Sir, he had all his eyes about him."

And it was true, that while thus entered into what he called "the enjoyments
of life, and a little sociability," he made acquaintance among the yeomanry, or
the few of that rank of men who are still called so: among men, however, who
had made money to put out at interest, and who employed him to find for them
good securities, and to transact other matters for them. So that though a young
man in the honorable profession of an attorney, and newly established in the
already well-stocked city of Chichester, he was considered as very likely to
make his fortune; and Mr. Lessington had, in the contemplation of such a
prospect, granted him the hand of the fair Catharine, his second daughter; rich
indeed only in herself -- in very handsome wedding clothes, which were now
preparing for her -- and in her connections and acquaintance among the
gentlemen's families of the county.

CHAP. II.
IT was on a beautiful afternoon toward the end of August, when Rosalie,
retired to her usual seat on the hill, was again engaged in her now favorite
occupation. The rays of the sun declining early in the afternoon, gilt the
landscape with tints more than usually luxuriant. Holmwood House, its windows
always lighted up when the evening rays glanced on them, was an object which,
as it continually forced itself upon her observation, she almost for the first
time in her life wished to escape from. Yet insensibly it brought to her mind a
train of ideas melancho^ly, yet not to be repelled. Her pencils and drawing
cards were laid down on the turf, while, with folded arms, and her head
reclined against the tree she was sitting under, she fell into a reverie. A
long row of old pines, stretched their grotesque heads from the eastern side of
the house toward a rising ground, where this wild and irregular avenue was
terminated by an octagon temple, now falling fast to ruin; where Rosalie
remembered to have passed many hours, when she was a child, the happy
thoughtless companion of the little Vyvians, who used to call this old
summer house their house, and to carry thither their play things, and make
their sportive arrangements, while their governess a little old Frenchwoman,
was accustomed to sit on the steps knitting or netting. The steps Rosalie could
distinguish from her solitary seat on the hill: But the playful groupe, and
their old little guardian, were gone. Rosalie recollected how happy she had
been there: And already she had acquired that painful experience that had made
her fear she should taste of unalloyed happiness no more. Her friend and
protectress, Mrs. Vyvian, who now seemed to have deserted, from some
unaccountable change of taste, the habitation she was once so fond of, appeared
before her in imagination more pale and dejected than usual. She fancied she
saw her slowly coming out of the little conservatory, which she had caused to
be built, and in which she took peculiar pleasure. She had a nosegay in her
hand for each of her girls -- Rosalie was once received under that appellation
-- and she beckoned to them as she saw them walking in the shrubbery, and, with
one of her pensive smiles, gave to every one her little present. The Abbe
Hayward, that excellent and venerable man, met her. Benignity and pious
resignation were in his countenance, as he endeavored to find some
conversation that might cheer the depressed spirits of Mrs. Vyvian. She bade
her daughters and Rosalie walk before them; and, making a short tour in the
plantations, seemed to remove her languor, and enable her to meet her family at
supper with some appearance of cheerfulness.

Such were the scenes Rosalie was recalling to her mind, and such the figures
with which memory was busy in peopling them, when her contemplations were
disturbed by figures very different, who presented themselves under all the
disadvantages of contrast.... Blagham, and two other young men, whom she did
not recollect ever to have seen before, came whooping and hallooing from the
house, and ascended the hill toward her. As it soon became very steep, Blagham
leaped from his horse, and ran toward her; and the other two followed him.

"Why, my sweet Rose," cried he, "my Rose of the world! why do you cruelly hide
yourself among thorns? Only to be looked after -- eh! my pretty Rose, -- Aye,
it is the way of you all: -- there is my Kate below yonder, would fain serve me
the same sauce -- but I Am come to drink tea with you, my dear little sister,
that is to be, and to introduce two of my friends to you." The friends by this
time were come to the spot. "This, Madam, is Captain Mildred of the 98th, now
quartered in our town; and this," ^ded he, with all solemnity, "this is the
Rev. Philibert Hughson, a worthy clergyman, and Rector of Higginston cum
Sillingbourn in this county." Rosalie had nothing to do but to curtesy to them
both. Her future brother-in-law, however, had not yet done with her; but,
stepping back, he made a ridiculous bow, and in a theatrical tone, exclaimed,
"And, now, gentlemen, give me the superlative pleasure of introducing to your
admiration Miss Rosalie Lessington, fourth and youngest daughter of the Rev.
Joseph Lessington, Master of Arts, Vicar of Cold Hampton, and Curate of Barlton
Brooks in this county: A young lady, of whose personal perfections, gentlemen,
I dare not speak; but who is, I may venture to say, endowed with every
qualification to render the marriage state completely happy." -- Shocked and
amazed at this impertinent address, Rosalie felt her cheeks glow with anger and
indignation; but recovering herself, she asked coldly, if her mother had sent
for her?

"She has -- she has" -- cried her persecutor, who, she now perceived, had
added to his natural impertinence all that which liquor gives when it overflows
a shallow brain, -- "She has, fair flower of the desert, and we are the
beatified ambassadors charged with the delectable commission. Come then, bright
nymph!" --

He was proceeding in this style, when Rosalie, taking from him the hand he
would forcibly have held, said, "I wish my mother had sent some person who was
more in possession of his reason." -- "Ah! Madam," cried the young man, who was
announced as the Rev. Philibert Hughson, "there are moments when reason is lost
in wonder and delight, and when" -- "What, Sir?" interrupted Rosalie, in a tone
so unexpected, that the young divine was unable to proceed, and even blushed as
he attempted to finish a speech, which he probably thought was in the style of
the society he was with.

As they walked down the hill toward the house, she turned to Captain Mildred,
who, as he had hitherto been silent, had not offended her; and whom, being an
officer, she hoped was a gentleman, and entered with him into the common
conversation, while Blagham, too drunk to make much speed, staggered after
them, and Mr. Hughson went sidling down a little before her. As if still
solicitous to attract her notice, yet half afraid of another rebuff, he was
trying to recall his consciousness of self importance. -- The Rev. Philibert
Hughson was what is called a dapper, tight-made, little man. His face neither
well nor ill, but with something in the expression of it that soon let an
observer of faces into his character. If the Rev. Philibert Hughson had even
ventured to think, in the same unrestrained manner in which he sometimes spoke,
it is very certain he thought himself a d -- d clever fellow. The second son of
a very rich father, he had been a buck of the first rate at Cambridge, spent
four times as much as he was allowed, and contrived to get some thousands in
debt. He was an excellent judge of horseflesh, and a great connoisseur in
carriages. He knew the dimensions and properties of every vehicle from a
phaeton to a sulky; had possessed them all by turns, and had changed them
oftener than his clothes, or his friends. He had made a merit of taking orders,
when he knew his careful father had bought the valuable livings of Higginston
cum Sillingbourn, worth together above eight hundred a year. Nor did he
determine to make this sacrifice, and, from the smartest fellow at Cambridge,
sink into a country parson, till he had stipulated for the payment of his
debts, and a handsome sum in ready money. He then cut off his hair, turned his
green coat into a gray one, and resolved to be very orthodox and very good. His
father most devoutly hoping he would keep his word, complied with all his
conditions, and was delighted when he had sworn that he felt an irresistible
call from heaven, and was inducted to the living of Higginston cum
Sillingbourn. The most pleasant circumstance attending his new situation, was,
that this cure of souls was undertaken in the best country possible for killing
pheasants, and not half a mile from him partridges were equally plenty. A pack
of the best fox hounds in England were within five miles; and he had greyhounds
of his own, of the true Orford breed. To take advantage of all these pleasures,
he had begun by sitting up and enlarging the stables, filling them with
high-prized hunters, and sending to Newmarket for boys to attend them. He
stored his cellars -- furnished his house for his brother sportsmen who had
promised to visit him -- bought a new phaeton; changed it for a curricle; then
imagined a new whisky of his own composing, calculated for the Suffex roads.
And, in short, during the eight months that he had been in possession of the
living, had felt so many irresistible impulses, besides that which had given so
valuable a member to the church, that he had already received from the
friendship of his dear friend Blagham a trifling accommodation of the
'needful'; for to apply to the old gentleman so soon was hardly discreet;
parental patience, like some other virtues, being sometimes apt to wear out, if
too frequently called into use.

Mr. Blagham had not been many days introduced to the Rev. Philibert Hughson,
before he discovered that something very advantageous might arise from
cultivating his acquaintance. He perfectly understood the way to recommend
himself, and set about it with so much zeal, that he became very soon the
dearest friend he had in the world....... Blagham thought he could not do
better than endeavor to recommend one of the sisters of his intended wife: And
he had already tried to persuade his friend that he was in love with Maria, in
which he would probably have succeeded, if, at a convivial meeting where the
beauty of the neighboring damsels was canvassed, some young man, who had
accidentally seen Rosalie, had not warmly assured him, that she was the
prettiest girl in the county; and when another spoke of the celebrity of her
sisters, agreed that they were fine women, but assured Mr. Hughson, to whom he
sat near, in half a whisper, that there was no more comparison between them and
the youngest sister, than between light and darkness. This had greatly raised
the curiosity of Hughson, who had since pressed his friend Blagham to carry him
to the house of his intended father-in-law; a request which was heard with
pleasure, and immediately granted.

Equally rash and headstrong in whatever he undertook, Hughson was passionately
in love at first sight; and as immediately determined to pursue the object that
had thus struck him, nothing doubting her ready and even joyful acceptance of a
man so unexceptionable in point of fortune, and so very clever a fellow. Under
this impression he took no pains to conceal his admiration, but persecuted the
distressed and reluctant Rosalie with speeches to which it was impossible for
her to reply. She looked timidly toward her father for protection: but she
saw, that far from being willing to afford it to her, he seemed delighted with
the attention Mr. Hughson paid her; and smiled and rubbed his hands, as who
should say, "Oh! oh! here comes a chapman for another of my girls." -- Mrs.
Lessington appeared to be impressed with the same idea, and overwhelmed the
little man with civility; while Maria, to whom he had before shown a great
preference, and who seemed to have been much better pleased with it, was piqued
at his now addressing himself entirely to her sister; and showed that she
severely felt the mortification, but endeavored to conceal her vexation, by
laughing and talking with Captain Mildred, who, being one of those military
heroes whose talents are greater in the field than in the cabinet, she found it
rather difficult to keep up the gaiety she affected; for Captain Mildred
besides that his head was very scantily stocked with ideas, was too fine a man
to give himself the trouble to produce the few he had, to amuse a country
parson's daughter. He only came with Blagham and Hughson, because he had
nothing better to do with himself; and had besides an inclination to buy one of
Hughson's horses, which he was in hopes of getting a bargain, and which he had
therefore been depreciating, and trying to put the little divine out of conceit
with; telling him that the horse in the first place had been strained behind,
and would never stand sound. "And besides," said he, "my dear Doctor, it
grieves all your friends to see you upon such a tall, long-legged animal. By
Heavens! Jack Norton of our regiment called to me the other day, as you rode
through East Street, and asked me who that little fellow upon the tail horse
was: 'For damme,' says he, 'he puts me in mind of Tom Thumb upon an elephant.'
-- Such was Captain Mildred, on whom neither beauty nor wit could make the
slightest impression, and who, equally stupid and selfish, had every
qualification for a rogue, except talents. But he had a tolerable person, a red
coat, and was said to be a man of fortune; so that he had been reckoned among
the misses a very charming man, and their mammas had invited him to their
concerts and their card parties.

Before the tea was finished, at which Rosalie so reluctantly assisted, Mr.
Hughson received from both her father and mother the most pressing invitation
to renew his visits as often as he could. "And I hope, my good Sir," cried Mr.
Lessington, "I hope you will not let the beginning of the shooting season
deprive us of the happiness of seeing you; for, I assure you, we shall have
excellent sport round about this village. I myself know of a great number of
birds. I expect my son too. My eldest son, will be here shortly: and I am sure
he will be greatly flattered by the honor of your acquaintance."

"I am sure he will not," sighed Rosalie to herself; "for never can a man be
imagined whom William would like so little. But, alas! my father knows he is
not coming."

Plans were now talked of for the next week, which Hughson spoke of as
dedicated to the gun, with childish eagerness. He gave to Mr. Lessington a very
long and elaborate description of a new gun he had bought, which had cost him
five and twenty guineas: not indeed that he wanted any such thing, for he was
an admirable shot -- killed nineteen out of twenty, and was reckoned as sure as
any man in Norfolk. "I remember about two years ago," said he, "I went out,
only I and my father's gamekeeper: and we killed, that is, I killed, about
forty brace in about five hours; for he hardly ever fired."

"Birds were remarkably plenty I suppose," said Mr. Lessington.

"Why no, really not so very remarkably plenty -- I have seen them as much so:
but, my dear Sir, Norfolk is the county for game.... why, I have seen, Sir, of
a morning, when the birds were at feed, the very ground covered with them; so
that you could not have thrown a pebble without touching them -- as close, Sir,
-- as close" --

Lessington, who by a glance from Rosalie's eye, saw that Hughson was doing
himself disservice with her by this sort of rhodomontading, saved him the
trouble of finding the comparison he was seeking for, by saying, "Yes, yes -- I
have been in Norfolk -- I know there is a prodigious quantity of game in that
county."

But Hughson, elevated with wine and inspired by love, could no longer check
the violent inclination he always felt, to relate some very mavelous story,
and to make himself the hero of it. He thought it was impossible to find any
audience better disposed to listen and believe, with the exception only of
Captain Mildred, whose coldness he imputed to envy. He began, therefore, and
told some of the most extraordinary adventures that ever were heard: -- how he
once, with his single arm, defended several officers of dragoons from the
insults of an enraged populace, whom some of them had offended, just for
throwing an old woman over a bridge into the river in a frolic.... "The old
woman," said he, "swam like a cork, and was taken out not a bit the worse. My
friend, Ned Whatley, as honest a fellow as ever lived, gave her a crown, and
bid her not make such a d -- d yelling, since there was no harm done. But there
came up a parcel of fishwomen and washerwomen* and the devil knows who; and
presently all the ^n, tag rag and bob tail, were under arms: and my friends
were forced to retreat to the Red Lion, and there they shut themselves up in a
room, Sir -- so, presently up comes the mob, and begins to batter the door,
Sir.... Oh! oh! -- thin^^ I -- are you there, my good friends? I shall have a
little conversation with you, gentlemen, in a minute.... So, Sir, out I went
among them all, and began to reason with them. They hissed, however, and began
to be very troublesome: but that I did not mind. I seized one of the foremost
by the collar; "damme" -- says I. I was not in orders then you know -- "Damme"
-- says I -- " I Will make an example of some of you. So, Sir, up comes a fellow,
six feet high, and as strong as Sampson. But I seized him with the other hand,
and was going to drag both him and the first rascal into the room, when up
comes a great strapping wench with a red hot poker in her hand. She gave me a
blow, Sir, upon my head, which cut through a thick hunting hat, Sir, and
stunned me sure enough."

"And pray, Hughson," said the Captain, with an air of incredulity, "what were
your friends the officers of horse doing all this while?" -- "Doing?" --
answered he -- "Doing? -- Why -- why they were -- they were shut up in the
room. What could they do, you know."

The evident fallacy and folly of such a story would not have been tolerated in
any other company. But Mildred was too heavy and too indolen^ to confute or
ridicule it; and the rest were the ^ery humble servants of the relator, except
Rosalie, who, disgusted more and more with every word he spoke, was extremely
glad to be relieved from hearing either his compliments or his stories; when it
was proposed they should all take a walk to the top of the hill, and that the
gentlemen should walk thither with them* and have their horses led. In the
bustle of their departure, Rosalie left the room, as if to get her hat. But
having done so, she glided away, and passing as quickly as she could through a
small orchard that lay on the other side of the house* she went into a copse
that adjoined to it, and was presently out of hearing the inquiries that she
supposed would be made for her. Perhaps her father and mother might chide her
on her return to the house. But she had so invincible a dislike to being
exposed to the impertinence of Blagham, or the ridiculous speeches of his new
friend, that there was nothing she had not rather submit to, that temporary
ill-humour could inflict, than to be exposed to such teasing and disgusting
conversation.

CHAP. III.
THE copse into which Rosalie had thrown herself, like an affrighted bird, was
very extensive, stretching along the edge of the hill, and making a curve as if
to let in the few houses that composed the village. It spread beyond into a
very extensive wood, and there assumed the ^^me of the Hunacres, probably a
corruption of hundred acres. It was as wild and almost as unfrequented as when
the ancient Anderid^e sought their food amidst the same entangled woods, then
overshadowing the whole country under the hills.

Now, however, there were some winding paths through it, made to solitary farms
around: And a nobleman, to whom the greater part of it belonged, had cut
ridings from the Downs toward his own house in two or three directions, to
facilitate the way of the sportsman. The path along which Rosalie went, was so
intricate, that she forgot how far or whither it carried her, till she found it
became dusk, and was stopped by arriving at one of these ridings or cuts
through the wood. She then recollected how far she had wandered from home, and
was turning to go back, when three gentlemen on horseback, followed by two
servants, came gal^oping so fast from a turn in this green lane a little beyond
her, that they were near her almost as soon as she percei^^d them. The foremost
of them checking his ^rse, and looking at her with some surprise, said to his
companions, "Here is a young lady who, if we are not right, I am sure will be
so obliging as to direct us."

Rather wondering than alarmed, Rosalie stopped, and the gentleman who had
first spoken, said, politely taking off his hat -- "We are going, Madam, to
Holmwood Park, which we plainly distinguished from the hill, and to which my
friend here, who ought to know, thought he could lead us by a nearer way than
that which we were directed to take. But he now thinks he has taken the wrong
turning, and that we are too much to the left. Can you inform us how we can
best make our way out of the wood? for if we could see the house again, we
could easily reach it."

Rosalie was about to answer, that the way they were in, led directly to a
common, which adjoined the Park at Holmwood, when the young man, of whom the
inquirer had spoken, as one who ought to know the way to it, jumped from his
horse, and exclaimed, "I cannot have forgotten you, whatever else I have
forgotten during two years absence. It is Rosalie, my dear play-fellow and
companion."

"It is indeed," answered she; "but, Heavens! Mr. Vyvian, how tall you are
grown? Upon my word, I should hardly have recollected you. How is my dear Mrs.
Vyvian? -- How are your sisters?"

The other two gentlemen, seeing the dialogue was not li^ely immediately to
end, dismounted, and were introduced to Rosalie; the one as the nephew of Mrs.
Vyvian, Mr. Montalbert, who, after a long residence abroad, was come to England
for a few months only, on a visit to the Vyvian family: the other as the Count
de Torriani, an Italian nobleman, to whom also the Vyvians were, though more
distantly, related. So many and so rapid were the questions that Mr. Charles
Vyvian now had to make, that he wholly engrossed the conversation: And as they
slowly walked down the green avenue before them, he seemed totally to have
forgotten whither he was going, (...) that he had any other business in the
world than to converse with Rosalie as long as he could. It was now, however,
so nearly dark, that she thought it would be wrong to proceed any farther. --
"I must wish you a good night," said she, "and make the best of my way through
the wood home."

"Indeed, but you must not think of returning by yourself," answered Vyvian. --
"Harry," added he, speaking to Montalbert "let us go home with Miss Lessington.
-- Shall we not, Harry?"

Harry answered, "With great pleasure:" and the opposition of Rosalie was in
vain.

"But we need not go down this way, surely," said Vyvian; "we may go along the
path I saw you in, and so through your father's orchard or garden, or something
-- I am sure I remember such a way."

Rosalie answered, that it was certainly a much shorter road, but it was only a
foot-path, and that there was a style to pass.

"Never mind the style," cried the young man, "we will leap our horses over."

He then led the way into the path, which only allowed two persons to walk
abreast. Mr. Montalbert and the Count de Torriani followed; the former
murmuring loudly against Vyvian's monopoly, and the narrowness of the path.

Rosalie expected to have found her father and mother returned from their walk,
and in no very pleasant humor, because she had left them* but, on entering the
house through the garden, the noise she heard in her father's book-room
convinced her that the party whom she so earnestly wished to avoid were not
gone, but were, on the contrary, set in to drinking; an alteration of plan
which did not at all surprise her, when Mr. Blagham and Mr. Hughson were of the
party.

Young Vyvian, whose sole meaning was to see her safe, was however now
compelled in common civility to inquire for her mother and her sisters. Mrs.
Lessington, amazed at his sudden appearance, received him with a mixture of
civility and confusion, for which Rosalie knew not how to account. Mingled with
this extraordinary expression, there was also some anger toward her, and
something that seemed like a disposition to reproach her for having introduced
visitors so unexpected.

Mrs. Lessington expressing her surprise at seeing him, when she imagined he
was at Cheltenham, or in the North with the rest of the family, he said, "The
Count de Torriani and my cousin Harry, having an inclination to see Holmwood,
we agreed to make a tour round the Coast, to pass about ten days at
Brighthelmstone, and to make Holmwood in our way back. The Abbe Hayward had
notice of our intentions yesterday, and expects us this evening. We lost our
way some how by a blunder of mine, and got down into Hu^acre wood, where we had
the singular good fortune to meet Miss Rosalie."

To Mrs. Lessington's inquiry after his mother's health, he said, that his last
letters spoke of her a^ being rather better. "But it is," said he (...) more
than six weeks since I have seen her, for (...) long have we been rambling
about; and her impatience to have me return is now so great, that I shall only
stay one day at Holmwood. -- Yet added he, evidently addressing himself to
Rosalie. "I am at this moment more disposed than ever I was in my life ^ make a
longer abode at our old enchanted, but not enchanting castle." Rosalie did not
seem to think any answer necessary to this: and Mrs. Lessington put on a look
of great gravity and reserve, but said nothing; and as at that moment Mr.
Montalbert did not seem to find any thing to say, a profound silence ensued for
a minute, which was interrupted by the noisy entrance of Mr. Lessington and his
friends. The former being apprised of the arrival of young Vyvian, came to pay
him his compliments: And the others were about to depart, or at least to
attempt it, though the whole party, without excepting even the master of the
house, seemed to have taken such large potations, that they appeared to be but
little in possession of their senses. Mr. Lessington, however, bustled up to
young Vyvian, expressing the greatest delight in meeting him: And, amidst the
confusion, Mr. Montalbert approached Rosalie, to whom he had yet hardly had an
opportunity of speaking, though his eyes had declared how much he wished it.
"Do you not recollect me Miss Lessington?" said he, speaking low -- "I
perfectly remember you, and the days I once passed with you at Holmwood made an
impression on me that never will be effaced. It has ever appeared to me since*
the very happiest period of the happy hours of my childhood; for I was then but
a boy. It (...) more," added he, "than eight years ago, and you were then very
young."

"You do me too much honor," answered Rosalie; "I was, indeed, very young --
but (an involuntary sigh forced its way as she spoke) those were my days of
unallowed felicity; it was my golden age, and every scene has imprinted itself
deeply on my memory... Yes! I well remember your coming to Holmwood -- with
your father, was it not?

"Yes; and an Italian tutor. I recollect, but I dare say you do not, that then
I could speak very little English."

"Why, you cannot speak much now, Sir," interrupted a voice from behind
Rosalie's chair. "I suppose by your accent, Sir, that you are a foreigner?"

" You suppose, Sir," said Mr. Montalbert angrily; and pray, Sir, who are you?"

"Me, Sir!" answered the Rev. Mr. Hughson -- "Me, Sir! -- Why, Sir, my name is
Hughson."

"Well, Sir," said Montalbert haughtily, "whatever name you bear, I suppose it
is not necessary for you to make a third in my conversation with this lady."
The stout, the brave, the magnanimous Hughson, he who had kept at b^y an
enraged populace, and protected, with his single arm, a whole corpse of officers
of dragoons, was, for some reason or other, appalled by the decided and
contemptuous tone taken up by Mr. Montalbert. The effects of liquor vary on
dif^nt constitutions. Some cowards it renders brave, and may, perhaps, render
some brave men cowards. However, that might be, Hughson attempted no reply: But
still, unwilling that this stranger should engross the attention of Rosalie, he
determined at least to keep as close to her as he could, and therefore squatted
down in the window seat near her, being in truth not very well able to stand.

Montalbert, shocked at his vulgarity and impertinence, and having no idea that
much ceremony was necessary toward a man, whom he supposed to be a little,
dirty, drunken curate, spoke in a still lower tone to Rosalie, and what was yet
more mortifying, he spoke in Italian, while, with open mouth and watery eyes,
her unfortunate admirer sat gasping and staring behind her totally disregarded.

Montalbert, as well as Rosalie, had forgotten not only that he was in the
room, but that any other persons were in it but themselves. From an oblivion so
pleasing, however, they were soon roused by Vyvian, who, disengaging himself
with great difficulty from the mandling civilities of Mr. Lessington, who was
very drunk and very tedious, came hastily to Montalbert and told him they must
go. Vyvian then took Rosalie's hand, and sighing said, "Alas! how little I have
seen of you, and that only by chance; can I not come tomorrow to take leave of
you, Rosalie? for you know I am going abroad again almost immediately; and who
knows when we shall meet once more? Tell me, Rosalie, do you think I (...) call
here again tomorrow?" Mrs. Le^ had by this time sidled up near her daughter,
to whom she did not allow time to reply, but with an air most repulsively grave
and formal, she said, "I am very sorry, Mr. Vyvian, it happens so, as your time
is so short; but my daughter is particularly engaged tomorrow. We are all
particularly engaged. It is extremely unfortunate indeed. Another time I hope
we shall be more lucky."

This rebuff seemed particularly mortifying to Vyvian. He bowed coldly to the
mother, and then, gently pressing the hand of Rosalie, which he still held, he
said in a whisper, "I must see you again; where are you going to?" -- "I do not
know, indeed," answered Rosalie, "for this is the first I have heard of any
engagement. I am afraid it is on some party with these men." She could add no
more; for a servant informed Mr. Vyvian and the other gentlemen that their
horse^ were brought round. Lessington again came (...) persecuting them with
his civilities; and (...) Lessington very evidently wished them gone. ^ became
impossible for either Vyvian or Montalbert to speak to Rosalie apart, though
they appeared equally to desire it; and with reluctance, that neither could
conceal, they left the house.

Blagham was no longer in a situation to be troublesome: And Miss Catharine,
somewhat ashamed of the figure he had made, had prevailed upon him to leave the
room..... Hughson, however, to whom the departure of the strangers ^ed to have
restored his consequence, sailed (...) listen eagerly to the remarks Mrs.
Lessington and Miss Catharine made upon them. "I should not have known Mr.
Charles Vyvian," said the latter. "How very tall he is."

"He is tall, indeed" replied her mother; "but you may see he is a mere boy.
That young man, would you believe it, Mr. Hughson, is hardly seventeen? He is
the son of Mr. Vyvian, you know, of Holmwood, with whose lady I used to be so
intimate. My daughter Rose used to live there a good deal when she was a child,
and this young man looks upon her as one of the family." -- Hughson, checking a
hickup which had nearly broken the sentence, cried, "Indeed! -- really! --
nothing to be sure can be more natural."

"Pray, Ma'am," said Miss Catharine, "who is that other gentleman; I don't mean
the foreign Count, but the other Englishman? He is a remarkable handsome man."

"I am surprised dear Miss Kitty should think so," sputtered Hughson. "To my
fancy now, he does not look at all like an Englishman -- not the least."

"Why, certainly," replied Mrs. Lessington, "he can hardly be called an
Englishman; for in the first place, his mother was a foreign lady; and, though
his father is an Englishman, he lived chiefly abroad, and this gentleman has
never been in England above half a year at a time, though they have a very fine
seat in the North of England, and a great fortune in the family."

"He seems to be a very proud man," said Hughson. "I believe I have affronted
h^ though I am sure I don't know what I said."

"I believe, indeed, that you did not," said Rosalie, "and you will pardon me,
Mr. Hughson, if I say, that you seemed to intend to affront him."

Hughson who had no clear idea of what he had said, would have taken her hand,
but she snatched it away, and hastened out of the room. Soon after she had the
satisfaction of hearing the whole party leave the house, and scamper away with
a degree of rashness which she thought must make her sister uneasy for the
safety of her lover.

Rosalie, whose spirits were fatigued by the events of the afternoon, could
not, however, compose herself to sleep. The sight of Charles Vyvian had
recalled all those scenes which she had vainly been trying to forget, and to
think of with less concern: And his manners, but still more those of his
relation, Mr. Montalbert, formed so decided a contrast to those of the persons
with whom it was now her lot to be associated, that she found she should, by
continually making the comparison, be rendered more uneasy than ever. She saw
too, by her mother's manner, that she would have yet to undergo some severe
reproofs for having brought Charles Vyvian and his two companions home with
her; and though it was easy to account for their appearance, which it must be
known was merely in consequence of accidentally meeting her, yet she knew that
the circumstance of her so abruptly quitting company, in which it was her
father's wish that she should remain, would bring upon her reproaches that she
should not soon or easily appease.

The next day verified her apprehensions. Her father ordered her to attend him
in his study at an early hour of the morning, as he was going out. She entered
dejectedly. Her mother was there, and both looked coolly upon her, as they bade
her shut the door and sit down. Mr. Lessington thus began:

"Rose, it is fit and right that you should know that you have extremely
displeased me."

"I am extremely sorry for it, Sir. It was by no means my intention."

"You think then, perhaps, that it is not improper to slight my friends, and
show that you despise them -- gentlemen whose notice does you so much honor,
and whose good opinion perhaps may be so material to you. Do you consider,
girl, that you have no fortune? That a clergyman's income dies with him? That
it is your business to endeavor to procure an establishment, instead of
affecting these fine romantic airs?"

"I affected no airs, Sir. I obeyed your commands, and made tea for the
gentlemen. I did not know you wished me to remain with them afterward,
especially as you must have perceived that they were not in a situation in
which they could be pleasant company for women."

"Prudish airs -- Were not your mother and your sisters with you? And do you
think I would have asked either them or you to stay in improper company? -- Let
me hear no more of all this, but listen to what I have to say to you. Mr.
Hughson is a young man of fortune; he is, in his family, his situation, and
prospects, every way unex^eptionable. He seemed to take particular notice ^f
you, notwithstanding your rudeness to him. ^ expect, if this partiality on his
part should go (...) my farther, that you will dispose yourself to ^eceive him
as a man to whom it would be agree^ble to me, and highly honorable and
advantageous to you, to be allied."

Rosalie was about to answer: But her father, ^ising and leaving the room,
said, with yet more ^ternness, "I will have no answer, unless it be an answer
of compliance." Then, turning to Mrs. Lessington, he added, "you will not fail
to enforce what I have said, and to impress on the mind of this young woman,
that, though she has hitherto found me an indulgent father, I know how to make
myself be obeyed." -- He then left the room, and Mrs. Lessington said, "You
see, Rose, that your father is peremotory. If Mr. Hughson.......

"Dear Madam," said Rosalie, "what occasion can there be for all these menaces
of anger, if I do not listen to Mr. Hughson, when it is not even known whether
Mr. Hughson will ever think of me again?"

"Perhaps your father has reasons, with which he may not think proper to
acquaint you, why he knows Mr. Hughson means to address you."

"Very certainly, Madam, Mr. Hughson could not communicate to my father what he
could not know himself last night; for so far from being capable of thinking
what he intended for the future, he knew not what he was about then; but,
admitting it to be so, why must I be compelled to listen to him? Indeed, my
dear Mamma, this Mr. Hughson is a man it is utterly impossible for me to like."

"It would be something new, Rose, and altogether unlike the heroines whose
adventures you have studied, if you should happen to like the man recommended
to you by your friends, and in every respect eligible. Do not think of doing a
thing so entirely out of rule; but contrive to take a liking not only to some
other man, but, if possible, to the very man to whom of all others it is
impossible you can ever be united."

"Rosalie blushed deeply, without exactly knowing why. "Dear Madam," said she,
"what a strange thing that is to say."

"As strange as true," replied Mrs. Lessington. "Its truth, I am much afraid,
will be too soon verified; but have a care, I promise you not only that nobody
will defend you in this dangerous absurdity, but that it will be the certain
means of estranging from you those friends who love you best...... I will not be
interrupted," added she, seeing her daughter was going to speak, "I will not be
interrupted -- hear me, and tell me afterward, whether you who have nothing,
you who must go into some humble business ^r even, perhaps, to service, if your
father should die, have any sort of pretensions to pleasing yourself, even if
the people you fancy you prefer were indeed so foolishly inconsistent as to
think for a moment of committing such a folly as taking you out of the ^ank you
are in, which, you may be assured, child, nev^ entered their heads, whatever
your vanity and your ignorance of the world may have put into yours."

"For God's sake, my dear mother!" said Rosalie, with tears in her eyes, "what
do you mean? This is the first time you ever talked to me in this manner! How I
have deserved it now, I am entirely ignorant. Did I ever say I liked any
particular person? -- or -- "

"Pho! pho!" cried Mrs. Lessington, interrupting her, "you cannot deceive me.
But let me earnestly exhort you, Rosalie, never to think of the persons to whom
you know I allude, but to determine to follow, like a reasonable woman, the
advice of those who know better what is fit for you than you do yourself."

Rosalie remained silent. Her soul abhorred the idea of receiving Hughson as a
lover; nor could she endure that a mother should for a moment believe her
capable of hesitating about him. The conversation she had held, however, was so
new, and so strange, that she had not courage to defend herself; and after a
short pause, Mrs. Lessington thus went on: --

"Did you ever know any woman who married just according to her own romantic
whims in setting out in life? -- Did I do it, do you think? -- Did Mrs. Vyvian?"

"Of you, Madam,^ said Rosalie, "I cannot pretend to speak. Mrs. Vyvian
certainly did not marry Mr. Vyvian from choice; but has she been happy? has not
^er whole life been embittered by the sacrifice she made, as I have heard to
her ^^ther's commands?"

"That was very different," said Mrs. Lessington. "My friend was -- " She
stopped, as she had often done before when their conversation had been led to
the same topic; and then immediately changing it, said, "But you now know my
opinion, and your father's commands. We are going today where you will again
be in company with Mr. Hughson: And it is expected of you, that you will behave
to him as a friend of your father's, and a gentleman whose partiality does you
honor."

"Whither am I to go, Madam?" said Rosalie in a dejected tone.

"To Chichester," replied her mother dryly... "We dine with Mr. Blagham. His
uncle is to be there with some other friends. Your sister Catharine's
settlement is to be signed. Afterward a party of friends dine with him on
venison; and we shall remain there all night, perhaps go to the assembly the
night after: You will, therefore, put up a small packet of clothes, and act
accordingly."

From the manner in which this was said, Rosalie knew no remonstrance against
an expedition so very irksome to her would be listened to; and that, however,
hateful to her, she must obey. She retired, therefore, with an heavy heart to
her own room, and began to dress, and to prepare for the party.

But her mother's oblique reproaches had made a great impression on her mind.
She imagined they must allude to Mr. Charles Vyvian or Mr. Montalbert; but
probably the former, as her mother could hardly suspect her of a partiality for
a man she had not seen since she was ten or eleven years old. In regard to Mr.
Vyvian her heart acquitted her; but she was at the same time conscious that
nothing could do so great a disservice to Hughson, in her opinion, as putting
him a moment in comparison with such (...) man as Montalbert.

CHAP. IV.
ROSALIE was soon ready to proceed on an expedition, from which she found no
pretense would excuse her. She mounted her sister Catharine's poney with
reluctance. Her father, mother, and Miss Lessington, were in the post chaise.
The other sister was also on horseback; and it did not add much to Rosalie's
prospect for the day, that it was her sister Maria who had been put out of
humor the preceding evening by the unfortunate and undesired preference
Hughson had shown Rosalie; and who, now sullen and pouting, endeavored to show
her sister that she had not forgotten the mortification.

They had ascended and were riding along the hill; but the morning being hot
and sultry, Rosalie turned her horse toward its edge, where began a wood that
shaded one side of it, and the ash and beech afforded a temporary skreen.
Several roads wound up the hill from the villages below, and as Rosalie was
crossing one of these, she saw Montalbert suddenly appear, who, approaching her
with the common salutation of the morning, rode along by her side without
noticing the rest of the party.

Rosalie conscious that this would give great offense to her father and mother,
and unwilling to increase the dislike they seemed already to have taken to him
from the little attention he showed to them the preceding evening, inquired if
he would not speak to them?

"Bye and bye," said he coldly; "but good God, is it never possible to have a
moment's conversation with you? -- I have a great respect for Mr. and Mrs.
Lessington, because they are so nearly related to you: But you know I have not
the pleasure of being acquainted with them."

There was something of peculiar dejection in the manner of Montalbert as he
spoke.

"You are not well?" said Rosalie.

"Not very well," replied he; "but the hot weather of England never agrees with
me. There is something strangely oppressive in it. I don't know whether it is
that which has affected poor Charles; but, I assure you, he is seriously ill --
so ill, that we do not think of going tomorrow. The Count, being obliged to be
in London, left us this morning, as it was uncertain when Charles would be well
enough."

"I am very sorry," said Rosalie with quickness, "it will so distress my dear
Mrs. Vyvian! -- Has he sent for any advice?"

^It were well worth while to be ill," said Montalbert, "were one sure of
exciting interest so tender." -- "But you do not answer me," said Rosalie,
affecting not to hear him. "Has Mr. Vyvian sent for Mr. Harrison, the
apothecary?"

"I believe Mr. Hayward intended it," replied Montalbert; "for the poor old man
was frightened out of his wits. Charles, however, opposed it. Perhaps it will
be nothing. But you know that his mother has nursed him to death; and (...)
Hayward is as timid as an old woman about him."

"I am very uneasy," said Rosalie, pausing ^ moment. "I think I had better tell
my mother* She will surely see Mr. Vyvian, as she knows how very wretched her
friend would be she her son b^l at a distance from her." Thus saying, and
without waiting for an answer, she rode toward the chaise and bade the driver
stop. Montalbert did not go with her, but followed the chaise at some distance.

"Well?" -- said Mrs. Lessington sharply, as the chaise stopped -- "and what
now?"

"Dear Madam," answered Rosalie in visible consternation, "here is Mr.
Montalbert, whom I have met by accident, who tells me that Mr. Charles Vyvian
is taken very ill!"

"Well?" -- cried Mrs. Lessington impatiently -- "and what would you have us
do?"

"I thought, Madam," said Rosalie, deeply blushing and speaking quick, 'I
thought you might be alarmed on account of your friend Mrs. Vyvian, and might
-- might -- "

"I don't see what we can do, my dear," said Mr. Lessington. "Probably Mr.
Hayward has taken proper care of the young gentleman. -- I suppose," added he,
addressing himself to Rosalie, "since Mr. Montalbert came hither by accident,
that Mr. Charles has not sent any message expressing a wish to see your mother?"

"No, Sir," answered Rosalie.

"Well then, child, there is no call for our in^ference: I wish him better with
all my heart. (...), you keep up with the chaise -- Andrew, drive on, we shall
be late."

Andrew obeyed: And Montalbert, who had very slowly rode on while this
conference lasted stopped, as the chaise passed and made a formal bow (...) ^he
persons in it, but without showing any ^ntention to speak to them. He then
rejoined Rosalie, and continued to ride the p^ (...) forty or fifty yards
behind the chaise, complaining of the perverseness of his fate, in her being to
stay perhaps several days at Chicheste^* while she, in her turn, expressed very
great uneasiness about Mr. Vyvian, and seemed to attend very little to the
unequivocal expressions Montalbert used to impress her with an idea of his own
attachment to her. At length they came into the turnpike road. Rosalie saw her
father look out repeatedly, as if enquiring with angry countenance, whether
Montalbert had left her, which she now entreated him to do. He sighed deeply,
and said, in a mournful tone, "And so you are going to that town, and do not
return perhaps these two or three days, and before that time we shall have left
the country, and I shall see you no more!"

This idea, which seemed so distressing to him, was by no means the pleasantest
that could be presented to the imagination of Rosalie. Her heart seemed to
re-echo, "I shall see him no more!" But she attempted to smile, and to answer
cheerfully, "O yes -- I am persuaded we shall meet again." -- "But when? or
where?" cried Montalbert, fixing his (...) earnestly on her face. "Alas! Miss
Lessington, I shall soon leave England; and this, perhaps, is the last time we
shall meet!"

"I should be so sorry to believe that," answered she, hesitating and blushing,
"that I will not stay to hear it repeated..... Adieu, Sir* fail not to assure
your friend of my sincere wishes for his recovery; and tell my dear venerable
friend, the Abbe Hayward, how much I lament that we never meet as we used to
do."

Mr. ^sington, now putting his head once more out of the window, waved his hand
impatiently for his daughter to keep up with them. Rosalie understood the
signal but too well; and though relu^ntly, put her horse in a gallop, while
Montalbert checked his, more reluctantly still. But, as he was on a rising
ground, he remained in the same place, following with his eyes the object from
which he was so unwilling to part, till a wood, into which the road turned,
concealed her from his sight.

Rosalie, in the mean time, proceeded with a heavier heart than she knew how to
account for. The illness of Charles Vyvian, which alarmed her not only on his
own account, but on that of his mother, and the certainty that she should be
compelled to pass two or three days among persons so extremely disagreeable to
her, were indeed reasons enough for chagrin; but the concern she felt was
something deeper than belonged to either of these. That she had seen Montalbert
for the last time, she could not think of without the most acute uneasiness:
And so much did that ^dea dwell on her mind, that she arrived at the end of her
journey hardly knowing how she got t^ere: Nor was she roused from the
indulgence (...) these painful reflections, till the troublesome assiduities of
Hughson restored her to herself, by imposing on he^ ^he necessity of repressing
his impertinence; wh^ she did, however with an asperity so unusual to her, that
her mother severely reproved her the moment they were alone. "Dear Madam," said
Rosali^* "that man is so utterly disagreeable to me: He is so ^ward, so
ignorant -- " "It is a misfortune to you, child," answered her mother gravely,
"that you have lived in a style, and among people who have given you a distaste
for those of ^ur own rank. However that may be," added she, with still greater
solemnity, "I repeat to you Rosalie, that you are expected by your father to
behave to Mr. Hughson not only as to his particular friend, but as to one, if
you should be lucky enough to procure him for an husband, would establish you
in possession of a fortune much greater than you ever can have the least right
to expect." -- "I had rather dedicate my whole life to the most humiliating
poverty, Madam," answered Rosalie with spirit; "I had rather not only go to
service, but submit to the most laborious offices, even to work in the fields,
than condemn myself to become the wife of Mr. Hughson."

"Very fine, indeed," said Mrs. Lessington, "very romantic, and very sublime.
But hear me Miss Rose: If you are weak, wicked, and vain enough to think, for a
moment, of that simple young man, Charles Vyvian, which I f^ I greatly fear,
that proud coxcomb Montalbert has been putting in your head, know that the most
remote hint given of any such -- such absurd and ridiculous idea, to my friend
Mrs. Vyvian, would not only put an eternal bar between you, but would forever
ruin you in her good opinion."

"I think of Mr. Charles Vyvian, Madam," said Rosalie, "no otherwise than as
the son of my dear benefactress! -- No, indeed, my dear Mamma, I never was
quite so absurd as to have any other idea!"

"Take care you never are then," replied her ^her, "and be not so blind to your
own inte^ or so deaf to the dictates of common sense, ^o throw away, by
refusing Mr. Hughson, an opportunity that may never offer again." Then,
perceiving her daughter was about to answer her, she added, "Let us have no
more romance, Rosalie. It will answer no purpose, but to irritate your father
without changing his resolution. You will dress for dinner. Tomorrow there is
to be an assembly. It is already settled that we are to go; and, as it is the
first time you have been seen there, I desire you will look as well as you can."

"Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Rosalie, as soon as her mother left her, "I am
thus to be dressed up, and offered like an animal to sale; and my mother seems
to think it a matter of course...... Oh! Montalbert, how different, are your
manners from those of the people I am condemned to live among! -- Dear and
amiable patroness of my happy infancy, little did you imagine, when you were so
tenderly kind to your unfortunate Rosalie, that you were laying up (...) her
future years insupportable mortification! -- Had I never been blessed in your
society, had I never known those who are related to you, I should not now be
perpetually making comparisons so much to the disadvantage of persons among
whom it is my lot to live, and I should then have been as happy as my sisters."

Very heavily for Rosalie passed t^ day. Mr. Hughson was sometimes extremely
troublesome* But finding her still cold and repulsive, he (...) and then tried
what could be effected by cha^ his battery, and affecting to neglect her so
(...) sister, who, in her turn, put on a disdainful (...) in evident resentment
of the preference he had lately shown Rosalie, who so little desired it.

It was not, however, in the eyes of Hughson only that she appeared the fairest
of the rural nymphs from 'under the hills.' Others of Mr. Blagham's
acquaintance, who were of their dinner party, made the same discovery: And two
of them attempted, during the afternoon, to engage her for the ball of the
ensuing evening. She refused them both civilly, but positively.

"Aye," said one of them in a whisper, "I see how it is -- Hughson is the happy
man. Is it not so, Miss Rose?"

"If you mean, Sir," answered she coldly, "that Mr. Hughson's happiness is to
arise (...) dancing with me tomorrow, I assure you* (...) are mistaken."

"What, are you not engaged to him then?"

"No, Sir; nor shall I engage myself to any body."

"Hey!" -- cried Hughson, rising and skipping across the room -- "Hey! what is
all that? -- who talks of engagements? -- Hey! -- why, I ^ope, Miss Rosalie,
nobody has been pretending to take away my partner. Surely you understand Ma'am
that you are engaged to me?"

"Indeed, Sir, I do not," replied Rosalie, "and I should be sorry you
understood it."

"There!" -- cried one of the young men who came from a provincial town in
another county, -- ^here! I have still a chance. Sir," added he, ^essing
himself very solemnly to Hughson, (...) tell you what is a rule with us -- that
is with our ladies -- and you know what excellent, genteel, fashionable
meetings we have at -- Sir, it is a rule among the ladies of -- never to engage
themselves to a gentleman of a black coat, while they have a chance of being
asked by any other: And damme if I don't think they are in the right."

" You think, Sir," said Hughson, coloring violently and trembling with
passion; "and pray Sir -- I say -- Sir, that is -- was there any question asked
as to what you, Sir, think, Sir?"

"I beg," said Rosalie, who had no inclination to have a quarrel begin between
these two coats of different colors on her account, "I beg that the
conversation may drop. I have no intention (...). Hughson, of dancing at all."

"Oh!" cried the young man, his opponent, "the whole room will rise, by G --,
against such an inhuman resolution..... No, no, that will never be allowed. --
Here, Blagham, before you sit down to cards, you dog you, come and set this
matter to rights for us."

"I beg leave to retire from the discussion then, Sir," said Rosalie rising;
"though I cannot imagine how either you, or Mr. Blagham, can be interested in a
matter so immaterial to you both."

"Eh!" cried Blagham -- "why, my Rose of beauty, you have all your thorns about
you (...) night. Aye! aye! Sir, thus it is -- thus it is (...) thus do these
imperious little divinities trea^ till they are married... Why now there is
(...) Kitty as great a tyrant as that little lioness (...) sister; but you see
she begins to look tame and demure already. Come, come, Miss Rose, frowns do
not become the fair, child." -- He was then proceeding in the same style, when,
her patience being entirely exhausted, she snatched away her hand, which
Blagham endeavored to hold, and left the room.

Before she returned, the card tables were adjusted: And Mr. and Mrs.
Lessington, who dearly loved a game at whist, were settled with Blagham, who
really had, and Hughson who fancied he had, great skill in the game. Rosalie,
therefore, seeing her two persecutors employed, and her father and mother
deeply engaged, took out her work, and sat down behind Mrs. Lessington, as much
out of sight as possible: But this peaceful state she was not long suffered to
enjoy. The idle men, who remained, insisted on making a party for a round
table; and with whatever reluctance, Rosalie was compelled to join them* and to
be listening for three mortal hours to (...) sad attempts at wit, which a
commerce tabl^ never fails to produce.

At length, however, the evening ended; (...) for Rosalie the following arrived
but too soon.

Dragged to a scene, where she considered herself exposed as an animal in a
market to the remarks ^d purchase of the best bidder, it was w^ extreme
reluctance that Rosalie entered the b^room; nor had she by any means taken
(...) to add to the attractions of her person which ^e^ mother had insisted
upon. The simplest and ^est muslin dre^ without feathers, flowers or ribands,
was all she put on; (...) her sister Maria came down as showy and blooming as
ribands and rouge could make her.

Mrs. Lessington would have reproved her youngest daughter for having thus
neglected her admonitions; but, when she saw the three together, she could not
help being sensible that Rosalie looked like a girl of fashion, while Catharine
and Maria had the appearance of people dressed for the performance of strolling
plays, with all the finery the property man could furnish. Without any
remonstrance, therefore, she was suffered to go with the rest: But not so
easily did she escape from the renewed importunities of Mr. Hughson to dance
with him, who having engaged her father to interfere in his favor, she
received so peremptory an order to accept him, accompanied by looks so angry
and menacing, that she was compelled, though with extreme reluctance, to
submit. Her sister, on the point of being married, was of course taken out by
her lover: But by some mortifying fatality Miss Maria was unasked; and the
first dance was nearly ended, when, to the extreme surprise of Rosalie, who
with her skipping partner was arrived at the bottom, she saw, (almost doubting
the information of her eyes) her sister Maria standing up with Montalbert*

The change of her countenance, when it was her turn to take hands with him,
expressed (...) forcibly than words could have done her asto^ment. Montalbert
perceived it. "You (...) wonder to see me here?" said he. -- "Wond^" cried she
-- "Good Heavens! -- and your fr^ how does he do? -- He is certainly better,
since you could leave him." The figure of the dance now obliged them to
separate; but in a few moments declining to go down the dance, which was soon
after over, Montalbert seated himself by her, taking without any scruple the
place of her partner, whom she sent away for some negus. "You inquire after my
friend," said Montalbert, "with an interest so tender, that, however I may envy
his happiness in exciting that interest, it becomes me to satisfy your
inquiries: Yet you might, perhaps, obtain more satisfactory information from
himself."

"From himself!" cried Rosalie eagerly; "is he here then?"

"Alas!" answered Montalbert, again deeply sighing, "he seems insensible of the
good fortune which I would purchase with worlds, if I possessed them, for there
he is conversing with L^d^ --, and Lady Anne --, at the other en^ of the room.
Shall I go and tell him, Madam," added he coolly, "that you desire to see him?"

"By no means," replied Rosalie, "by (...) means -- not for the world!"

"Insensible fellow!" cried Montalbert, "whom rank can a moment detain from
Miss Rosalie Lessington. Ah! if he saw with my eyes -- if his heart felt as
mine does!" --

"I am very glad, however," said she, affecting not to understand this, "I am
extremely glad to find Mr. Vyvian so much recovered; I was (...) alarmed at his
threatened illness on account of his mother."

"On account of his mother!" repeated Montalbert.

"Yes; Sir," said Rosalie gravely, "certainly on account of his mother."

At this moment two persons of very different description approached them....
Hughson came smirking and prancing with a glass of negus, and began telling how
he had mixed it after a manner peculiar to himself; but seeing that Rosalie
gave no attention to him, and that Montalbert mad^ no offer to resign the place
he had usurped, he remained looking even less wise than ordinary, till his
dismay was increased by the appearance of Vyvian, who, putting him on one side
with very little ceremony, entered into conversation with Rosalie, who
expressed as warmly as ^e felt it, the pleasure his recovery gave (...) ^he
loved Charles Vyvian exactly as she loved her brothers. Brought up with him
from her childhood, she had never considered him for a moment in any other
light, nor did she suppose it possible, notwithstanding what her mother had
said, that any other person could entertain an idea of his having for her any
other attachment than that which might subsist between a brother and a sister.
Vyvian was fourteen months younger than she was; and nothing could in her
apprehension, be more absurd than to suppose Vyvian, not yet eighteen, would
see her in any other light than she thought of him. This gave to her manner
toward him an ease which she was far from feeling when she conversed with
Montalbert (...) now, without any hesitation, or indeed any apprehension of
impropriety, she rose from her seat, and walked with him to the other end of
the room, Montalbert taking his place in silence on the other side; while the
luckless Hughson drank up himself what he had fetched for his partner, and then
went with a rueful countenance to find at the sideboard below something more
powerful to dissipate the chagrin he felt, as well as the awkward sensations of
conscious inferiority. Rosalie in the mean time, not thinking about him, was
inquiring of Charles Vyvian why he prolonged his stay in the country, when he
was well enough to go? "I thought," said she, "I thought you told me, that Mrs.
Vyvian did not even know of your intentions of being at Holmwood. If she should
hea^ of your remaining there on account of illness, it is so far from advice, I
cannot imagine why you stay."

"What would you think," replied he in a (...) whisper, as if he was solicitous
that his (...) might not hear him -- "what would you think Rosalie, if I were
to tell you, that I went thither in the hope of seeing you; that I linger here
for no other reason than because I cannot prevail upon myself to quit the
country where you are?"

"I should think," said Rosalie hesitating, "and I should say, that I was very
sorry Mr. Vyvian should talk so wildly and improperly --." She was proceeding,
though she hesitated, blushed, and was evidently disconcerted, when she was
interrupted by her mother, who coming toward her, said, with more appearance
of ang^r than she had ever yet shown, "Why is it, Rose, that you thus quit Mr.
Hughson I am astonished at your rudeness, child, and must insist upon having no
more of such behavior." Mrs. Lessington then seized her hand, and giving it
into that of Hughson, said, with a sort of convulsive laugh, "Here, Sir -- I am
sure Rose will be happy -- he! he! he! -- to go down the dance with you. I am
sure she does not wish to be left out of this dance."

Hughson then, endeavoring to smile and smirk in order to conceal the extreme
vexation he felt, advanced to take her hand; but, from some unusual courage
which at that moment she felt, some sudden impulse for which she could hardly
account, and which she afterward thought blameable, she snatched away the hand
Hughson would have taken, and telling him disdainfully that she did not know
that she should dance any ^ore, she turned to the seat she had before occupied,
whither Vyvian, wholly regardless of the evident anger of Mrs. Lessington,
followed her*

Hughson, swelling with rage and resentment, which he had, however, no means of
satisfying, now seemed to give up the point in absolute despair. But,
accustomed as he had been to fancy that so clever a little fellow, with his
fortune and expectations, might have his choice among the young women of a
whole county, he could not repress the mortification he felt. The plan that
Montalbert had adopted of dancing with Maria Lessington, in order to obtain the
opportunity of conversing with her sister, had been so far from answering, that
it had entirely ba^ed his pu^se...... He now saw himself engaged for the
evening, and prevented from enjoying a moment's conversation with Rosalie,
while his more fortunate cousin was happy enough wholly to engro^ her attention.

Montalbert, however, who had seen too much of the world to be easily diverted
from his design, made a false step as he was going down the dance that was now
begun, and protesting he had hurt himself so as to make his going on
impossible, was limping to a seat; but seizing on poor Hughson in his way, he
cried, "My good Sir, I perceive your fair partner declines dancing a^ more; I
am, most unfortunately for myself, di^abled -- It will be happy for you; for
you (...) have the pleasure of taking one lovely sister instead of the other."

Hughson, clever fellow as he thought himself, was so overawed by the easy
manners and conscious superiority of Montalbert, that he had nothing to say,
but advancing toward Miss Maria, as if this was an arrangement to which he was
under the necessity of submitting, they sullenly finished the dance together;
while Montalbert availing himself of the success of his stratagem, seated
himself on the other side of Rosalie, who, however, unwilling to disoblige her
mother, forgot in a few moments that she was likely to do so, while she
attended sometimes to Vyvian as to a brother whom she loved, or as to a very
young man whose wild sallies were pardonable; but to Montalbert she listened
with sensations very different. She kn^w far less how to repress the oblique
declarations he made to her -- declarations which she trembled to listen to,
while she felt conscious, though not daring to own it to herself, ^at all the
future happiness of her days depended on their sincerity.

Mrs. Lessington had retired to cards after her last sharp remonstrances to her
daughter; and the eagerness with which she always pursued her game, kept her in
another room for some time. At length, however, she was either put out of the
game by rotation, or some evil-disposed persons had whispered to her what was
passing among the dancers; for about an hour and an half after her last rebuke,
she returned to the ball-room, and, in a voice and manner more angry than
before, told Rosalie that she was going home, and should take her thither at
the same time. "As to your sisters," added she, laying great empha^ on her
words, "as they know better how to (...) have, I need not interrupt their
amusement -- they shall stay as long as they please."

Rejoiced to be released on any terms from a repetition of reproaches in a
public room, she ^ed her mother that she was quite ready to attend her. "Very
well, Miss," replied Mrs. Lessington -- "it is mighty well....... Come, Sir,"
continued she, turning to Charles Vyvian, "as we are old acquaintance, you
know, you shall favor me with your arm -- but stop -- I must beg that you will
first be so good as to accompany me to the top of the room, I must speak to
Catharine and Maria." -- Without waiting for an answer from Vyvian, she ^ook
his arm, and led him away.

"My blessing on your dear Mamma!" said Montalbert, smiling half maliciously --
"how kind she is to me! but the moments are precious^ tell me, I do beseech
you, Rosalie, is it impo^ble for me to see you again before I leave the country
-- before I leave England -- for years!"

"How is it possible?" answered Rosalie, hardly knowing what she said.

"It would be possible," replied he, "if you would only try to oblige me."

"O no! no!" cried she with quickness, "pray do not think of it. It would be
utterly improper, if it were not impossible."

"Do you rise early?" said Montalbert, dis^garding this faint repulse -- "Do
you ^ver w^ before breakfast?"

"Why will you ask?" answered Rosalie.

"Because, as I shall certainly quit Holmwood House after tomorrow -- as I
cannot again importune you -- as I shall probably -- ah! too p^ -- never see
you again, let me entreat you (...) see me for one half hour before I go?"

"I cannot indeed, S^!" ans^ (...) "To what end would you ask, what (...) you
would think it very wrong were I to grant*

"But if I am in the neighborhood of your house, early on the morning after
tomorrow, I might have a chance of saying adieu for the last time?"

Rosalie did not reply: For her mother was by the ^e returned, and sharply
bidding her follow, went hastily to the hired chaise that waited for them.

CHAP. V.
VERY bitter were the reproaches which Rosalie was compelled to hear during
their way home. She bore them with patience and silence, conscious perhaps that
they were not wholly unmerited. She was, indeed, willing enough to acknowledge
that she should not so rudely have repulsed Hughson in positive disobedience of
her father's commands. But why her mother should make her conversation with
Charles Vyvian so great a crime, she could not imagine, since in fact she had
shown a much greater disposition to ^verse with his cousin than with him, and
was perfectly conscious that she gave him no other ^ence than what arose from
the long intimacy, (...) being so much together in childhood, had created
between them..... On this conversation, however, it was that Mrs. Lessington
dwelt with acrimonious repetition -- protesting to her daughter, that if Mrs.
Vyvian were acquainted with the impropriety, folly, and disobedience she had
been guilty of, her favor would be forfeited forever.

After listening to such sharp reproaches, intermingled with many assurances of
the ang^ and resentment of both her parents, unless she behaved in a very
different manner to Mr. Hughson* Rosalie obtained with some difficulty leave to
retire, when the image of Montalbert was the only one that she found rested
forcibly on her mind. His conversation made a deeper impression the more she
reflected on it. Montalbert was not only the most elegant and agreeable man she
had ever conversed with, but he appeared to her to be the most unlikely man in
the world to amuse himself with the cruel, yet too frequent folly of making
professions that mean nothing. Montalbert therefore loved her. An idea so
soothing acquired new power to charm her in proportion as she reflected on all
he had said, and the manner in which he said it. How fortunate would be her
destiny, should she become the wife of such a man, and how was it possible that
her mother, who must see the marked preference he gave her, could hesitate a
moment between him and such a man as Hughson! It was true, Mr. Montalbert was a
Catholic, but of what consequence was that? Was not her mother's earliest and
be^ friend of the same persuasion? -- Such were (...) of the contemplations
which engrossed the thoughts of Rosalie, and, fatigued as she was, kept her
from repose till she heard the whole party return. Loud mirth, which echoed
throughout the house, declared the joyous hearts of the company. Rosalie
particularly distinguished the boisterous laugh and horse-play of Blagham, and
the ideot-like chuckle of Hughson. Rosalie, delighted to have escaped this
conclusion to the evening, and fearing that her sister, who shared her bed for
that night, might either be elated with the amusements of the latter part of
the evening, or not yet have recovered of the ill-humour she had felt at the
beginning of it so as to enter into conversation with her, either to testify
her pleasure or ve^t her ill-humour, Rosalie affected to be asleep. The next
morning was fixed for their return home.

At breakfast every body affected to resent to Rosalie what had passed the
evening before. -- And while Mr. Lessington regarded her with evident marks of
displeasure, and would not speak to her, while her mother, still more angry,
talked at her, and encouraged Blagham, in his strictures on the company who
were at the assembly, to ridicule the two traveled men, who were, he said, the
greatest coxcombs he ever recollected to have seen -- to which Hughson very
warmly assented, casting at the same time a look of resentment at Rosalie, as
if to say, "Yet you Miss, preferred these men to me?"

"For my part," said Blagham, "by the Lord, if I had a sister who preferred
such Frenchified chaps to honest Heart of Oak Englishmen, why I Would send her off
to be a Signora or Mademoiselle among them -- I should think such a bad taste a
disgrace to my family. To be sure, in regard to these two fine gentlemen, they
being Papists is reason enough for their being educated among your Seniors and
Monseers; but what the use is of sending our young nobility* and gentry to
learn a parcel of useless coxcomb^ amongst them, I never cou^ discover; and I
own Sir," addressing himself to Mr. Lessington, "that when I consider this
matter, I cannot but think that the Legislature of our three kingdoms ought to
interfere."

Before Mr. Lessington, who never spoke without due consideration and emphasis,
could return an answer, 'Miss Maria said, "Oh! there they go."

"Who go," inquired her mother.

"My sister Rose's great and fine friends*" answered Maria, "Mr. Vyvian and Mr.
-- I forget his name, that very finest of all fine men."

Rosalie who had seen them as well as her sister, could not help blushing.
Montalbert had looked earnestly in as he passed, and checked his horse a moment
when he perceived he had caught her eye.

"I hope," said Mrs. Lessington austerely, "that Mr. Vyvian is returning
immediately to his mother, who is extremely ill, who knows nothing of his being
here, and who would be extremely unhappy were she to be informed of it. It was
but the day before yesterday he was ill in bed," added she, casting a
significant glance at her youngest daughter, "and last night he was at a ball."

"He did not dance, however, Madam," said Rosalie; "and I understood came
hither only to consult a physician."

"Who informed you of all this, Ma'am," answered her mother, "and why do you
take upon (...) to answer for him^

Rosalie whose conscience was perfectly clear in regard to Vyvian, answered
calmly, "He told me so himself, Madam; and I answered, because I thought your
conversation addressed particularly to me."

"Humph," -- said Mrs. Lessington contemptuously -- "silence, child, would
often become you much better."

The other young ladies had a great deal to do in the town; for Miss Catharine
was now to be married in three days. Mantua-makers and milliners were therefore
to be hurried; and, as soon as breakfast was over, they went out together for
that purpose, attended by Blagham and Hughson, while Rosalie remained where she
was, having no ambition to accompany them. Her preparations for her sister's
wedding were confined, (as it was intended that Maria only should accompany the
bride,) and about these she was by no means solicitous.

Disagreeable and uneasy to her as the remonstrances and reproaches were that
she was still obliged to hear, she flattered herself that one good effect would
arise from the circumstances of the preceding evening -- that Hughson,
convinced of its inefficacy, would carry his suit no farther, and that his
pride would prevent her being teazed with addresses, which her sister seemed
disposed to receive favorably.

But in this hope she was disppointed. The admiration Rosalie had so
universally excited, while her sister had been hardly noticed, the whispers of
approbation that he had heard from the most fashionable set in the room, for
whose opinion the whole country around had the most implicit deference, as well
as the impression she seemed to have made on Vyvian and Montalbert, were
altogether circumstances so far from deterring Hughson from pursuing her, that
they served only to inflame his ambition: And, though he affected to direct his
attention toward Miss Maria, for a while, in hopes of piquing Rosalie, he soon
renewed those expressions of affection and protestations of unwearied
perseverance, from which Rosalie foresaw so much persecution and trouble.

As Hughson was to perform the marriage ceremony between his friend Blagham and
Miss Kitty Lessington, he went back with the family; and by his troublesome
assiduities, and ridiculous attempts at gaiety and wit, deprived her of the
satisfaction she would have derived from having left a place so very
disagreeable to her as the provincial town where they had passed the last three
days..... At home she at least hoped to enjoy the solitude of her own room; but
she dared not ask herself, whether she ought to venture the meeting Montalbert
had so earnestly solicited* (...) She felt all its impropriety; then
endeavored ^ reconcile herself to a step from which she thought no evil
consequence could possibly arise. "My mother," said she, arguing this point
with herself, "my mother will never forgive me, should she know it. But how
will she know it? -- and what (...) harm is there in it? -- It would certainly
have a bad appearance, were a young woman known to have private meetings with
any one -- but what meetings can I have? -- Is not Mr. Montalbert immediately
going back to Italy: And is there any probability of my ever seeing him again?
-- Ah! no." -- The argument concluded with a deep sigh: But it had not helped
to determine her. From an almost intuitive sense of propriety, for she had
received but little instruction on such matters, she was conscious that she
ought not to go out with a view of meeting Montalbert. Yet to think that she
had seen him for the last time, to let him go with impressions of her having a
predilection in favor of such a man as Hughson, of her being happy among such
society as she was condemned to, it was impossible to determine on. Sleep the
ensuing night was driven from the pillow of Rosalie by these debates; but it
was at this season, long before day appeared with its first dawn, however, she
left her bed; for it would very soon be necessary to determine whether she
would venture to commit such an impropriety as meeting Montalbert, or suffer
him to depart under the impressions he would carry with him, if she saw him no
more.

His dejection when he spoke of immediately leaving England, his respectful
manners, the warm and lively affection he seemed to have for her, the
advantageous light in which his honorable addresses appeared to her, all
contributed to dispose her to meet him. Against it there was only that internal
sense of prudence, (which like the voice of conscience, could not be entirely
stifled,) and the fear of offending her mother. Yet why should her mother be
offended? -- Considered in every way whether as to fortune* rank of life,
family, or prospects, there could, she thought, be no comparison between
Montalbert and Hughson; and if to have her married well was the wish of her
parents, why should they be angry at her not declining an acquaintance which
seemed likely to end in an establishment above their hopes. There was some
truth, but more sophistry, in the arguments she used with herself to conquer
her remaining apprehensions; when, having determined to venture, since it could
be but for once, she left the house, and trembling and looking behind her at
every step, hastened through the heavy dews and gray fogs of a late October
morning to the copse where she had first unexpectedly met Vyvian and
Montalbert, and where he had told her he should be very early on this morning,
the last of his stay in the country, in hopes of her giving him an opportunity
of taking a long leave of her.

As she had usually been a very early riser, and frequently walked to some
neighboring village, or farm-house, before the rest of the family went risen,
the servants and laborers, who saw h^ pass, took no notice of it: And she had
crossed the orchard, and traversed the first copse with the swiftness of an
affrighted fawn, before she gave herself time to breathe. The gloomy quiet of
every o^ ^round her, the heavy gray* mists that hung (...) the half-stripped
trees, their sallow leaves slowly ^lling in her path, had something
particularly awful and oppressive. She could hardly draw her breath, and her
heart beat so violently that she leaned against the style which in one place
divided the wood. "Whither am I going?" said she; "to meet a man, who, till a
week since, was a stranger to me! How am I sure that he will not despise me for
this easy compliance; perhaps I shall forfeit his good opinion -- perhaps --
surely it were better to retreat." There was, however, no longer time to
hesitate; for at the end of the path before her Montalbert appeared. He sprang
forward eagerly, the moment he saw her -- "This is very good, dearest Miss
Lessington," cried he; "how infinitely I am obliged to you!"

"And now," said Rosalie, collecting all her resolution, "let me not risk my
mother's displeasure by staying long; but receive, Sir -- receive my sincere
good wishes for your health and happiness, and suffer me to bid you adieu!"

"Good Heavens!" replied he, "and will you already leave me? -- No, Rosalie,
our time is precious, and I will not throw it away in a profusion of words. I
love you, and am sensible that on you alone depends the happiness of my future
(...). I will not, however, deceive you. I am a younger brother; and though the
fortune of my family is very considerable, much of my expectations depend on my
mother, who is a native of another country, who has hardly ever been in
England, and who dislikes the customs, the manners, and, above all, the
religion of this. With a great number of prejudices, which contribute but
little to the happiness of her family, nor* I fear, to her own -- she has
however, always been to me an affectionate, if not a tender mother, and it
would be equally ungrateful and impolitic, were I to act in absolute defiance
of her known wishes. Yet, surely, a medium may be found. Without incurring her
displeasure, I may escape the misery of resigning the only woman I ever saw,
with whom I wish to pass my whole life."

"I do not see how," answered Rosalie, trembling and faltering. "No, Sir;
however flattered I may be by your good opinion, I entreat you to think of me
no more, otherwise than as a friend. The obstacles between us are
insurmountable, and -- "

"Not if you do not make them so, Rosalie," interrupted he. "Hear me with
patience: Though you may think my mother's known aversion to my marrying an
English woman and a Protestant, together with the state of my fortune,
sufficient reasons for refusing to unite your destiny with mine -- yet surely
you need not therefore refuse to remove the fear, the tormenting fear of losing
you, by promising that you will not give yourself to another, at least till I
have attempted to conquer the obstacles that oppose my happiness. O Rosalie! if
you had any idea of the agonies I feel, when I think that while I return to
Italy in the hope of finding a remedy against the perverseness of my destiny,
the object of my affections may be the wife of another -- even of this Hughson,
on whom it seems to be the resolution of your family to throw you away."

"If it be any satisfaction to you, Sir," said Rosalie in a low voice, "to know
that Mr. Hughson can never be more to me than a common acquaintance, I most
positively assure you of it."

"I am persuaded you think so now," answered Montalbert with vivacity; "but who
shall assure me, Rosalie, that you can always resist the importunities, the
commands of your father -- family convenience, and what is called the voice of
prudence, and all those motives that may be urged to enforce your obedience?
Besides, if you should have resolution enough to dismiss this man, how many
others are there, who may have the same pretensions? No, nothing can give me a
moment's peace, unless you promise me, loveliest of creatures, that you will
await my return from Italy -- that you will then be mine, if the obstacles now
between us can be removed."

"On so short an acquaintance, can I, ought I, to promise this?" replied
Rosalie with increased emotion. She then, though in broken sentences, and in a
faint and low voice, urged all the reasons there were against her forming such
an engag^ment; but Montalbert found means to convince her of their fallacy one
by one, till at length he extorted from her the promise he demanded. He
insisted on being allowed to cut off a lock of her hair, and on her taking a
miniature of himself which he drew from his pocket, and which he owned had been
drawn in London for his mother. He then told her that he should write to her,
and that she must find some means of their securely corresponding. This Rosalie
declared was quite impossible; but while he was pressing her to reflect
farther, a loud voice was heard in the part of the wood adjoining to the
orchard, calling on Rosalie. Terror now seized her. "It is my father," said
she. "If he finds you with me, what shall I (...) suffer! -- leave me -- leave
me, for Heaven's sake!"

"You terrify yourself needlessly; it may only be a servant sent to seek you."

"And why to seek me," replied she, "if there was no suspicion of my being
improperly absent? It is not usual for them to inquire or call after me."

Montalbert now saw her so affected with apprehension, that he would not longer
detain her; but kissing her hand, and pressing it a moment to his bosom, he
told her he would find the means of writing to her, and disappeared, while
Rosalie endeavoring to recollect and compose herself, took the path that led
toward home.

CHAP. VI.
HAD it indeed been Mr. Lessington himself, who had thus loudly summoned his
daughter to return home, it would have been difficult for her to have concealed
from him the agitation of her mind, notwithstanding her utmost endeavors to
compose herself. But it was only Abraham a servant who was occasionally
bailiff, coachman, footman, groom, or whatever was wanted in the family, who,
approaching her out of breath, cried, "Lord, Miss, I Have been ever so long
looking a'ter you..... Why, here a been all on em looking for your coming; for
what do you think."

"Indeed, I don't know," replied Rosalie, breathless, and terrified at this
preamble.

"Ah! Miss -- Miss! -- you cannot guess whose come?"

"No! no! Abraham -- do pray tell me?"

"Iv'e a good mind not, for your giving me such a dance after you. (Abraham had
seen her grow up from her infancy, and was no observer of forms.) "However,
I Will tell you for once: It Is both our young masters; it is Mr. William from
Oxford, and Mr. Francis from London -- ^oth -- both on um be comed to be
present at the wedding, and a rare time we shall all on us have on it I warrant
too."

"I am very glad, indeed," said Rosalie, relieved from a thousand apprehensions
of she knew not what. "I thought my brother William would not be here till
tomorrow; and as for Frank, I did not know he was expected." She then hastened
into the house, and in meeting her brothers particularly the eldest, to whom
she was much attached, the embarrassment of her manner was not remarked, nor
was any enquiry made where she had been.

It was not till she retired to dress for dinner that she was at liberty to
reflect on all that had passed with Montalbert. The promise she had given
seemed to be a relief to her spirits, when she remembered that it should make
her consider herself as betrothed to the only man in the world whom she
preferred to all others; that she had now the best reasons in the world to
strengthen her resolution, never to listen to Hughson; reasons, which if she
dared plead them, her father himself could not disapprove. She ran over in her
mind every look, every sentence of Montalbert, and sincerity and tenderness
seemed to dwell upon his tongue. What but real affection could induce him to
speak, to act as he had done? and what could be so fortunate as her inspiring
such a man with a passion such as he professed to feel for her? A consciousness
of attractions, which till very lately she never suspected that she possessed,
gave her a momentary pleasure; but she felt that those attractions would have
been without value* had they not secured for her the heart of Montalbert.

Soon dressed for the day, she sat in the window of her bed chamber, pensively
looking toward the quarter where Holmwood House was situated, though she could
not distinguish it. "He is gone!" said she. "Already he is on his way to
London; in a few days after he arrives there he will leave it -- will leave
England -- the sea will be between us!" She took out the picture he had given
her, and, for the third time since it had been in her possession, fixed her
eyes earnestly upon it. The candor and integrity of the countenance struck her
particularly. "Never," sighed she, "can the heart that belongs to these
features be otherwise than generous, tender, and sincere." She was thus feeding
the infant passion which had taken entire possession of her mind, and was lost
in thought, holding the picture still in her hand, when her elder brother
opened the door. "Are you dressed Rosalie?" said he, "and may I come in?" -- "O
yes! yes! brother," answered she, hurrying the picture into her pocket, "pray
come in."

"I have a great deal to say to you, my dear Rose," said he. "Come, give me a
place in the window by you. You are very much improved, my love, since I saw
you last; I don't wonder at the havoc you make; but my mother complains of you,
Rose."

"On what account, my brother? I am sure I never intentionally offended my
mother."

"But she tells me that you have now an opportunity of marrying extremely well;
but that from some unaccountable perverseness, or unreasonable prejudice, or
perhaps," added he, fixing his eyes earnestly on hers, "perhaps through some
unhappy predilection, you drive from you, with contempt and disdain, a man
every way unexceptionable."

"You have seen him, brother," answered Rosalie, "and can tell whether you
think him all that my mother has represented."

"I have only seen him for a moment, and have hardly exchanged ten words with
him. His person is neither good nor bad; but surely my sister has too much
sense to refuse a man merely because he is not an Adonis."

"But indeed, brother, it is not that. Mr. Hughson is a man, whom it is
impossible I can ever like. He is silly, noisy, and conceited; a boaster, and a
sort of man whom I know will displease you when you see more of him. I dare say
his fortune is greater than I have a right to expect. But I never saw a man
more likely to spend a fortune than he is; and I cannot thi^ there is much
worldly wisdom in marrying a man with whom I might enjoy a short affluence,
that would only make me feel more severely the indigence he might reduce me to."

"All that is very well," said William Lessington; "but tell me, Rosalie, what
do you say as to this prepossession in favor of another, of which my mother
accuses you?"

"I can say nothing," replied she, "because I -- because I know that -- indeed
I do not know who she means."

"Is there no such predilection existing then, Rosalie?"

"Not for the person my mother thinks of," answered she, coloring still higher.

"You allow there is for some other then?"

"Not at all. I am sure I did not say any thing like that; but if there were,
why, my dear brother, should it of necessity be in favor of a person who would
disgrace my family?"

"There may be very improper attachments, Rosalie," replied he very gravely,
"which may not be disgraceful in the usual acceptance of the word: As, for
example, if a young woman should be flattered into a partiality for a boy of a
different religion, and in whose power it could never be to ^ulfil any promises
which a childish passion might induce him to make." The countenance of Rosalie
changed to a deeper scarlet. "I see how it is, my sister," added he, "and ^ill
not distress you any farther; but I trust to ^our own sweetness and candor to
give me an opportunity of discussing this matter when we are both more at
leisure...... I believe dinner is now ready."

"Before you go, my dear William," cried Rosalie, recovering herself a little,
"let me assure you, that my mother has no grounds whatever for her suspicions,
but because Mr. Charles Vyvian has appeared particularly pleased at our m^ting;
and what was more natural? We ^e brought up together from children. As to
myself, I certainly did the other night find more pleasure in talking to my old
friend, whose mother I love so much, and am so much obliged to, than in dancing
with Hughson, who is the most disagreeable man in the world to me -- perhaps I
might be rude to him -- I am afraid I was; but why would my mother compel me to
dance with him?"

"And is that all, Rosalie?"

"That is all, upon my honor, replied she, in regard of Mr. Vyvian."

Young Lessington, who did not know Montalbert even by name, appeared
satisfied, and they went down together; when, from the beginning of the dinner,
conversation, and quantity of wine which Hughson very soon swallowed Rosalie
flattered herself that long before the (...) ^he evening he would do or say
someth^ (...) would thoroughly disgust her elder bro^, and, by convincing him
that she was right in refusing him, procure for her a defense against the
irksome importunity of his future addresses.

In this she was not mistaken. Before you^ Lessington had been two hours in
company with Hughson, he was compelled to own that Rosalie could not be blamed
for having kept at a distance a man whose manners were so unpleasu^^. The other
brother, however, who had seen very different company, and whose ideas had
taken quite another turn, thought of him as he did of himself, that he was "a
cleve^, sprightly, little fellow."

Dinner was hardly over, and the bottle going as briskly about as it could do
before the ladies retired, when Abraham came stumbling into the room, and
muttered something which nobody understood: and, before there was time for
enquiry, Mr. Charles Vyvian and Mr. Montalbert entered, to the displeasure of
some of the company, and to the astonishment of Rosalie, who, on meeting her
brother's eyes, looked so confused, that all the suspicions Mrs. Lessington had
hin^ed to him in the morning seemed to be confirmed. The reception they
received was cold and formal, particularly from Mrs. Lessington, who gravely
expressed her surprise, after what Mr. Vyvian had told her, at his making so
long a stay in the country.

"Oh!" answered he, "I was so unwell yesterday, tha^ (...) good old doctor
would not hear of my sett^ (...) today; and, as my mother thinks we are sti^
upon the ramble, and will not be uneasy, I have persuaded my worthy old Abbe to
say nothing about it: however, we intend to be ^d boys, and to go off
tomorrow; and, upon (...) honor," continued he, rising and taking her ^ands,
"my dear Mrs. Lessington, I only came to know if you could not give me some
little commission to my mother, to put her in good humor with her truant
boy........ Come -- come -- I know you will oblige me with a letter -- or --
you, Madam, perhaps," turning to one of the other sisters -- "if not, I am sure
Miss Rosalie will."

The repulsive gravity with which Mrs. Lessington answered him, was but ill
seconded by the increasing confusion of her daughter, who hesitated, blushed,
and stammered out a few incoherent words; symptoms which did not escape her
brother, who narrowly watched her, and who sailed not to impute it all to a
very different motive from the real one.

Montalbert, in the mean time, was on thorns. Surrounded as she was, there was
no possibility of speaking to her: and he could not bear to leave her without
having fixed on some means by which they might hear from each other. He
recollected that none of her family understood Italian: he looked round to see
if it was likely any one in the room did, and being soon convinced he had
nothing to apprehend, unless it was from the Oxford man, and even with him he
thought the chances were much in his favor, he told Rosalie, addressing her
with great gravity, that sinc^ (...) had the pleasure of seeing her, he had
rec^cted the words of the Italian song she had mentioned, and that, if she
would favor him with a ^en and ink in the next room, he would write them out.

At this moment the mistress of the house, ^ceiving a hint from her husband to
depart, said as she rose from the table, "we will send you one down sir." -- "O
no!" replied he, "rather let me write it, dear Madam, in your apartment; and,
Vyvian, as we must immediately return home, we will now wish Mr. Lessington and
his friends good night." This short ceremony passed with great formality on all
sides: and Vyvian and Montalbert followed the woman of the family into another
room, the latter sat himself down with great solemnity to write out his song,
which having done in the plainest Italian he could imagine, but written as if
it was in measure, he gave it to Rosalie; and Vyvian, who had been talking
earnestly to her the whole time, reluctantly took his leave also, and they both
departed.

They were hardly out of the room before Mrs. Lessington, whose anger and
suspicions were roused anew, demanded to see the paper Montalbert had given
her. Rosalie, not without fear and trembling, delivered it to her. She looked
at it a moment; and believing from the manner in which it was written it was
really a song, gave it her back again, not without evident marks of
displeasure, and many hints of her resolution to inform Mrs. Vyvian where her
son was, and of the impropriety of his conduct, if he did not leave the ^ntry
the next day. Of all this, as Rosalie (...) not obliged to think it addressed
to her, she took no notice.

The next day the wedding of her second sister and Mr. Blagham was celebrated.
The party were more noisy and disagreeable than is even usual on such
occasions. Hughson was the most drunk, and consequently the most impertinent;
and never was an hour so welcome to Rosalie as that which took them all away,
by the favor of a full moon, and left her alone with her mother.

Till now the tumult, with which she had been surrounded, had not allowed her a
moment, except those allotted to repose, to indulge reflections on what had
passed. The sullen calm that succeeded was calculated to restore her dissipated
and bewildered thoughts. Her mother, busied in arranging her house, left her to
herself. Her father had accompanied the bride and bridegroom to their house,
and was afterward to go on a tour with them into the eastern part of the
county. It was at once a matter of pleasure and surprise to Rosalie, that he
had never once proposed her being of the party: and she remarked that he now
appeared much less anxious than her mother to promote with her the suit of Mr.
Hughson; it seemed as if he would have been as well contented that his daughter
Maria should ensure this important conquest.

Mr. Lessington was one of those men who have just as much understanding as
enables them to fill, with tolerable decency, their part on the theater of the
world. He loved the conveniences of life, and indulged rather too much in^
pleasures of the table. His less fortunate acquaintances (a race of people to
whom he was not particularly attached) knew that Mr. Lessington was not a man
to whom the distressed could apply with ^y hope of receiving any thing but good
a^ Those who were more fortunate had for the most part a very good opinion of
Mr. Lessington. If he was exact and somewhat strict in exacting his dues, he
was also very regular in the duties of his office; and if he did not feel much
for the distresses of the poor, he never offended, as some country curates have
done, the ears of the rich, by complaints which those who overlook the
laborers in the vineyard are always so unwilling to hear. He had brought up a
large family respectably: and every body concluded he had some private fortune,
besides the two or three thousand pounds he was known to have received with his
wife. He kept a post-chaise; not, indeed, a very superb and fashionable
equipage, but very well for that country. His cart horses drew it, but they
were sleek and well trimmed: and Abraham trussed up in a tight blue jacket, and
his broad cheeks set off by a jockey cap, made a very respectable appearance as
conductor of a vehicle which gave no inconsiderable degree of consequence to
its owners in a country thinly inhabited by gentlemen. Mr. Lessington was the
most punctual man imaginable at all meetings of the clergy, where he did equal
honor to the sublunary good things that were to be eaten, and the spiritual
good things that were to be listened to. He (...) an high idea of his
consequence in the church, and was a violent opposer of all innovations;
against which he had drawn his pen with more internal satisfaction to himself
than with visible profit to his bookseller; his works, though he (...) them
with extreme complacency, having, through want of orthodox taste in the modern
world, the misfortune to be, according to a term most painful to the ears of an
author, shelfed.

This, however, affected Mr. Lessington less than it would have done many
authors: for he wrote less for literary fame, or literary profit, than to
recommend himself to certain persons who so greatly dreaded any of those
impertinent people that dare to think some odd old customs might be altered a
little for the better* (...) nothing would, he knew, be so effectual a
recommendation to the favor of these dignitaries as zeal, in ^p^en with rushes
the gaps threatened by such innovators, even before they were visible to any
but the jealous eyes that saw, or fancied they saw, the whole sense levelled.
The prosperity of his family might be considered as being in some degree the
effect of his thus keeping always on the right side; for he was reckoneded a
rising man, and one who would at no very remote period be promoted to higher
dignities. Mr. Blagham had not been entirely without considerations of this
sort, when he married a wife with no other portion than her wedding clothes.
But Mr. Lessington had promised her something handsome at his death: and there
was no doubt in the mind of the lawyer of his ability to fulfill his promise.

Mrs. Lessington and Rosalie had now been at home alone three days. The former
had settled her house, and was quietly enjoying the order she had restored
after all the bustle they had lately been in; while Rosalie, with mingled
emo^^ons of fear, anxiety, and doubt, waited for intelligence from Montalbert.

It was in the evening of the third day, that as she was walking in a sort of
court, that was before the house next a road, an horseman stopped, and inquired
if this was not the parsonage? On Rosalie's answering in the affirmative, he
produced a letter, which he said he had been sent with from Jews.

The predominant idea in the head of Rosalie being Montalbert, she trembled
like a leaf when the man gave her the letter, and, without considering whether
it was likely her lover should send it thus openly, or how it should come from
Jews, she hastened breathless into the house to obtain a light to read it by,
for it was now nearly dark. In her way to the kitchen, she was met by her
mother, who, seeing her extreme agitation, and a letter in her hand, for she
had not had presence of mind to conceal it, immediately fancied it came from
Charles Vyvian, who was always haunting her imagination. In this persuasion she
took it from her daughter; and carrying it immediately to a candle, found --
not a billet-^eaux to Rosalie, but intelligence of a very different nature --
it was a letter from Mr. Blagham, informing her, after a short preface, that
Mr. Lessington died that morning in an apoplectic ^it.

Though nothing was more likely than such an event, from the form and manner of
life of her husband, it had never once occurred to her as possible. The shock,
therefore, was great; and the widow's grief not a little increased by the
reflection, that their income arising from church preferment was at an end.

Rosalie felt as she ought on the loss of a parent. But as it was more to the
purpose to endeavor to assuage her mother's sorrow than to indulge her own,
she gave her whole attention to that purpose. Mrs. Lessington was too
reasonable to be a very inconsolable widow; and in a (...) hours was in a
condition to consider what ought to be done, which Rosalie set about executing,
by writing to Mr. Blagham, and giving such orders as her mother thought
necessary.

CHAP. VII.
IT is not necessary to relate all that passed in the Lessington family, till
the period when all its members were assembled to hear the will read. It was
then found that he had given his widow, for her life, a third of all he
possessed, which amounted in the whole to about eight thousand pounds, and
divided the rest among his children, to each of whom he allotted a certain
portion to be paid at a certain time, except to Rosalie, whose name was not
even mentioned in the will.

All expressed their surprise at this except Mrs. Lessington, who said nothing
in answer to their exclamations of wonder. Rosalie, indifferent as to fortune,
of which she knew not the want or the v^ ^as no otherwise grieved at this
strange omission, than as it proved her father's total want of affection for
her -- a conviction that cost her many tears; nor were those tears tried by the
remark she made on the behavior of her sisters and her younger brother, who
all seemed pleased, though they affected concern. The behavior of her elder
brother, however, would have given her comfort, could she have conquered the
painful idea, that her father had thrown her off as a stranger to his blood. As
soon as the funeral was over, her brother William took occasion to talk to her
alone. "Be not so dejected, my dear Rosalie," said he; "unpromising as your
prospects appear, you have at least the consolation of knowing that you have
always a friend in me, who will never forsake you."

"You are too good, dearest William," replied the weeping mourner; "but do not
imagine that it is the want of a share of my father's little property that
grieves me -- no; if he had but named me with kindness, I should not have been
so unhappy. But when I think that he must certainly have died in anger with me,
and that either from my seeming to refuse Mr. Hughson, or some other cause, he
was irritated against me."

"If you reflect a moment, my sweet sister, on the date of the will, you will
see that this could not be. The will is dated above three years since, when the
very existence of such a man as Hughson was unknown to him, when you were only
between fourteen and fifteen years of age, when you had been more with Mrs.
Vyvian than at home, and when it was every way impossible that you could have
given him the least offense. I rather think that this strange circumstance
arose from the opinion he entertained, that Mrs. Vyvian would provide for you."

"How could my father think that," said Rosalie, "when he must have known that
Mrs. Vyvian, notwithstanding the large fortune she brought, has not even the
power to hire or discharge a servant, and is hardly allowed enough yearly to
appear as her rank requires, least, as her cross tyrant of an husband says, she
should squander his fortune on begging friars and mummers of her own religion?
She had, indeed, a settlement of her own: but I heard him reproach her with
having disposed of it in some such way: but, however that may be, my father
must have known that it was not in her power to do any thing for me. Of late,
too, he must have thought that it was not her wish, for she has appeared almost
entirely to have forgotten me."

"There is, however, no other way of accounting for the circumstance: and the
more I reflect on it, the more I am persuaded that this is the truth."

Rosalie, though far from being convinced by the reasoning of her brother, was
consoled by his tenderness, and by degrees regained her serenity, which was,
however, again disturbed by a letter from Montalbert, in which he renewed all
the professions he had made on their parting; told her (...) continued to
postpone his journey to Ital^ for some time longer, and had done so only in
(...) of seeing her again.

He did not seem to have heard of her father's death. She knew that her being
left destitute of fortune would make no alteration whatever in his affection.
The little she would in any case have possessed could never indeed have been
any object to him, even if fortune had ever once been in his thoughts. She
wrote to him, therefore, of what had happened; and without affecting to deny
the partiality she felt for him, and lamenting the little probability of their
meeting properly, submitted it to him, whether it would not be more prudent to
forbear meeting at all till there was less danger of offending her mother. She
told him, that of the future destination of the family she knew nothing: but
that, from what she could learn, her mother had some thoughts of taking a small
house in or near London, when the period arrived, in which she must quit their
present habitation.

Rosalie now found herself for a while relieved from the irksome importunities
of Hughson, who was obliged to be absent. Her mother too seemed to have relaxed
a good deal in the earnestness she had formerly shown on this subject: and had
not her extreme uncertainty, in regard to Montalbert been a constant source of
anxiety, she would at this period have tasted of more tranquillity than had
long fallen to her share.

Sometimes when her brother William, who continued at home, was either
instructing her as the kindest tutor, or amusing her as the tenderest friend,
her heart reproached her for (...) ^cerity toward such a brother, and (...)
half tempted to relate to him her e^ (...) Montalbert. But when she had nearly
argue^ herself into a resolution of doing this, her natural timidity checked
her. She recollected how material it was to her lover, that their engagements
should remain a secret: and she was besides deterred by the fear that her
brother would, from education and principle, in all probability, strenuously
oppose her becoming the wife of a Catholic.

But naturally ingenious and candid, it was impossible for her so well to
dissimulate, but that Mr. Lessington saw there was something more on her mind
than she ever ventured to express. The impression that his mother had given him
of some attachment between her and young Vyvian frequently returned to his
recollection; though he thought it could be only a childish passion on the part
of Vyvian, who could think no more of it after he left England, he dreaded
least the spirits and health of Rosalie might suffer, as he had seen so often
happen to young women, who had been incautiously led to listen to vows and
promises that were meant by the men that made them only as the amusement of an
idle hour.

In his frequent conversations with his sister, therefore, and intermingled
with the lessons he sometimes gave her, he found opportunities continually to
hint at the weakness and danger of attending to such sort of professions;
while, at other times, he took notice, how generally unfortunate mar^^ages
turned out to be, where the pa^ were of different religons, giving Mr. and
(...) as an example immediately within their own knowledge. On these occasions,
he fixed his eyes on those of Rosalie: and, sure that he meant more than he
expressed, her countenance betrayed her consciousness; for whatever her brother
said, when he remotely alluded to Vyvian, was equally applicable to Montalbert:
and whatever resolutions she sometimes made, when she was alone, to avow
ingenuously the truth, these hints entirely deprived her of the courage she had
been thus trying to obtain.

Montalbert, who, by means of a servant at Holmwood House, on whose fidelity he
could depend, continued to write to her and receive her letters, became now
impatient to learn where was to be her future residence. As this seemed still
uncertain, he implored leave to come down incog. to the neighborhood of
Holmwood; than which, he said, nothing was more easy, as he could be concealed
in the house of a farmer, a tenant of Mr. Vyvian's, who, being a Catholic, was
entirely devoted to his service, and of an integrity on which he could rely.
Rosalie, however, extremely alarmed at such a proposal, urged so many reasons
why it should not be executed, and assured him it would make her so extremely
miserable, that he, for that time, consented to relinquish it, which was done
with less reluctance, when she informed him, that within a few days her mother
had talked in more positive terms of their immediate removal to London, or to
its neighborhood; that her broth^ was ^e to look for a house for them: and she
(...) extremely probable, from the im^ (...) ^ther expressed, that they should
there begin the new year. Rosalie was at a loss to comprehend by what means
Montalbert prolonged his stay in England so much beyond the time, when he told
her, his mother expected his return to Naples, where she generally resided.
This surprised her still more, when she found by part of a letter from Mrs.
Vyvian, which Mrs. Lessington read to her, that Charles Vyvian was already
gone. The sentences of the letter which her mother chose to communicate ran
thus: --

"I have determined, in order to be near Dr. W --, without residing immediately
in London, to take an house at Hampstead, and my upholsterer informs me he has
found one that answers my description. Mr. Vyvian has, in his cold way,
assented to my engaging it, taking care, however, to let me understand, at the
same time, that he thought my not being well or able to live in London was a
mere whim, and that the air of Hampstead was not at all better than at his
house in Park Lane, or even so good. Till now I did not know that he had taken
an house in Park Lane, instead of that in Brook Street; but, alas! my dear old
friend, there are many other reasons, besides the difference of the air, that
will make me adhere to my intention of going to Hampstead. It is an unpleasant
circumstance surely to be a cipher in one's own house, and such I am become;
now that my son, my dear Charles, is gone, I feel that there is nobody here
that is at all at^tive to me. The Miss Vyvians, young (...) are introduced into
the world by their father, or their father's friends. The countenance of a
mother seems not necessary to them. They are formed, I believe, with spirits to
enjoy all the pleasures of a gay life; and seem to fear, from me, that
interruption which certainly is not my intention to give them. The oldest,
though not yet sixteen, her father thinks of marrying to a man of high rank,
with whom she got acquainted while she was with her father's sister in
Yorkshire. He has not, however, the title to which he is to succeed; but his
uncle, whose heir he is, being old and without children, and having some
political connection, I know not what, with Mr. Vyvian, it is by them that this
union is proposed: while the mother of the young man, who has an immense
fortune in her own disposal, has hitherto shown a disinclination to the match,
in the persuasion that my daughter is still a Catholic. I have learned these
particulars from persons who are in their confidence, which I am not, and I
easily comprehend that this intended connection adds a strong reason to (...)
others why the father and the daughter would be quite as well pleased if we saw
no more of each other, during the winter, than we have done for these two last
summers. Do not, however, grieve for me, my dear Catharine. You know my
sufferings, and you know how I am enabled to bear them. From Mr. Vyvian why
should I expect kindness? I am thankful that my lot is not yet more bitter than
it is. It ^uld be a great pleasure to me, should your affa^ (...) you to settle
in the neighbourhoo^ (...) determined, for the present, to fix my residence. I
am, as you well know, no great judge of such matters. But, I believe, from all
the inquiries I have been able to make, that you would not, in point of
economy, find the difference so great between living near London and in a
country town as you may perhaps imagine; at least not to a family, which would
not, I imagine, enter much into the card playing societies of the village, but
would live a good deal retired, though, considering your two unmarried
daughters, you could not, perhaps, be quite such a recluse as I shall be, who,
except my nephew Montalbert, whose stay, however, in England will not be long,
shall probably live for weeks together wi^ out seeing any body but my
confessor*"

"The rest of the letter," said Mrs. Lessington, as she put it into her pocket,
"is of condolence, and so forth, on Mr. Lessington's death."

"And is there no other mention of me in it?" said Rosalie.

"No, not any other," answered her mother coldly; "but what, does that make you
sigh?"

"Indeed it does, Ma'am," answered she; "for how can I help lamenting that Mrs.
Vyvian, who used to love me so, seems, and indeed has lon^ seemed, entirely to
forget me."

"O, when she sees you again, she will recollect her former partiality for you.
You know that my friend is so wrapped up in a particular set of notions, and
such an enthusiast in her religion, that she thinks (...) a very wrong thing to
be much (...) any body; and endeavors to wea^ herself from all affections that
may prevent her giving up her whole heart to God. And really, considering the
way in which her family treat her, I really think it is extremely fortunate
that her tender heart and weak spirits have taken that turn; otherwise, to be
treated, poor dear woman, as she is, to have such a husband, and such children,
would certainly break her heart."

"Though her daughters," said Rosalie gravely, "are certainly very unlike what
she could wish them, I believe her son is dutiful and affectionate -- I never
saw any thing wrong in him."

" You never saw," repeated her mother -- "I dare say. It is very becoming in
you, to be sure, Rosalie, to enter on his defense. I wish I may be mistaken;
but I am much afraid that her son will no more contribute to her happiness than
her daughters. However, the boy is gone now, thank God, and at least will not
give her the sort of uneasiness she would have felt, could she have known of
his behavior while he was here."

"What behavior, dear Madam?" said Rosalie, who wished to know the extent of
her mother's suspicions.

"What behavior! why, did he not talk a great deal of nonsense to you? -- Did
he not pretend to make love to you?"

"No, upon my word," answered she; he said a great many civil things, and
foolish things, if you please to call them so, but nothing that was at all like
making love to me."

Mrs. Lessington then put an end to the ^ersation, by saying, that as he was
^ow (...) for some years, it did not much signify what boyish nonsense he had
talked, since it had gone no further: And Rosalie left her, well pleased to
find, from what she had said, that her intention of removing her family to
Hampstead was confirmed by this letter from her old friend, and that she meant
almost immediately to put it in execution.

In a fortnight afterward, all their arrangements being made, they departed
for ever from a part of the country where Mrs. Lessington had resided above
seven and twenty years, or rather from her native country, for she was born not
far from Holmwood House. She left it, however, with much less regret than
people usually feel on quitting a spot to which they have long been habituated.
Miss Maria -- or, to speak more properly, Miss Lessington, for she was now the
eldest unmarried sister, was pleased with a change which offered her a prospect
of seeing London where she had never been for more than two or three days.

The Abbe Hayward, dismissed by Mr. Vyvian from Holmwood, had now left that
venerable edifice to servants. The way of the Lessingt^ family to the next
post-town lay through the part As Rosalie passed this scene of her former
hap^ness, a thousand mournful thoughts crowded (...) her recollection, but she
consoled herself with the thoughts of being soon near Mrs. Vyvian, and that she
was going where, since Charles Vyvian would no longer be there to alarm the
vigilance of (...) her, she hoped to be allowed the inno^ (...) of conve^ing
with Montalbert, without the necessity of contrivances that she felt to be
unworthy of both.

CHAP. VIII.
MRS. Vyvian arrived at the house she had taken at Hampstead a few days after
the family of Mrs. Lessington had become inhabitants of that village. The
description of the first meeting between her and her old friend may be given
best in Rosalie's own words to Montalbert; who, it was agreed, should not
appear immediately on their arrival. "At length I have seen her, my ^iend --
this dear Mrs. Vyvian -- so nearly related to you, and therefore dear to me --
the first and ^st friend of my childhood; for I never recollect having received
so many proofs of affection from my mother as from her...... Ah! Montalbert,
how is she changed since I saw her last; yet it is but a little while, not yet
two years; but trouble, as she said with a melancholy yet sweet smile, makes
greater ^avoc in the co^ than time. I do not know, Monta^ (...) it is her being
so nearly related to you, or the memory of her past kindness, or both, but to
me there is an attraction about Mrs. Vyvian that I never was conscious of in
any other person. The eminent beauty she once possessed is gone, and its ruins
only remain: but the delicacy, the faded loveliness of her whole form, is,
perhaps, more interesting than the most animated bloom of youth and health. She
had not spirits for the first two days after her arrival to receive us all. My
mother only was admitted to see her. Yesterday however, my sister and I were
allowed to attend her at an early hour of the afternoon. Maria was going to the
play with a family who live here, who are distantly related to the husband of
one of my sisters, and who imagained, and perhaps not without reason, that to
make parties for us to visit public places is the first kindness they can show
to some of the family. Only Maria, however, accepted this invitation: for I had
hopes of passing the evening with Mrs. Vyvian: a pleasure I would not have
exchanged for the most brilliant spectacle that London offers.

"How can Mr. Vyvian treat this charming woman with coldness, even with cruel^
(...) am afraid he does, though my mother (...) never complains? -- How is it
possible (...) daughters can neglect her? -- Were I her d^ter, I think it would
be the greatest happiness (...) my life to watch her very wishes before she
could express them, and to relieve that languor which always seems to hang ove^
(...) spirits, and cloud (...) ^ancy of an understanding naturally so good. But
I have heard, Montalbert, she was compelled to resign the man to whom she was
attached, and to marry Mr. Vyvian, who, though he knew her reluctance, was
determined ^o persevere. Strange that there can be found a human being so
selfish as to act thus, and then treat with cruelty the victim whom he has
forced into his power. I hope I shall never again see this man; for I feel such
an antipathy to him that it would really be painful to me. As to the young
ladies, I find they are frequently to visit their mother: but I shall avoid
them as much as possible; for they are so much changed since we played together
as children of the same family, that there is no longer any affection probably
between us -- I shall be despised as the daughter of a country curate; and
though, I hope, I am not proud, I do not love to be despised...... Ah!
Montalbert, it is your partiality that has, perhaps, taught me to feel this
sensation more than I ought to do. The little rustic thinks that she is
preferred by Montalbert, and forgets her humility.

"I thank you, most sincerely thank you, for your forbearance. Believe me, a
little self-deni^ (...) will greatly accellerate the security with (...) ^e may
see each other hereafter. My (...) has so little idea of your having any par^y
for me, that she seems quite easy now ^les Vyvian is gone; and, except that she
^till thinks I have done extremely wrong in refusing to encourage the addresses
of Hughson, she seldom dwells on what is passed. From present appearances, my
dear friend, it seems (...) if (...) should be fortunate enough to pass a few
tranquil and pleasant hours in the society of each other before you go to
Italy. Alas! they will be but transient; for yesterday, Mrs. Vyvian, in
speaking of my drawing, and recommending to my mother to procure me a good
master, she said, 'When my nephew, Montalbert, goes back, as he must now do
very soon, since I find his mother is become very impatient at his long stay,
he shall send over some chalks and crayons, for Rosalie, much better than can
be found in London.' -- If either of them had looked at me, at that moment,
they would have remarked, that I did not hear with indifference the name of
Montalbert, but fortunately I escaped observation, and soon recovered myself.

"It is long, very long, since any circumstance has given me such pleasure as
being restored to my beloved benefactress; yet she says little to me. She makes
no professions of that kindness toward me, which, I believe, has not been
lessened even by our long separation; but there is an affection in her manner
which I cannot describe. She is civiller to my sister than to me. But she
addresses her as Miss Lessington* while she calls me Rosalie. I recollect that
(...) name, and it seems in her mouth to have (...) charms.

"I have passed, perhaps, too much ti^ ^ce I left her in reflecting how happy I
might be, could I be related to this dear woman without opposition from the
more near relations of Montalbert. You have often told me, that you love her as
a mother, though only the half sister of your father. The sweetness of her
manners, even that weak health, and that air of pensive sorrow, which her own
children, at least her daughters, seem to consider as the effect of bigotry or
unsociable humor, make her to me an object of tenderer attention. O
Montalbert! what delight it would be to me to soothe the hours which are
embittered by matrimonial discord, and, I fear, by filial neglect.

"Yet, while I think thus, perhaps I am continuing a correspondence with you,
that may be displeasing to her, that may add to her solicitude, and deprive her
of the satisfaction of seeing her nephew married to a woman of equal rank and
of his own church. This reflection is extremely bitter to me: and it occurs the
oftener, because I see with what alarm she thinks of her son's making any other
alliance than what his father would choose for him; though it is very certain
that ambition only will govern him, and that, in regard to religion, she
cannot, if Mr. Vyvian dictates, be gratified.

"I shall hardly hear from you, Montalbert, ^ain* before you will be here. As I
now expect (...) I ^all not, I think, betray myself when we (...) Till then, my
dear friend, farewell!"

That she was totally destitute of fortune gave not a moment's concern to
Rosalie. Dependent wholly on her mother, and likely, in case of her death, to
be left wholly destitute on the world, since the share she had of Mr.
Lessington's fortune was to go to her other children at her decease, (...) felt
not the least uneasiness as to pecuniary circumstances. But, with the easy
faith of youth, trusted that the attachment of her lover would save her from
every distress, and that before she should be deprived of her surviving parent,
whose life was apparently a very good one, she should be the wife of Montalbert.

He now saw her almost every day; for as he had always been very attentive to
Mrs. Vyvian, there was nothing remarkable in his frequent visits to her; nor
was it strange that he should renew his slight acquaintance with her friends.

Miss Lessington, whose acquaintance increased every day, had continual
invitations to stay at the houses of some of them for several nights together.
Rosalie failed not sometimes to receive the same kind of compliments: but she
generally declined them, saying, that she could not leave her mother alone.
But, in fact, she had no wish to mix in those societies, or to enter into those
public amusements, which gave so much pleasure to her sister. And Maria,
apprehensive of the superior elegance of Rosalie, showed a visible
disinclination to her joining these parties, and gradually discouraged her
friends from giving these invita^ by observing, that ^r sister was of a very
r^ed turn; that she had formed connections in a very different sphere of life
from the rest of her family; and that it was merely giving her the trouble to
find excuses, to invite her to scenes or society for which she had a decided
repugnance.

In a very short time, therefore, the attornies' and brokers' wives, to whom
Mr. Blagham had introduced the family, forebore to attempt engaging a young
woman, who, they imagined, gave herself airs, and was extremely proud and
reserved. Miss Lessington was left in undisturbed possession of all the
admiration the set of men that belonged to these "worshipful societies" had to
bestow, and Rosalie at liberty to pass her time in company much more agreeable
to her.

Her mother, less refined, and loving cards rather too much, was not equally
difficult as to her companions; though she had really as much affection for
Mrs. Vyvian as she was capable of feeling for any body, she could not help
being sometimes sensible of a want of variety. Her friend's piety and
estrangement from the world made her, as good Mrs. Lessington sometimes
thought, rather respectable than amusing: and instead of such long visits from
her confessor, Mrs. Lessington secretly wished for another, that they might
make up a rubber. Insensibly she became acquainted with some "mighty agreeable
people" in the village, who never played high, but were happy to make a little
snug party just to pass away the long evenings. One of these pa^ties ^duced a
second, a second a third, till Mrs. ^ngton could hardly spa^ one day in a week
to pass with her friend Mrs. Vyvian, who, when Rosalie was with her, seemed,
however, to be scarcely sensible of the absence of her mother.

But from that unfortunate prepossession received early in life, that to deny
herself the most innocent gratifications were sacrifices acceptable to Heaven,
Mrs. Vyvian frequently abstained from indulging herself with the cheerful
conversation of Rosalie, who then, as her mother was so frequently out, and now
went occasionally to London for two or three days among her own and her eldest
daughter's friends, (...) left at home, and the visits of Montalbert were
uninterrupted, (...) without ^quiry. To be continually in presence of a beloved
object, to see or suppose that his attachment every moment becomes stronger, to
listen to arguments to which the heart yields but too ready an assent, was a
situation of all others the most dangerous for a young woman who had not seen
her nineteenth year. Montalbert, besides the advantages of a very handsome
person, had the most insinuating manners and the most interesting address. He
was naturally eloquent -- love rendered his eloquence doubly formidable; and
Rosalie had nothing to oppose to his earnest entreaties for a secret marriage,
but the arms with which he had himself furnished her -- the fear of a discovery
on the part of his mother, which he owned would injure, indeed ruin, his future
prospects in life. This he still acknowledged, but averred that it was
impossibl^ his mother, who resided at Naples, should know that he was married
in England. Rosalie repr^ent^ that if Mrs. Vyvian knew it, it must inevitably
be known to her. Montalbert insisted that there was no necessity of Mrs.
Vyvian's knowing any thing about it. Rosalie entreated that he would first go
to Italy, without risking the displeasure of a parent on whom he depended.
^ntalbert declared, he should be wretched to leave her; that he did not know
how to acquire resolution enough to absent himself, leaving her, perhaps,
exposed to the persecution of other lovers, which it distracted him only to
think of, while he would pass the miserable ^ours in which he should be absent
from her, in anxiety, in torture, which, if she was once securely his, would be
infinitely less insupportable.

But notwithstanding the frequent opportunities they now had of meeting, and
even of passing whole hours alone together, how was it possible that a private
marriage could be effected? -- Rosalie knew that to escape to Scotland, and
return without being missed, and without avowedly eloping, was impossible.
Montalbert allowed it to be so, but he had another expedient ready -- they
might be married by a Catholic priest. Rosalie had heard but in a vague way,
that such marriages were not valid: but Montalbert reasoned her out of this
persuasion. "Admitting," said he, "my dearest love, that it were as you have
heard, would not such a marriage be binding to me? Might it not at any time be
renewed according to the laws of any country where we may reside, "when I shall
be wholly at liberty? and is it ma^al to you what restrictions are laid upon
such marriages in England, if your husband looks upon other laws binding to
him? -- Even if we were to have the ceremony performed in your church, I should
think it necessary to have it gone over a second time by a priest of ours." By
such arguments he sometimes shook the wavering resolution of Rosalie, who,
except the single circumstance of his mother's known aversion to his marrying
an English protestant which her reason told her was unjust and unreasonable*
saw nothing that ought to prevent her giving her person where she had already
given her heart. In point of family and fortune, Montalbert was infinitely her
superior. Her mother, therefore, however she might reproach her with having
married clandestinely, could not accuse her with having debased herself* or
degraded her family. She had no other person to whom she was accountable,
unless it was her elder brother, whom she loved too much to be quite easy as to
his sentiments: but, on the other hand, it was in^le h^ could make any
objection, unless it (...) difference of religion. Yet she dared not venture to
tell him, lest that single circumstance should appear to him of consequence
enough to prevent entirely a union otherwise so desirable.

Every opportunity that occurred, Montalbert pressed his suit with redoubled
ardour. He urged, with all the vehemence of passion, the necessity of his
immediate return to Italy, as he had already on various pretenses, prolonged
his stay two months beyond the time he intended. -- There was now danger that
his mother might suspect that some of those connections, she was so averse to,
were the occasion of his prolonged absence, and might engage some of her
friends in England in an inquiry that would be the cause of discovering what
nobody now seemed to suspect. This and numberless other reasons Montalbert
always had ready to offer, why there was no time to deliberate. He had already
conquered one obstacle -- the difficulty of finding a Catholic priest who would
venture to perform the ceremony.

Besides the consequence, both in England and in Italy, of his family and his
connections, the ease with which a dispensation might be obtained whenever his
mother withdrew her opposition, and the pecuniary advantage Montalbert
promised, the priest, with whom he had at length succeeded, knew that Rosalie
was the daughter of of a country clergyman* and had no relations who were at
all likely to be displeased at her marrying a man so greatly her superior, and
of course not likely to proceed against one who had comm^ a breach of law so
much to their advantage. He rather wished to detach Montalbert from his
pursuit, by representing the great distance between him and Rosalie in temporal
concerns, as well as the difference in spiritual affairs, which appeared to him
so momentous. Finding it, however, very bootless to argue with a man of three
and twenty, madly in love, he consented to do as Montalbert required, and
reconciled his conscience by that accommodating reflection at hand on so many
occasions, "If I do not do it some other will." He stipulated with Montalbert,
however, that if there should be any probability of his incurring the heavy
penalty for marrying a minor, that he should be immediately sent to Rome at the
expense of Montalbert; an expedient which Montalbert immediately agreed to, as
indeed he would have done to any demands the father thought proper to have
made, however unreasonable they might have been.

The longer Rosalie reflected on the proposals of her lover, the fainter became
her opposition; yet still conscious that it could not be right to dispose of
herself without the consent of her mother and her brother, she more than once
entreated Montalbert to allow her to consult them. But he heard this request
always with impatience, declaring, that if she determined to tear herself from
him, to abandon him to all the horrors of that despair which her loss would
inflict, she could find no way more certain than what she proposed. His
vehemence, and the convict^ of his sincerity, which that vehemence brought with
it, once more conquered her scruples. Montalbert extorted once more a reluctant
and trembling acquiescence, and then eagerly insisting on finding some
immediate opportunity for them to meet, where the priest might attend. Rosalie,
terrified at the step she was about to take, again recoiled, and entreated to
be released from her inconsiderate promise.

Though the attachment between these young people seemed not even to be
suspected either by Mrs. Vyvian or Mrs. Lessington, yet the conflict in the
mind of Rosalie had such an effect on her frame, that the former one day
observed it to her as they were sitting together alone. "Surely, my dear," said
she, laying down her work, and looking very earnestly at Rosalie, "surely you
are not well."

"Dear Ma'am," ^wered Rosalie, "why do you suppose so?"

"You are pale," said Mrs. Vyvian; "your eyes are heavy and languid, I am
afraid, my love,.............." She hesitated: and the conscience of Rosalie at
that moment accusing her, a faint blush overspread her countenance as she
eagerly cried, "Afraid my dear Madam, of what?"

"Nay, of nothing, Rosalie, that need alarm you. I will tell you my fears --
either you have some affection that makes you uneasy; or the almost total
seclusion in which you live is too much for your spirits."

"Indeed, Madam, my spirits would very ill bear the dissipation in which my
sister lives. The seclusion that gives me an opportunity of passing some of my
hours with you, is the greatest gratification I can enjoy."

"But to the other article, Rosalie, what do you say?"

"To what article, Madam?"

"Oh! you have forgotten already -- to what I told you I feared as one cause of
the alteration I have observed."

"Indeed, my dear Mrs. Vyvian, I am sensible of no alteration. You know how few
people I see, and that with fewer still I have much acquaintance, or wish it."

Mrs. Vyvian shook her head with an air of incredulity and, as Rosalie fancied,
of concern; but she suffered the discourse to drop; and Rosalie left her,
trembling lest the truth was suspected, and dreading, yet feeling it necessary,
to give an account of this dialogue to Montalbert.

CHAP. IX.
WHAT had passed the preceding evening between Mrs. Vyvian and Rosalie was no
sooner repeated to Montalbert, than it served as an additional argument to
enforce the consent he had been so long soliciting. Montalbert was of a warm
and impetuous temper. Though he had never yet been emancipated from the
government of an high-spirited and imperious mother, he was not the less bent
on pleasing himself, than are those who have never been contradicted. It
seemed, indeed, as if the severe restraint he had so long habitually been
under, disposed him to be more earnest in a circumstance on which the whole
happiness of his life depended: and when Rosalie asked him how he could hope
ever to reconcile his mother to a marriage, to which he hi^ owned she would
have unconquerable objectio^ he inquired, in his turn, what amends she co^ make
him for opposing the only connection which could make him happy, only from
prejudice and difference of opinion in matters wherein he could not think as
she did, and wherein he thought it unreasonable that her prepossessions should
interfere with his choice. "I will certainly not make my mother uneasy." said
he. "I will so far pay a compliment to her unfortunate prejudices, as to
conceal from her what would make her so. But to relinquish the only woman I
could ever love, is surely a greater sacrifice than she ought to demand of me.
If, indeed, I were about to disgrace her, Rosalie, by uniting myself with a
woman without reputation, or of a very mean and unworthy origin, I should feel
that I ought not to be forgiven. But why, because our modes of worshipping God
are different -- why, because my mother was born in Italy, and you in England,
should an imaginary barrier be raised, which must shut me out from happiness
for ever? What has reason and common sense to do with all this?" -- Rosalie was
compelled to acknowledge that it had very little. Still, however, the idea of a
clandestine marriage shocked her. She solicited most earnestly that her mother
might be made acquainted with it. This he strenuously opposed; representing,
that if Mrs. Lessington knew it, it would not be a secret from Mrs. Vyvian,
"Who, however, she may love you," said he^ "would make it a point of conscience
to prevent my marrying a Protestant, and ruining myself, as she would conclude
I should, in the affections of my mother for ever. You know, Rosalie, how much
I love my aunt. There is a pensive resignation to a very unhappy fate, a sort
of acquiescence, which arises not from want of sensibility, but from the
patience and self-government she has learned, that render her to me infinitely
interesting, while her kindness and affection to me demand all my gratitude.
But with great virtues, and I know hardly any one who has so many, she is not
without prejudices, which greatly add to her own unhappiness. It is unnecessary
to point out to you what these are; nor need I tell you, Rosalie, that they are
exactly such as would induce her to think it her indispensible duty to inform
my mother of our attachment. Then all the evils, I apprehend, would follow. I
must either hazard offending her beyond all hope of forgiveness, or I must lose
you for ever." -- Let no fastidious critic, on the characters of a noval,
declaim against the heroine of this, as being too forward or too imprudent.
There are only two ways of drawing such characters: they must either be
represented as -- "Such faultless monsters as the world never saw" -- Or with
the faults and imperfections which occur in real life. Of these, many are such
as would were they described as existing in a character for which the reader is
to be interested, entirely de^troy that interest. There are other (...) which,
in an imaginary heroine, we may at once blame and pity, without finding the
interest we take in her story weakened. This is the senti^t that Rolalie may
excite, who being tenderly attached to a man, not only amiable in his person,
but of the most insinuating manners, believing his ^larations of love and
persuaded that her friends could not disapprove of the step he so earnestly
urged her to take; searing, on the other hand, to lose him; that he would be
convinced he was indifferent to her, would return to Italy, and make an effort
to forget her; found her objections giving way before so many motives, and at
length, though with trembling reluctance, agreed to the expedient Montalbert
proposed -- of their being married by the priest whom he had engaged for that
purpose. Rosalie neither knew the danger this man incurred, nor that her
marriage would not be binding. She knew, however enough, from such information
as she had casually picked up, to express her doubts to Montalbert as to its
legality, who found the means of satisfying her scruples. "It is binding to
^e." said he, "since the ceremony is performed after the laws of our own
church; and where then, my Rosalie, can be the foundation of your doubts: -- In
a few, a very few days after that fortunate hour, which shall give me a right
to call you mine, I must leave you. But I shall know myself to be your husband;
I shall feel no disquiet, lest the persua^ion of your family, or any other
circumstance, should throw you into the arms of another, and (...) hope of
returning soon to England to claim you for my wife, will give me patience not
only to endure this enforced absence, but will animate me to those exertions
that may shorten its duration." -- The calmer reason of Rosalie some^ told her,
that there was much of sophistry in any of these arguments; but what (...)
woman of her age listens long to reason, in ^tion to the pleadings of the man
she loves? -- Montalbert was equally passionate and persevering* he had some
plausible manner of obviating every apprehension, and it now only remained to
be considered, how the marriage ceremony might pass with most secrecy.

Though Montalbert had not seemed to make more frequent visits than usual at
the house of Mrs. Vyvian, nor to appear oftener at Hampstead, he had in reality
hardly ever quitted it since Mrs. Vyvian had settled there; but had taken an
obscure lodging in the lower part of the village, where he was sure he should
not be known: and this gave him an opportunity of remaining later either with
his aunt, when Rosalie happened to be there, or at the house of Mrs.
Lessington, who was now more frequently than ever in London. Then it was that
Rosalie passed the evenings entirely with Mrs. Vyvian, and nothing was so
natural as that Montalbert, when he happened to be there, should attend her
home, to which Mrs. Vyvian never seemed to make any objections on Rosalie's
account, ^h she often expressed h^ apprehensions (...) ^nger he incurred in
retur^ing so late to (...).

It was strange, (...) suspecting as Mrs. Vyvia^ seemed to do, some ^achment
which made R^salie unhappy, the (...) no notion that her nephew might be the
object of this attachment; but it seemed never once to have occurred to her:
and Montalbert conducted himself so cautiously before he^ (...) Rosalie was of
the party, that she had (...) to believe he regarded her otherwise than as a
common acquaintance. Montalbert young as he was, had been a great traveller. He
had lived at Paris, at Vienna, at Turin, at Rome, and at Florence, and had
acquired in the more early part of his life the reputation of being a young man
of dissipation and intrigue. These gaieties had been exaggerated: and Mrs.
Vyvian had received an impression of his libertinism, which had never been
effaced. She now, therefore, could not imagine, that for such a man the
simplicity of Rosalie's beauty could have any attractions; and persuaded, as
she was, that he was engaged in intrigues among women of a very different
description, she sometimes gently reproved and sometines slightly rallied him,
on these fashionable excesses. He humoured her in the answers he gave; listened
as if half disposed to feel contrition, or defended himself, as if conscious of
the truth of these charges -- management which would have concealed his real
sentiments and designs from a more penetrating observer than Mrs. Vyvian.

During the few days (...) Montalbert was in doubt how to procure un^d the
admission (...) ^e priest to Rosalie, wh^ (...) was with her, the family of his
aunt ar^ from their house (...) the north to settle for the winter in Park
Lane. Mr. Vyvian contented h^ h^lf with calling one morning on horseback, with
a slight and col^ inquiry. He told his wife, that he had directed his steward
to attend her whenever she pleased, on money matters, and that his daughter
should visit her the next day. He t^ m^oned the marriage of the eldest, of
which the preliminaries were now settled; he did not, however, tell Mrs. Vyvian
of this, because he thought her approbation not of any consequence, but spoke
of it as a matter settled, signifying, at the same time, that it was his
pleasure she should speak to her daughter of the arrangement, as being what
every part of her family could not but approve. Mrs. Vyvian acquiesced, without
any remonstrance on the cruelty of thus disposing of her child at so early an
age, without even consulting her mother. A few tears involuntarily fell from
her eyes as soon as her unfeeling husband was gone; but she immediately went to
her oratory, and found consolation in the duties of religion; to which, under
all these trying circumstances, she had ever recourse.

But the appearance of the two Miss Vyvians had another effect on Montalbert.
These ladies, young as they were, had been early initiated into the world. They
were no longer diffident and unassuming, but had all the confidence of women of
middle age, without their judgment; were careless of the opinion of all the
world as to my thing but their beauty and air of high ton, (...) rather incline
to provoke censure, by their ^gularity, than to conciliate by civility, or
engage by gentleness. They had already learned that disdain of all inferiors
which belongs to people of the very first rank; and the alliance the eldest was
about to form, which would eventually place her in the first class of nobility,
seemed to have ^ev^ ^he haughty spirits of both: an alteration which, on their
very first visit, their mother saw with additional disquiet; while Montalbert,
who was with Mrs. Vyvian when they came, beheld and heard them with a disgust,
that amounted almost to aversion.

During the stay Montalbert made at her father's seat in the north, Miss Vyvian
had been piqued at the little attention he had shown her, and mortified to
observe his neglect of those charms, which she thought, and which her maid
assured her, ought to attract the homage of all the world. That Montalbert ^s
so far from paying her this homage, that he took the privilege of his near
relationship to tell her of her faults, was not to be forgiven by Miss Vyvian.
She had by no means forgotten, now that she met him in London, the slights she
had received in Yorkshire, and attacked him with a severe sort of raillery,
which he failed not to return, though with more good humor than the lady
deserved. Thus passed the first visit; but, on the second, (as the young ladies
affected still to retain so much consideration for their mother as to make
their air^ng^ very frequently toward Hampstead), it happe^ed, unluckily
enough, that Mrs. Vyvian, n^ aware of their coming, had sent for Rosalie to sit
with her. Montalbert soon after came in; and as Mrs. Vyvian was pleased to
encourage her taste in drawing, Montalbert, who, without any affectation
understood it extremely well, was giving her some rules, and leaning over her
chair, was lost in the pleasure of instructing his charming pupil. But he
sometimes varied a (...) what he undertook to teach, and instead of giving her
a sketch of the object he was describing, he wrote a line or two in Italian.
Mrs. Vyvian was pensively at work, and did not regard them. The room where they
sat was at a distance from the door to which the coaches drove up, an^ while
this was going on, a footman entered, announcing the two Miss Vyvians.

Montalbert in confusion quitted the table near which he was standing; and
Rosalie, whose cheeks were dyed with blushes, was putting away her drawings.
But Mrs. Vyvian, speaking mildly, bade her not disturb herself; then, welcoming
her daughters, she said, "My dears, he^ your playfellow and acquaintance, the
youn^ Miss Lessington, your old friend Rosalie."

Miss Vyvian, toward whom her younger sister seemed to look, as if to regulate
her own behavior, turned haughtily to Rosalie, and making her a formal and
cold courtesy, muttered something in so low a voice, that it could not be
heard; then, without taking any further notice, began to tell her mother where
she had been, and w^ she had seen. Miss Barbara, the youngest* too^ not the
least notice of Rosalie, but, as if she (...) never see^ her before, sat
profoundly silent.

Montalbert, who remarked wi^ indignation this insolent behavior, and who saw
a fa^ blush of grief and regret wavering on the pale (...) of Mrs. Vyvian, was
tempted to express some (...) of what he felt; but he checked himself, and had
determined to go, when Miss Vyvian, casting a malicious look at the
drawing-table, and then a^ Rosalie, who sat by it unoccupied, said, "Oh! I see
now, Mr. Montalbert, from whence it happens, that your friends in town complain
that they never see you -- you have found employment here in teaching some of
the fine arts."

"If I were capable of teaching them," replied Montalbert, who could not so
command his countenance, but that it expressed his resentment, "if I were
capable, Miss Vyvian, of instructing, I should think myself highly honored
were that young lady to become my scholar; but, I assure you, she is already so
great a proficient, that it would not be in my power to improve the elegance of
her execution."

"Oh! I dare say," replied Miss Vyvian; "and no^ I recollect, Miss Lessington,
I think you used to be fond of drawing, and had some lessons when you lived
with us. But Mr. Montalbert, since this lady has no occasion for your
instructions, do tell me what i^ is you do with yourself? Do you know, that out
of the few people I have ^n, at least a dozen have asked me, what is ^come of
my gay and gallant cousin? Some have asserted," added she, with a very
significant ^ook, "that you are married, and others, that you are become
melancholy mad for the love of some rural beauty; but all agree that you are a
lost creature."

Mrs. Vyvian, however, hurt at such a wild and improper speech, had not time to
express, as much as she dared do, her sense of its indecorum, before she was
struck with the pale countenance of Rosalie, who seemed ready to fai^
Montalbert was about to reply, when Mrs. Vyvian, as if unable to check herself,
rose from her seat, and taking Rosalie's hand, said, in a tremulous voice, "I
am sorry, my dear Miss Lessington, that you are so shocked at the unkindness
and rudeness of Miss Vyvian; I will take care that you shall not again be
subject to it. My woman shall wait on you home, and I beg you and your mother
will accept my apology, thus hastily made, till I can renew it in person."

Rosalie, who had never seen Mrs. Vyvian exert so much spirit before, but who
was more terrified than ever, lest the retort of her daughter should bring on a
quarrel of which she would be the cause; alarmed too at the hint given about
Montalbert, and almost sinking under her apprehensions of every kind, was glad
to quit the room, which she did immediately; but, disabled by the violence of
her emotions to go farther than the next, she sat down and burst into tears.

While she was, however, reasoning herself into some degree of composure, Mrs.
Vyvi^^ whose languid spirits were roused by the ill-be^viour of her daughter,
was reproving her in very bitter terms, such indeed as she had never us^
before. But far from feeling the severity of a remonstrance she so well
deserved, she affected to turn off her impertinence with a laugh* "Dear Madam,"
cried she, "I had no notion (...) you so angry. Upon my honor I meant nothing
in the way of affronting your fair protegee; and as to behaving as if I had
forgotten her, dear, ^u know one really forgets every body in a year (...) two."

"You have at least forgot yourself, Miss Vyvian," said her mother.

Miss Barbara now fancied it necessary for her to enter into a defense of her
sister. "I am sure, Madam, my sister meant nothing; but one must really feel it
grating to find that Miss, that country parson's daughter, preferred to us.
People have often said, indeed, a great while ago, that the Lessington family
had as much of your favor as your nearest relations. I am sure neither of us,
neither my sister or me, had a thought of offending you: but it does seem hard
to your own children, to see people, who are comparatively strangers, so much
more taken notice of."

"It is you and your sister Barbara, said the unhappy mother, while sobs
stifled her voice, who have estranged yourselves from me; it is you and your
sister........" She could not go on. Montalbert, shocked by the sight of her
distress, approached her, and, tenderly taking her hand, said, "Dearest Madam,
do not, I ^plore you, distress yourself thus. These ladies ^e young and
inconsequent; they may learn, and, I heartily hope, will, to know the value of
such a mother." The agony of Mrs. Vyvian redoubled. "Nay, but I entreat you,"
continued he, "to be calm. Allow me to send your woman to you."

"O no!" cried she, with a deep sigh, "do not leave me, Montalbert. I have in
you all the consolation which is left me, now that my son is sent far from me."

"Since you oblige me to speak plai^ Madam" said Miss Vyvian, who seemed wholly
unmoved at her mother's distress, "since you compel me to say disagreeable
things, I must tell you that it was quite time my brother was sent, as my Papa
sent him; for he too was in danger of becoming too much attached to the same
people that have weaned your affections from us. I should never have mentioned
it, though, I assure you, if I had not seen that girl here, and been so found
fault with for not worshipping her enough; for now my brother is gone, it is a
matter of indifference to me who her heart attracts; other people are old
enough to take care of themselves -- but come, sister, our company does not
seem just now to give Mamma any pleasure; another time, perhaps, we may be more
fortunate."

"Before you go," said Mrs. Vyvian, endeavoring to stifle her convulsive
sighs, and to speak distinctly, "I conjure you to tell me what you mean about
my son."

"It is a very unwelcome task, Ma'am," replied her eldest daughter, "and I
might not be believed; but if you ask the Abbe Hayward, h^ perhaps, may obtain
credit, even when he tells you so unwelcome a truth, as that your son, when you
thought him engaged in quite another tour, was at Holmwood with one or two of
his friends," she cast a malicious look at Montalbert as she said this, "and
there was reason to apprehend (...) this Miss, or some of the Misses her
sisters, were the occasion of his paying much more frequent visits at the
parsonage house, than ^en you yourself, perhaps, would have approved of; since,
I can hardly think, your friendship would induce you to overlook the shocking
disparity between the only son of Mr. Vyvian and such people as those.

It seemed as if the unfortunate mother was utterly incapable of answering. She
repeated in a faint voice, "The Abbe Hayward! -- My son -- My son at Holmwood!"
-- Her daughters, who appeared thus to have plunged a dagger in her heart, left
her without any attempt to mitigate the pain they had inflicted; and she
remained alone with Montalbert, who, during this conversation, had exhibited
symptoms of anger and disquiet, which Mrs. Vyvian was too much affected to
observe. It was some moments before she recovered herself enough to command her
voice. "Tell me, dear Montalbert," cried she at length, "what does Miss Vyvian
mean? -- Tell me, when was my Charles at Holmwood? -- When did he thus visit
Mr. Lessington's family?"

"Never, Madam, I can venture to assure you, with the least improper design....
It is true, that when we were upon our tour this summer round the coast, the
Count and I expressed a wish to see Holmwood. He, as having heard it spoken of
as a fine old place; I, because I used to be fond of it when I was a boy, and
passed there the most pleasant of my hours during my occasional visits to
England. As Vyvian was as (...) ^f the scheme as we were, we went thither for
four or five days. Charles fatigued himself too (...) and was taken ill; but he
recovered perfectly (...) next day: for some reason or other, he did not seem
to wish you and his father should know he had visited Holmwood. This I only
know by his enjoining the Count to secrecy, when being obliged to return to
London, he left us there."

"You staid there then some time?"

"I cannot be correct," answered Montalbert, hesitating; "our stay, whether
there or elsewhere, seemed to me to be a matter of no consequence at the time
-- nor could I imagine why it was necessary to keep a man's visit to the seat
of his father a secret. As near as I can recollect, we were there about seven
or eight days."

"Seven or eight days!" repeated Mrs. Vyvian; "and did Charles pass so much
time at the house of Mr. Lessington?"

"Indeed he did not. I believe I may venture to assure you, he never was there
but when I accompanied him. I am sure, I may say, that he went with no design
that you could disapprove, and that all Miss Vyvian has thought proper to say,
originates in misrepresentation on one side, and malicious jealousy on the
other. For Heaven's sake, dearest Madam, make yourself easy I am persuaded,
that, in regard at least to Charles, you have no reason to be otherwise."

A little soothed by these assurances, Mrs. Vyvian became more calm; and at
that moment seeing the Abbe Hayward coming up the garden, of which ^e had a key
to let himself in, from his (...) Montalbert rang for Nesbit, Mrs. Vyvian's
(...), and leaving her mistress to her care, ^ed away to speak to him.

Their conference was long and serious. Mr. Hayward assured Montalbert, that he
would quiet the spirits of Mrs. Vyvian relative to the supposed visits of her
son at Barlton Brooks; and recommended it to Montalbert very earnestly to
conceal, as far as was now possible, the disagreeable dialogue which had passed
that morning. "You know Mr. Vyvian," said he, "and how violent and unfeeling he
is....... There is no knowing what rudeness and reproaches he may throw on that
excellent lady, if this family dispute goes to any length.......I tremble for
her peace." -- The council this good man gave was perfectly reasonable.
Montalbert felt that it was so; yet there was something in his manner, when he
spoke of the Lessington family, which gave Montalbert an idea of some mystery
that he could not comprehend. He returned, however, no more to the house, but
hastened to find Rosalie at that of her mother.

Mrs. Lessington had gone to London early in the morning, was to go to a play
that night, and to an opera the next, a spectacle which she had not seen for
many years, and about which she had expressed as much eagerness as a girl. It
was in hopes of making his advantage of this absence, that Montalbert had met
Rosalie at Mrs. Vyvian's in the morning. Rosalie, dreading importunity which
she had no longer resolution to contend with, had taken shelter there. Mrs.
^yvian, not at all expecting either Montalbert (...) daughters, had engaged her
to stay all (...) when Miss Vyvian's jealously and malice, ^ened by the sight
of Rosalie, whom she had never thought so very handsome before, had, together
with some circumstances hitherto concealed or stifled, occasioned the scene of
the morning: a scene which did more to accelerate the views of Montalbert, than
he could have done in another week with all the eloquence of the most
passionate love.

CHAP. X.
THERE could be little doubt but that ^he correspondence between Montalbert and
Rosalie was suspected, if not absolutely discov^^ed. Firmly as he thought he
could rely on the fidelity of the person he had employed, it was but too
evident that he was in some degree betrayed: and Rosalie, whom he found in
tears, acknowledge^ that their situation admitted ^ot of hesita^ that
Montalbert must either return imme^tely to Italy, or risque every discovery in
re^ard to his mother, which he had so many reasons to avoid.

It was vain to weary themselves with conjectures as to the source from which
Mrs. Vyvian derived the intelligence that she detailed with so much malicious
pleasure. On any other occasion, Montalbert would have flown into one of those
transports of passion to which he was but too subject, and have insisted on an
explanation* but the tears and terrors of Rosalie, who saw ^he discovery likely
not only to produce every kind of mischief they dreaded, but eventually to
separate them for ever, now checked every impulse of resentment, and left to
Montalbert no other wish than to secure her his, and to return to Italy before
the malignity of his cousin should have conveyed intelligence thither, which
would embroil him for ever with his mother, and probably deprive him of that
affluence to which it was now his delight to think he should raise the woman he
adored.

There now seemed no alternative between resigning Montalbert for ever,
depriving him of his inheritance by a discovery, or consenting to sacrifice her
own scruples. It is not difficult to foresee that she chose the latter. Another
whole day was to pass before the return of her mother; and it was settled that
the priest, whom Montalbert had engaged, should call early in the morning on
pretense of a message from Mrs. Lessington to Rosalie; that Montalbert should
soon aft^ arrive on his way to Mrs. Vyvian's, of whom he was supposed to be on
the point of taking (...) -- and that the marriage should then be cele^ed
according to the Romish ritual, in the presence of a friend whom Montalbert was
to bring with him. There was, in fact, neither difficulty nor danger of
detection in this arrangement. The country servants of Mrs. Lessington, a maid
and a boy, took every thing that was told them for granted. The ceremony was
soon over; and a testimony of its performance being given to Rosalie, the
priest departed for London with the friend of Montalbert, while he himself went
to Mrs. Vyvian's, where he intended to dine, and where he hoped his aunt would,
without any solicitation, send for Rosalie. In this, however, he was mistaken.
He found Mrs. Vyvian so much affected by the scene of the day before, that she
was confined to her bed. She admitted him to her bed side: and he was shocked
to see the havoc which even a few hours acute uneasiness had made in her
enfeebled frame. "You see," said she, "how it is with me, Montalbert. I have no
longer strength to resist that most corrosive of all miseries, the estrangement
and ingratitude of my own children -- of my daughters, I ought to say -- for
Charles, my poor boy, I believe loves me; but what I suffer from them,
Montalbert, is indeed -- 'Sharper than the serpent's tooth."

Montalbert endeavored to sooth her agitated spirits, by representing to her,
that her daughters were young and thoughtless, giddy with (...) health, and
prosperity, and that a few (...) would in all probability, produce (...) (...)
change in their volatile dispositions* (...) few years!" said Mrs. Vyvian, with
a melancholy smile; "and do you think that a very few years, or more probably a
very few months, will not finish all for me in a much more certain ma^er? -- O
yes! yes!"......

She paused a moment, as if to recover herself, and then said, in a still lower
tone: "But there is one thing, my dear Harry, that I wish to say to you.
Perhaps -- perhaps I may never see you again, and I would fain -- "

Montalbert remained silent in anxious expectation of what she was going to
say* but, as if she could not collect resolution enough, she sighed deeply, put
her hand to her head, and seemed to suffer great pain there; then, becoming
more languid, said, "But I hope I shall see you again, Harry, when I am more
able to converse: yet surely you do not mean to prolong much your stay in
England?"

"If my mother would grant me permission," answered he, "to stay till spring, I
own it would be agreeable to me."

"I should not suppose she would, Harry," said Mrs. Vyvian. I understood that
her last letters expressed great anxiety for your return; and you know she does
not very patiently bear contradiction..... But I wonder, Montalbert, what
attractions England can have for you. Oh! if it were in my power to go to
Italy, how readily would I quit this country for ever; and yet -- " -- Again
she hesitated and sighed; and Montalbert, finding no pretense for naming
Rosalie, and that it was unlikely he should pass the day with her as he had
fondly hoped, assured her he would see her again several times before he left
England, since he should await the arriva^ of his next letters before he fixed
the day of his departure; and then took his leave.

It was but too certain, however, that he had that morning received the most
positive commands from his mother to set out immediately, mingled with some
severe reproaches for his having delayed his journey, from time to time, so
much beyond that which he had originally fixed for his stay. He now thought it
more than ever impossible to leave Rosalie, though he had sworn that if she
were once irrevocably his, he would go without further hesitation. To invent
some plausible pretense for the evasion of this promise, was now his object;
and so great was the reluctance with which he thought of going, that he
sometimes determined rather to brave the displeasure of his mother, and boldly
to combat her prejudices, than leave his wife, now more dear to him than ever:
but was there no medium between these extremities? was it not possible for hi^
to take her with him? -- While he meditated on the practicability of such a
project and the arguments he should use to prevail upon her to consent to it,
he found himself before the door of Mrs. Lessington's house, and was going in,
when he was amazed and concerned to observe her and her daughter Maria getting
out of a coach, which he had till then imagined had just stopped at the house
of one of her neighbors. As he could not retreat without being seen, and his
uneasy curiosity was excited by this unexpected and unwelcome return, he
advanced toward Mrs. Lessington, and was beginning a speech about Mrs. Vyvian,
whose name he meant to use as an excuse for his calling; but, without seeming
to attend, she began to apologize for not having it in her power to ask him in,
being, she said, in great alarm on account of her daughter.

"What daughter? -- and oh! for Heaven's sake, what is the matter?" -- were
words that were on the point of issuing from Montalbert's lips, who thought
only of Rosalie: when this indiscretion on his part was prevented by Mrs.
Lessington's proceeding to tell him, that her eldest married daughter, who was
near her time, had suffered from being overturned in a cha^se, and had
entreated to see her mother, who had, therefore, hastened from London, where
she received the letter, to pack up a few necessaries, and was setting out post
immediately afterward for the house of her daughter in Sussex. Montalbert,
alarmed lest Rosalie was going too, troubled so much, that he had not courage
to ask but to leave the house without knowing was impossible. Regardless,
therefore, of the rules of decorum, which certainly demanded that he should
absent himself, he followed Mrs. Lessington into the house, where his sudden
re-appearance, and the unexpected arrival of her mother, had such an effect on
the countenance and manner of Rosalie, as could not have escaped observation,
had not Mrs. Lessington and Maria been both much engaged with the immediate
preparations for their journey; for amidst her maternal anxiety for her
daughter, the elder lady was by no means indifferent to the appearance she was
to make among her former country neighbors and though she was still in deep
mourning, she observed that it was not the less necessary to be "tolerably
dressed."

Miss Maria was of course more solicitous on this important matter than her
mother: and in the midst of their giving orders to one to run to the
mantua-makers, and another to fetch home a new bonnet, etc. etc. they neither
of them seemed to recollect that it was necessary to make some arrangement
about Rosalie, or even to remember that she was in the house.

She remained, therefore, a few moments in the parlour with Montalbert, who,
advancing trembling to her, inquired eagerly if she also was going? "I think
not," answered she. "But my mother in her hurry, seems totally to have
forgotten me." -- "I pray Heaven," said he, "that you may be left behind! If
you go, I shall be distracted. When will it be decided? -- How can I know?"

"I had better go up to my mother," answered Rosalie, "offer to assist her, and
ask for her commands." -- "O hasten," cried Montalbert, "my angel, or I shall
die with impatience! -- I must stay till I know what is to be your destination,
and will make some pretense for my intrusion." Rosalie then went up to her
mother, who seemed to be awakened, by her presence, to some sense of
recollection as to what was to become of her youngest daughter during her
absense. "I don't know, child." said she, "how to take you with us very well,
as your brother Blagham is in town for two days on law business, and is
desirous of going down with us in a post chaise." -- Rosalie's heart beat so,
that she could hardly breathe.

"I declare," continued her mother, "I know not how to manage about you. To be
sure it will be but a disagreeable journey* and I suppose my dear you do not
want to go?"

"If I could be of any use to my sister," said Rosalie, hesitating.

"Oh! as to that," answered Mrs. Lessington, "there is no occasion to be sure;
but it will be lonely for you at home, unless, indeed, Mrs. Vyvian would be so
good as to take you."

Rosalie knew, from the scene of the preceding morning, that Mrs. Vyvian could
not, without exposing herself anew to the insults of her daughter, which was
painful even to think of.

This, however, she could not now explain to her mother, who, after a moment's
hesitation, proceeded......"I have a mind to send to Mrs. Vyvian; yet I don't
know -- perhaps it will be inconvenient to her. There are times when I know it
would be painful to her to have company; -- but -- let me -- see -- I dare say
my friends the Hillmores would take you for a few days, and then you might come
back; and Mrs. Vyvian would, perhaps, nay I am sure she would, have you with
her as much as her spirits will allow, and by that time -- most probably, you
know we should be come back."

Though Rosalie knew the Hillmores were the most disagreeable people in the
world, she had neither courage to object, nor presence of mind to propose any
other plan. She thought she saw in her mother's manner an evident wish to get
her off her hands, on the present occasion, without much solicitude as to the
propriety of her situation during her absence: and at that moment she felt
happy in the consciousness of being the wife of Montalbert, who would, in every
event, defend and protect her.

She remained silent, however: and Mrs. Lessington, who was still busily
engaged in packing, at length turned to her, and said, "Well, child! and what
do you say to the plan of passing the little time we shall be away between Mrs.
Vyvian and Mr. Hillmore's?"

"I know very little of Mr. Hillmore's family," said Rosalie timidly; "but I
dare say, Madam, you are sure they would be kind enough to ^ceive me."

"To be sure I am," replied Mrs. Lessington; "and as to Mrs. Vyvian, I wish I
could see her myself -- but -- I have not time. -- However -- st^^ -- do you
think Mr. Montalbert is gone (...) dare say he would be so good as to carry a
m^ssage for me."

"I am persuaded he would," said Rosalie timidly, "if he is not gone."

"Do go down and see: no -- I will go myself." She then descended to the room
where Montalbert still remained, who, when he heard the commission she gave him
to his aunt, accepted it with transport he could with difficulty disguise. "I
only waited here," said he, "to know if I could be of any use to you in your
present hurry; and you cannot oblige me more than in employing me." He then
hastened to Mrs. Vyvian, to whom he delivered a message rather suited to his
own purposes than very exact as to correctness; and modulating Mrs. Vyvian's
answer in the same way, he returned instantly to Mrs. Lessington, who,
concluding the disposal of Rosalie settled her own way, told her she would have
a note for her friends, the Hillmores, which she hastily wrote, and then
directed Rosalie to stay a few hours after her to adjust the house and put
every thing away, which her present hurry did not allow her to attend to. After
which a hackney-coach was to convey Rosalie to Mincing Lane, where Mr. Hillmore
lived, and she was herself to deliver the note that was to secure her reception
for the first three or four days of her mother's absence: after which, if that
absence continued, she was to return and remain under the protection of Mrs.
Vyvian.

This arrangement was so exactly calculated to answer all the wishes of
Montalbert, that he now trembled with apprehension lest it should be revoked.
He would not, however, venture to stay, lest Mrs. Lessington should entertain
any suspicions of the cause of his extraordinary zeal. He therefore wished her
a good journey, and left her. Soon after which Rosalie saw her mother and
sister get into a post-chaise, which was ordered to stop to take up Mr Blagham
at the house of a friend at Islington; and then they drove awake leaving her to
reflect on the extraordinary circumstances that had thus left her at liberty,
and to wait with a beating heart the return of Montalbert.

In less than half an hour he appeared; and telling the maid who opened the
(...) that he brought a message (...), he was admitted. As nothing was ^eafy as
for Rosalie to leave the house with her clothes, under the directions her
mother had given her, nor less hazardous than to postpone her visit to Mr.
Hillmore's family for a day or two, Montalbert vanquished every objection she
made to going with him. The hackney-coach, therefore, that was to have conveyed
her to Mincing Lane, and in which she did not set out till toward evening*
went no further than to the suburbs of London, where Montalbert waited for her
with another, from whence they got into a post-chaise, and were soon at a
distance from London.

Thither, however, it was necessary that Rosalie should return in two days at
the farthest, least her mother should direct to her there, and her absence be
discovered It was long before Montalbert would listen to her earnest
representations on this subject. But there was no alternative* he must either
tear himself from her, or suffer it to be known that she had eloped, nor could
it long remain a secret with whom. Her representations were so forcible, and he
felt them to be so just, that his reluctance at length gave way to the
consideration of his wife's tranquillity: and he consented to her return to
town, whether he conducted her, and putting her into a coach, followed it at a
distance on foot, till it set her down at the house of her mother's friends.

But as Mrs. Vyvian had no acquaintance or communication with this family, the
principal of (...) ^torney in the city, nothing was more ea^ (...) ^he day on
which she left their house, (...) concealed the time when her mothe^ (...) ^d
her visit should begin to them. This, however, depended on the return of Mrs.
Lessington.

Rosalie on her arrival at the house of Mr. Hillmore, found a very cordial
reception; but the manners of the whole family were so unlike those she had in
the happiest part of her life been accustomed to -- the old lady was so
vulgarly civil, the young men so impertinently familiar, and the misses so full
of flutter and fashions, -- that Rosalie foresaw she would be esteemed very bad
company. They had already, from the report of Miss Maria, entertained an idea
that their guest was proud and reserved; and Rosalie saw by their manner, that
they disliked her, and wished her away. The mother, because she feared her
beauty might attract one of her sons; the daughters, through jealousy of their
lovers. The next day after her arrival there she received a letter from her
mother, which informed her, that though Mrs. Grierson was doing well, yet it
would be ten days before she should return. Rosalie, therefore, armed herself
with patience, to pass a few days longer where she was, before she returned to
Hampstead: but Montalbert could not suffer her to remain there without seeing
her. As he was not known to the people of the house, he called under pretense
of a message from Mrs. Vyvian, but he could only see her in a formal way in the
presence of Mrs. Hillmore and her daughter, who prodigiously admired him (...)
genteel man indeed. (...) that evening to the p^ (...) ^mined to be himself.

It was then that he saw the (...) ^r beauty of Rosalie attract all eyes, and
he^ inquiries around him, who that lovely girl was in mourning? The faces of
the Miss Hillmores were well known, though their party would have passed wholly
unnoticed, but for the brilliant star that now first appeared among them.
Montalbert, (...) the other side of the house, enjoyed a peculiar kind of
pleasure at the admiration excited by his wife. But one of the foibles of his
temper was jealousy; when therefore he saw two or three young men,
acquaintances of the Hillmores, enter their box, evidently with a design of
l^ng introduced to her; when he saw young Hillmore^, who was a sort of a city
wit and city buck, displaced one of his sisters in order to sit near to
Rosalie, he could remain where he was no longer; (...) crossing the house, went
into the next box, when he sat the remainder of the evening, not near enough to
speak to her, so entirely was she surrounded; but suffering inexpressible
torment because she was spoken to by others.

His impetuous spirit could ill submit to a longer course of such punishment.
He went out, therefore, to a tavern, a few moments before the play was over,
and wrote a note to her, in which he insisted on her leaving the Hillmores the
next morning. "I will send a servant," said he, "with a chariot and a letter,
as if from Mrs. Vyvian. (...) ^ple you are with, know neither h^ (...) ^g, you
may very easily leave (...) wi^ the least suspicion. I will take care of the
rest. But remember, Rosalie, I must not be refused -- I would not leave you
exposed another day to the impertinence of the vulgar puppies you are
surrounded by to be master of an empire.

Montalbert, having sealed this letter, waited at the door of the box for her
coming out; but as she had on each side of her competitors for the ho^or of
leading her out, it was not without difficulty he found an apportunity of
giving it to her.

The next day an handsome chariot, with a servant in livery, was at the door of
Mr. Hillmore by eleven o'clock: the latter brought a note apparently from Mrs.
Vyvian, which Rosalie showed a^ a reason for leaving Mrs. Hillmore, who, while
she expressed great concern that they were so soon to lose the pleasure of her
good company, was, as well the young ladies, heartily glad to see her depart. A
short time brought her to a place where Montalbert waited for her to begin
another short excursion from London. He endeavored to appease the excessive
fear she expressed, left these journies should be discovered by assuring her
that he had taken every p^ precaution to prevent it. That Mrs. Vyvian did not
expect her for two or three days, at the end of which time he promised she
should go back to Hampstead: and he had engaged a person to convey to him any
letters that might arrive in the mean time from Mrs. Lessington, lest, from any
alteration in her plan, she should (...) find her daughter where she expec^
(...) measures, and Montalbert's solemn ^ra^ that as soon as he saw her once
more safe u^ the protection of her mother, he would no longer delay a journey
which was so necessary on account of his own, and that he would force himself,
though at the expense of his present felicity, to pursue such measures as might
secure uninterrupted possession hereafter.

CHAP. XI.
WHILE Rosalie was thus, as Mrs. Vyvian ^ed, passing part of the time of her
mother's absence as she had directed, that excellent but unhappy woman, Mrs.
Vyvian herself, was suffering under the most acute anxiety. The absence of her
son, the estrangement of her two daughters, and the cold and even severe
conduct of the man to whom she had been sacrificed, (...) together a cruel
combination of evils; (...), ^ver, did not so entirely occupy her ^d, ^t that
she felt for Rosalie, to whom she (...) ever shown the tenderest partiality,
and to whom she would with delight have granted an assylum in her own house,
had she not been deterred by the envy and ill-humour which her daughters had
expressed, and terrified at the hints they had given of an affection for her on
the part of her son, which, if it should once reach the ears of Mr. Vyvian,
would, she knew, so greatly enrage him, that he would forbid her ever receiving
any of the Lessington family again. Timid and mild, and with nerves shaken and
en^bled by a long course of unhappiness, Mrs. ^y^n was unequal to contention
with a violent, ^ou^y, and unfeeling man, who disdained to listen to reason,
and held all friendly attachments, every thing that did not coincide with
self-interested motives, to be mere cant and pretense. He had never considered
the Lessington family with an eye of favor; but while Lessington lived, he had
been useful to him in electioneering matters, and therefore he, and of course
his family, had been endured. But the apprehension of any attachment between
young Vyvian and a person whom his father considered so infinitely be^ him,
would not have been suffered a moment* and Mrs. Vyvian knew that on the
slightest suspicion, she should be overwhelmed with menaces and reproaches,
which she found herself altogether unable to sustain. This dread alone
prevented her from hazarding a repetition of the language her daughters had
held, and compelled her to submit to so great a depra^s that of often resigning
Rosalies company, (...) interesting gratitude, and innocent, (...) ^e,
conversation, formed one of her g^ pleasures, and was best calculated to soothe
her wounded heart.

Still, however, she was uneasy that so young and so pretty a woman should be
consigned to the care of people of whom she had no very high opinion. She
fancied they were low bred: a^ was persuaded that if the morals of Rosalie were
in no danger among them, her delicacy of min^ must suffer from the style of
such co^ When, therefore, she saw Montalbert, (...) while Rosalie was really at
Mr. Hillmore's c^ upon his aunt as usual, lest his absence might be remarked,
she continually questioned him, about these people; and he, not willing to
appear to know much about them gave her such answers as served rather to
increase her solicitude for her former protegee, and her regret that she could
not give her protection in her own house.

Montalbert never loved his aunt so well as when he thus saw her interested for
Rosalie; and sometimes it seemed as if this interest was so strong, that she
could not be angry at finding his sentiments so entirely agree with hers. Half
resolved to open his whole heart to her, and entreat her countenance, her
protection, for his wife, he sat meditating what to say, when the entrance of
Mr. Hayward, or some sentence Mrs. Vyvian uttered, again shook his resolution,
and deterred him from entrusting to her a secret of so much consequence; while,
if it still remained a secret to every body but to her, his Rosalie could
derive no benefit from the partial information; for Mrs. Vyvian would still be
deprived of the power of receiving her as Rosalie Lessington; and as the wife
of Montalbert it would be still mo^ impossible.

It was now time for her to return to Hampstead ^here all Mrs. Vyvian could do
was to receive her on those days when none of her own family were likely to
call upon her, or if they did, to send her into another room. Montalbert,
during the four or five days that were to be the last of his stay in England,
passed a part of each with Mrs. Vyvian, who, while she thought it her duty to
press him to begin a journey that had been so long delayed, began to be
serio^sly uneasy about his health, which she thought was evidently declined. He
was pensive and absent, spoke little, and had lost his appetite -- symptoms
that she fancied indicated a decline, and induced her to urge him with
increased earnestness to begin his journey, in the persuasion that the winter
in England was inimical to his constitution. Montalbert every day promised to
fix the time of his departure; but every day brought with it some excuse: --
his baggage, some things he had bespoke as presents to his Italian friends,
were not ready; his own servant was taken ill; he must wait the arrival of a
friend from the country, with whom he had business relative to his family's
northern property. While this went on, he lived in a miserable state of
restraint, never seeing his wife but for a short time in the presence of Mrs.
Vyvian, unless she happened to be there of an evening, in which case he went
home with her, but attended by a servant, under petenc^ that his horses were at
a stable not far from the house of Mrs. Lessington.

Such a state of constraint was insupportable. More passionately attached to
Rosalie than before he became her husband, the idea of leaving her for weeks
and months was become more terrible than that of death. He fancied it
disgraceful to submit to divide himself from all he held dear, influenced
merely by pecuniary consider^ and often resolved to acknowledge his marriage
and brave the consequences. But then the fear of reducing to poverty the woman
he adored -- of exposing to the inconveniences of indigence her whom he thought
worthy of a throne, checked his resolution of making this dangerous avowal; and
again he determined to leave her in the hope (...) ^eturning to claim her, and
place her in a situation of life which she seemed born to ^ll.

Rosalie seized every opportunity that now presented itself to press his going.
-- She urged his former promises, his own acknowledgments of the necessity of
his departure. Again he promised he would go, but again found it impossible to
tear himself from her. But now her mother returned; and their meeting must
become mo^e ^are and more difficult; and at length, but not till after he had
received another letter from his mother, Montalbert determined to go. The last
interview he could obtain with his wife was short and hazardous. Neither of
them could say farewell; and when he was gone, and Rosalie knew she should see
him no more, she felt so depressed, that, apprehensive of the remarks that
might be made, she retired to her bed under pretense of a violent head ach,
though the pain she felt was in her heart.

This pretense could not, however, be long continued: and Rosalie returned,
though reluctantly, to the common business of life, while Montalbert, scarcely
knowing what he did, pursued his way to the sea coast from whence he was to
embark for France, meaning to pass through that country to Italy. But the
greater the distance became between him and the object of his love, the less
supportable it became. A thousand times he was tempted to return, and rather
hazard every future consequence than subject himself to the present misery of a
separation so painful. Arrived at the borders of the sea, this distracting
irresolution redoubled. It was yet in his power to return to all he held dear
on earth -- a few leagues of land only were between them, but soon immense
worlds of water would divide them: and he was conscious, that the single
circumstance of its being out of his power to return when he would, must
increase all the impatience he now felt. Yet his reason told him, that his
temporary absence ought to be undergone, since it might secure the repose
hereafter of the woman he loved.

As it was now a time when multitudes of English, who had long been prevented
by the war from visiting the continent, were hastening to France, Montalbert
was not many hours waiting for a wind, before he met some of his acquaintance,
from whom it was impossible for him to escape. The gaiety and vivacity of these
men, fatigued without amusing the mind of Montalbert. They were, however, of
some use to him in calling off his attention from the subject, on which it was
painful and useless for him (...) dwell. One of his friends rallied his
supposed melancholy; another rattled away on past adventures and future
projects of his own; and, amidst this variety of conversation, the wind
becoming favorable, the whole party were summoned on board, and in a few hours
Montalbert found himself at Calais.

His friends, impatient to get to Paris, hastened on their way, while
Montalbert was again (...) alone to indulge his uneasy reflections.

The traveller, who quits England with ang^ of mind, has often found a
transient relief (...) the variety and novelty offered by his arrival in a
country, which, though so near his own, (...) seems so unlike those he has
been accustomed to. But this change had lost its power over the mi^ of
Montalbert, having traveled so often between Italy and England through France,
each country was equally well known to him; and ^apsing into his former
despondence, he wandered along the French coast, looking with aching eyes
toward England, and again tempted to return to it. -- At length, however,
after two days indulgence of this weakness, for such he owned it was, he once
more reasoned himself into a resolution to proceed, and though with an heart
which became more heavy every league, he hastened toward Naples, making no
stay at Paris, or any other town through which his route lay.

While he was thus obeying the imperious dictates of duty, Rosalie, concealing
the wretchedness of her heart, endeavored to pass the time of this cruel
absence in perfecting herself in those branches of knowledge most agreeable to
him. But very unpleasant were the many hours she was obliged to pass among
people who had no ideas in common with her, who were engaged in other pursuits,
and who seemed to consider her, what indeed she really was, a being of quite
another species, who, in being among them, was evidently displaced.

The only time she passed with any degree of satisfaction, was that when she
was admitted to sit with Mrs. Vyvian, and to converse with the Abbe Hayward. --
Miss Vyvian was now married and gone, accompanied by her father and sister, to
the seat of her husband's family in great parade. Her mother, of whom she had
taken a cold leave, sunk into deeper dejection than ever not that she felt as a
misfortune this more certain separation from a daughter, who had long ceased to
return her maternal tenderness; but it seemed as if her frame could no longer
resist the sorrow inflicted upon her by the absence of a son she adored,
aggravated by the ingratitude of his sisters.

Rosalie appeared to be more dear to her than ever, and there was now no
impediment to their being often together. But Mrs. Vyvian, whose health visibly
declined, was not always well enough to leave her bed, or to be amused with
Rosalie's endeavors to relieve her long hours of solitude by reading or music.
When she was able, however, to sit up, the duties of her religion, which she
fulfilled with the most scrupulous exactness, alone detained her from the
society of Rosalie. Whatever might be the dejection of Mrs. Vyvian's mind, her
penetration was not blunted: and she saw that something unusual pressed upon
the spirits of her young friend: again then she spoke to her of what she
apprehended -- "you are certainly not well, Rosalie," said Mrs. Vyvian, as they
were sitting alone together, " or you are unhappy?" -- "I am well, indeed, my
dear Madam," she replied; "as to being unhappy, I am not particularly so. I own
to you, that the continual round of company in which my mother is engaged, is
far from adding to the pleasantness of my life; and sometimes I languish for an
abode in my native country, as solitary as our parsonage under the southern
hills."

"There is more in it than that, dear girl," said Mrs. Vyvian, with a look that
expressed her incredulity.

"You would not surely wonder if there were," answered Rosalie. "I have often
wondered at my own inconsequence in not being more depressed, when I recollect,
that, whenever I lose my mother, I shall become a friendless and destitute
orphan."

"Not, if I live," said Mrs. Vyvian. Then, pausing a moment, she added, in a
slow and solemn voice -- "for, as I think, my early indulgence to my daughters,
or rather to myself, in having you so much at Holmwood during your infancy, has
perhaps been the means of stranging you from your family, I consider it as my
duty to make you what little amends I can. Much, alas! is not in my power, for
the unintentional injury I have done you."

The tears rose in the eyes of Rosalie as Mrs. Vyvian concluded this sentence.
"O no dearest Madam," answered she -- "your kindness to me, never, never,
injured me: so far otherwise, that I think I should, but for that kindness,
have been the most unhappy creature in the world. At least I know that the only
moments for which I would wish to live are those when you permit me to be with
you."

"And therefore it is, my love, that I think I have injured you. Your mother,
your sisters, are happy among acquaintance and parties of their own, from which
you fly with disgust: nor is this all -- I am sensible that you have refused a
very advantageous match from the same prepossession."

"I assure you, my dear Mrs. Vyvian, that, as far as I am able to judge, I
should have refused Mr. Hughson, though I had never enjoyed the advantages of
being admitted to Holmwood. Indeed, had I been in the most humble condition of
life, I am sure I should have preferred remaining in it, and even embracing the
hardest labor, to giving my person to a man from whom my heart recoiled."

A deep and long-drawn sigh, as if some painful recollections had arisen at
that moment, half interrupted the answer of Mrs. Vyvian, who said, "You are
certainly right in the sentiment, Rosalie: but it is sometimes not in the power
of young women to resist parental authority. However, admitting that a man,
less disagreeable than you represent this Hughson to have b^, should now
present himself; tell me, Rosalie -- answer me ingenuously -- would he not be
equally rejected?"

The eyes of Mrs. Vyvian, which, though ^nerally soft and languid, were very
expressive, were fixed steadily on the countenance of Rosalie as she asked this
question. Rosalie, who affected to be steadily at work, looked up, and met
these penetrating eyes. A deep blush suffused her cheeks; she was conscious of
it, and became more confused. Yet, making an effort to recollect herself, and
to speak with composure, she said, "O nothing is so -- so very unlikely, as
that any man should have a preference for me! -- I never thought whether I
should refuse any other offer or no: because it is so improbable, that it is
hardly worth while to suppose about it."

"Not so improbable as you affect to imagine, Rosalie; but you are not sincere.
I do not wish my dear, to distress you; and we will drop the discourse at this
time. But another day, perhaps, I may talk to you further; for I have something
very serious to say to you: and I think, Rosalie, you will not deceive me,
since it may be very material to us both."

More and more confused, and not doubting but that by some means or other Mrs.
Vyvian had discovered her marriage, she was too much agitated to allow herself
to consider, whether, if this were really the case, it was likely Mrs. Vyvian
should speak as she had done. But trembling and breathless she hastened to put
her work into the work-basket, and, affecting to understand what her friend had
last said as an hint to depart, she smiled, and replying that she was always
happy to answer any questions from her, and that she hoped always to be
ingenuous with so good a friend, she hastened away, which Mrs. Vyvian did not
oppose.

CHAP. XII.
THE night that followed this conversation was the most uneasy Rosalie had ever
yet known. From what had passed she could not doubt but that Mrs. Vyvian knew
of her marriage. Yet it was incomprehensible if she did, that she should have
expressed so little anger or disapprobation: yet what else but her knowing of
the mutual attachment between her nephew and her protegee could have urged her
to speak as she did?

The various conjectures that agitated the mi^ of Rosalie, allowed her not to
sleep. She h^ never till now tasted, in its full bitterness, the pain that is
inflicted on an ingenuous mind by concealment and dissimulation. Conscious that
she merited the loss of Mrs. Vyvian's good opinion, and that the longer this
mystery was continued on her part, the more unpardonable it would appear, she
endeavored to reason herself into a resolution of unbosoming herself to Mrs.
Vyvian, and rather enduring her reproaches for precipitancy and indiscretion,
than suffer the misery of living in continual dread of being detected in a
falsehood. The most probable conjecture she could form, was, that Mrs. Vyvian
knew the truth, and had held the conversation she had heard the preceding
evening to give Rosalie an opportunity of declaring what was already known.
This supposition strengthened her wavering resolves: and she arose in the
morning, believing she had force of mind enough to disclose the secret that
weighed upon her mind. But when a note came from Mrs. Vyvian requesting to see
her as soon as she had breakfasted, her courage at once forsook her, and hardly
could she find strength to obey the summons.

On her arrival, however at the house of Mrs. Vyvian, she found nothing
remarkable in the manner or looks of her friend, who seemed as to her health to
suffer less than usual. Rosalie inquired, as she had been accustomed to do, if
she should fetch a book. Mrs. Vyvian answered no; and bid her take her work.

For some time the conversation ran on indifferrent topics. At length,
contriving to bring it without abruptness to the point she w^shed, Mrs. Vyvian
renewed the subject on which she had touched the day before. Rosalie, whose
heart was beating so violently that she could hardly breathe, listened to her
in silence.

"I spoke to you yesterday, my love," said she, "with a desire to hear your
sentiments on a m^ very important to you. You say that you sometimes accuse
yourself of not having sufficient prevoyance -- of looking forward with too
little ^licitude to a future, which certainly promises (...) little prosperity.
-- What, if a way was to (...) of escaping from these fears? -- If an
establishment* in most respects unexceptionable, were to be found?"

"I am not my own mistress, you know, my dear Madam," said Rosalie, speaking
this equivocation, for it could not be called a falsehood, in so low a voice as
hardly to be heard.

"That is true," answered Mrs. Vyvian; "but I think, indeed I am sure, your
friends would not disapprove the proposal in question -- indeed there can be
but one objection to it, which I think would not have much weight; the
gentleman is a Catholic."

"A Catholic!" repeated Rosalie faintly.

"You are surprised, I see; but you know, Rosalie, there are considerations
that may influence persons to overlook this difference of opinion. Tell me now
ingenuously: should a man of that religion offer, whose circumstances, whose
character, are such as would preclude all those fea^ that you, or those who
love you, might have as to your future fate? -- Tell me, if you should hesitate
to accept of his hand? -- Remember I expect you to be candid. Would you receive
such a man as your husband?"

The first attempt Rosalie made to answer this question failed; she was unable
to articulate a syllable. Collecting, however, all her resolution, she at last
found courage to say, "I am very sensible, Madam, that I ought to feel
extremely grateful for the notice of any man of whom you have a good opinion;
-- but -- my dear, dear bene^ress," added she in a voice that her agitation
re^red indistinct, and rising from her seat, "I cannot any longer conceal the
truth from you -- I am already married."

"Already married!" exclaimed Mrs. Vyvian with a tone and look of amazement; --
"Already married! -- Merciful Heaven! and to whom?"

"Can I hope, dearest and best of women, to be forgiven, when I tell you -- O
no! -- I dare not -- you will reproach me, perhaps detest me, and cast me off
for ever."

"Speak," said Mrs. Vyvian, trembling as much as the unhappy girl --
speak"...... She had her salts in her hand; and her eyes were eagerly fixed on
the face of Rosalie, who was compelled to support herself by holding the table.

"Since you have just said, Madam, that a Catholic might, in your opinion, make
such an alliance."......

"A Catholic!" cried Mrs. Vyvian, still more faintly.

"I might hope, perhaps," continued Rosalie, "to be forgiven for every thing,
but the presumption of becoming part of your family -- of marrying a very near
relation of your own."

Rosalie might have continued her confession without interruption another hour.
Mrs. Vyvian heard no more, but sunk back in her chair to all appearance
lifeless.

In an agony of terror, to which no words can do justice, Rosalie flew toward
her, then to the bell, which she rang with violence: and when her servants
came, she assisted in carrying Mrs. Vyvian to her room, though she was herself
(...) situation but little better...... "I am u^ne," said she, -- "I shall
never be forgiven..... No, I see that my more than mother cannot, will not,
forgive me. -- O Montalbert! why are you not here to plead with me for pardon?
-- What will become of your unhappy Rosalie, if her first, her best friend
abandons and abhors her, while you are far far off, and unable to protect her
from the insults of the rest of the world?"

While Rosalie was making this mournful monologue on one side of the bed, the
applications used by Mrs. Vyvian's woman were so successful, that she opened
her eyes; but, turning them on Rosalie, she seemed shocked by the sight of her,
and without speaking, waved her hand that she might leave her.

This was too much. Rosalie, regardless of the presence of the servant, threw
herself upon her knees by the bed side, and attempted to take Mrs. Vyvian's
hand -- she snatched it from her with abhorrence, and, speaking with great
difficulty, said, "Wretched, most wretched girl -- if you would not see me die
before your face -- go -- I conjure you go."

"Hear me but for one moment; let Hallam leave the room while I speak to you
for the last time, if it must be so."

The maid, who understood nothing of all this, and who felt no curiosity to
know what it meant, restrained by some degree of terror, retired without being
bid; and Rosalie again most earnestly imploring for pity and pardon, Mrs.
Vyvian, in a ^ice at once shrill and plaintive, said --

"It is now I feel, in all its severity, the punishment I have deserved: long
has the dread of it pursued me -- long has it embittered every moment of my
wretched existence -- but at length it overtakes, it crushes, it destroys
me.......... Miserable girl! -- the unfortunate young man, to whom you believe
yourself married -- is -- gracious God! -- do I live to tell it -- is your
brother!"

"My brother!" -- cried Rosalie -- "Heaven defend me! -- My dear Madam -- Mrs.
Vyvian! -- "Nothing occurred to her at that moment, but that the senses of her
friend were gone.

"You are my daughter," said Mrs. Vyvian, the unhappy child of an unfortunate
man, whose very name I never suffer to escape my lips."

This confirmed Rosalie in the apprehensions that her mind was deranged; but,
heart struck with horror, she could not speak. Mrs. Vyvian, after a short
pause, proceeded --

"Destined from your birth to be an outcast -- to appear a stranger even to
your mother -- I guiltily indulged myself with a sight of you, till Vyvian, my
son, victim of my crimes........"

"Vyvian!" cried Rosalie, not knowing what to believe -- "it is not Vyvian, but
Montalbert, who is my husband."

"Montalbert! -- and am I not then the wretch I thought myself? -- O Heaven!
have thou yet mercy upon me!"

"If, dearest, dearest Mrs. Vyvian, you would but listen calmly to me......."
Terror, for still she apprehended that Mrs. Vyvian wa^ ^^come insane, again
prevented her proceeding^ nor was this impression weakened by the solemnity
with which she now spoke.

"Yes, Rosalie," said she, "you are my child -- I am not mad -- I am only
miserable -- yet not so very miserable as I thought I was. Oh! why have so many
cruel people been endeavoring to embitter the sad hours of my unhappy life, by
repeating to me continually that Vyvian was so strongly attached to you, that
neither reason nor absence could cure him of his passion. They knew not that in
raising this idea in my mind, they poured into my heart the most fatal poison
-- Alas! they knew not that the dread of this horrible crime drove from me my
Rosalie -- the dear, unhappy object of so many years of silent anguish and
stifled solicitude."

Rosalie, more and more amazed, and doubting the evidence of her senses, could
only listen in breathless wonder, while Mrs. Vyvian, whose heart seemed to be
already relieved, proceeded --

"Montalbert then is your husband..... Ah! my poor girl, what a store of future
misery you have laid up, it is too probable, for yourself. I am now amazed at
my own blindness. Many, many hours of the most cruel anxiety would have been
spared me, had not so strong a prepossession been given me of Charles's frantic
passion for you: yet I now wonder I did not discover that it was Montalbert you
loved -- that you were attached to somebody I was sure, and when I thought it
was to Charles -- oh! no words (...) do justice to the tortures that wrung my
(...)."

Rosalie sighed deeply. But not knowing what to say that should express the
mingled emotions she felt, she remained silent, still holding the hand of Mrs.
Vyvian, who seemed to be collecting some of the presence of mind her late
terrors had so entirely dissipated.

The pause had something of horror in it. Rosalie watched her countenance with
a fearful and anxious eye, still assailed by the idea of some temporary
derangement of intellect: For how could she, whose parents were never even
doubted, be the daughter of Mrs. Vyvian? -- The whole scene appeared to be a
dream: and, during this silence, Rosalie apprehended that she should again see
her relapse into phrenzy. Till these fears gradually subsided, as Mrs. Vyvian
began with some degree of calmness to inquire into the particulars of the
marriage; it was legally and properly celebrated according to all her ideas.

"But tell me," added she, when this inquiry was at an end -- "was Montalbert
ingenuous with you? -- Did he tell you that he depends for every thing but a
bare subsistence, on the bounty of his mother? -- Did he tell you, that mother
has prejudices the most unconquerable against the natives and the established
religion of England?....... Ah! my poor dear girl, the same softness of heart
that destroyed me, has been, I fear, most dangerous to you. I cannot,"
continued she, deeply sighing, "I cannot now tell you the sad particulars of
your birth.... I have not strength either of mind or body -- The ho^ idea, that
my unhappy, perhaps guilty, attach^ment would be punished by a yet more fatal
one between my children, was so very terrible, that it could not be sustained.
-- I tremble still like a wretch, who, having seen himself on the brink of a
precipice, into which he must inevitably fall, is snatched from it as it were
by miracle, and can hardly believe his safety........ Let it suffice, my
dearest love, for the present, to tell you, that there are the most material
reasons why you should conceal, even from Mrs. Lessington, this unexpected
explanation between us. Let her not know, I conjure you, what has happened. But
let her, at least for a while, suppose the secret known only to her and to me.
I need not tell you, that your future welfare, and that of my nephew, depend
entirely on your still keeping secret this clandestine engagement. There are
events that may obviate the inconveniences I foresee. -- Ah, Rosalie! from an
affection cherished in secret, arose the misfortunes that have embittered my
life, and fearful to my imagination is any dissimulation. But I dare not speak
farther now. I am unequal to it. Already there is too much reason to fear that
the violence of our emotions may have given rise to conjectures, which it is so
necessary for us to stifle. Let what has happened be supposed to arise from
indisposition on my part, and on yours from the fears that indisposition
occasioned; and try, my best love to recover yourself as much as you can, and
to resume your usual composure."

Rosalie, still in astonishment at all she had ^d, and surprised at the
tranquillity with which Mrs. Vyvian now spoke, obeyed her as well as she could;
but, as she kissed her hand, and would have bade her adieu, the new sensations
she felt, while she considered as her mother the friend whom she had always so
tenderly loved, quite overcame her spirits, and her tears blinded her. Mrs.
Vyvian, yielding for a moment to the tenderness she had for so many years
suppressed, clasped her daughter fondly to her bosom, and, for almost the first
time in her life, called her by the dear name of her child. There was some
danger that they would both have indulged too long in these effusions of
natural affection, but a rap at the chamber door compelled them hastily to
recover themselves. It was a message from the venerable Mr. Hayward, who,
returning from his morning walk, had heard of Mrs. Vyvian's being greatly
indisposed, and now solicited leave to enquire after her. Rosalie, therefore,
who knew that for every wound of the mind Mrs. Vyvian found a resource in the
spiritual consolation offered her by this excellent man, hastened to follow her
wishes as to leaving her; and remaining only a few moments in another room to
recover herself yet a little more, she left the house of her real, and returned
to that of her supposed mother.

Nothing could be less in harmony with her feelings than the groupe she found
assembled there. A large party from the city, some of whom were entirely
unknown to her, had been on a jaunt of pleasure to a village about ten miles
distant and, on their way back to London, had been engaged by Miss Lessington,
who was one of the company, to dine and pass the rest of the day at her
mother's house at Hampstead.

Some of the gentlemen, who seemed to be of that rank of beings who are called
" City Bucks -- Young Men of Spirit -- Fine Flashy Fellows" -- were, in
Rosalie's opinion, the rudest and most insupportable set she had ever seen.
Agitated almost beyond endurance, as her spirits were, she was yet under the
mortifying necessity of remaining for some time in this company, which did not
separate till one of the men proposed finishing their pleasurable party by a
jaunt to Ranelagh. It was now early spring, and it was not without difficulty
that she was at length allowed to decline going, and saw Miss Lessington and
this groupe of good folks, so perfectly contented with themselves, depart
without her.

She was then left alone with her supposed mother; but to conceal from her the
perturbation of her mind was by no means difficult. Mrs. Lessington, whose new
manner of life was much more pleasing to her than that she had lived in, t^
uniform insipidity of a country village, retained, however, so much of her
original notable economy, as to use every hour to advantage which was not
given to the vigils of the card table. She now, therefore, busily employed
herself in domestic arrangements, that she might enjoy with higher relish the
rubber of the evening; and she had ^e to make observations on the appearance
(...) ^osalie.

Thus left to herself, she reviewed with astonishment the strange discovery of
the day. To find herself the daughter of Mrs. Vyvian, though of her father she
was yet ignorant, seemed to be knowledge more flattering, more elevating than
any event that could be imagined. -- She was now ready to account for a
thousand things which had before seemed extraordinary. The little affection Mr.
Lessington had ever shown for her; his leaving her name entirely out of his
will; the indifference of Mrs. Lessington, who sometimes, and particularly
lately, had seemed to forget her assumed character of mother, and to express
only what she felt, the cold civility of a common acquaintance; the want of
even the slightest family resemblance between her and the other children of the
family, and innumerable other circumstances which crowded together upon her
recollection. But if on one hand she now saw only strangers among those whom
she had hitherto considered as her nearest relations, she beheld in Mrs. Vyvian
a mother whom her heart bounded to acknowledge. To be her daughter, to be with
her knowledge the wife of Montalbert, left her hardly any thing to wish but
that the hour was come when she might (...) at least the latter title, and be
received as belonging to a man, who had not disdained to give her that title
when he thought her Rosalie Lessington, and knew not that she inherited a
portion of the noble blood of the Montalbert family: a family which, though now
debarred from farther elevation (...) ^ffering from the established religion,
and es^d by foreign connections, had not formerly been inferior either in
antiquity or honor, to the most illustrious of the British nobility.

CHAP. XIII.
ROSALIE now saw the beloved parent, whom she yet dared not own, every day. And
the discovery of her marriage with Montalbert, which she had so much dreaded,
had been the means of procuring her the knowledge of the ^essing she possessed
in a mother, who now secr^ indulged all the tenderness of her heart. The eldest
Miss Vyvian, now Mrs. Bosworth, was still at the family seat of her husband
with her sister, and her father was gone into the north during the recess of
parliament. No impediment, therefore, existed at present against Rosalie's
passing almost all her time with Mrs. Vyvian, and so happy di^ this indulgence
make her, that, had Montalbert been in England, she would hardly have had a
wish left ungratified.

It was now indeed that such a friend was more necessary to her than ever; and
it was more requisite that this dear friend should know she was a wife, since
she found it was probable she should become a mother. Nothing was more
immediately pressing than that Montalbert should be informed of this. But
without the concurrence of Mrs. Vyvian, and indeed without her assistance, she
dared not hazard a letter, which, if it fell into the hands of his mother,
might be of the most fatal consequence. The two letters she had received from
Montalbert were but too expressive of his despondence and uneasiness; and
though he seemed to stifle part of the anguish of his heart from tenderness
toward his wife, she saw that the reception his mother had given him was far
from having been pleasant, and that, while he yet acknowledged the necessity of
his journey, he regretted that he had made it.

But Mrs. Vyvian, who had received letters from her son, knew yet more. She had
learned that one reason for the impatience, expressed by the mother of
Montalbert for his return to Naples, w^ that she had projected a marriage for
him with the daughter of a friend of her own, who h^ lately lost her husband, a
Roman of high rank, and was now a very rich widow. Charles Vyvian related all
the advantages offered by such an alliance. On the beauty of the young widow,
and her predilection in favor of Montalbert, with whom she had been acquainted
before her first marriage, he dwelt particularly; (...) added, laughingly, that
he supposed Harry had left his heart in England, for at present he seemed as
insensible to the charms of the lady, as deaf to the remonstrances of his
mother.

Mrs. Vyvian was extremely distressed by this intelligence, which she carefully
avoided communicating. Though she loved Montalbert extremely, she had many
doubts whether in affairs of love he had more honor than other gay young men.
She had reason formerly to believe his principles were very free, and she could
not but fear, that he might consider his marriage with Rosalie, celebrated as
it had been contrary to the laws of England, as an engagement so little
binding, that he might break it whenever ambition or the love of variety might
induce him to it.

The situation, therefore, of this beloved child, more dear than ever to her,
was a dreadful weight on the spirits of Mrs. Vyvian: and she now felt renewed,
in the person of Rosalie, all those cruel sensations which had corroded her own
heart, when, betrayed by an unhappy passion into g^ and dangerous imprudence,
she was compelled (...) undergo all the meanness of concealment, and (...) the
terrors of detection. The similarity of their destinies hitherto endeared to
her mother this lovely unfortunate young woman, who seemed too likely to be
doubly a victim. Yet, circumstanced as she was herself, she could not protect
her openly, and even trembled every time she reflected that, with the return of
the family of her husband* the indulgence of ever seeing Rosalie must be
resigned; and that they must equally sti^ their fears and their affections.

Every day rendered the situation of Rosalie more critical. Though Mrs.
Lessington seemed, as if by a tacit agreement with Mrs. Vyvian, not to notice
the preference Rosalie so evidently gave to the latter, and to suffer her to
act as she pleased, others, who still supposed her a member of the Lessington
family, could not be but surprised at her associating so little with them, nor
help remarking, that whenever they did see her among them, there was something
peculiar in her manner and appearance. The men, who had admired her beauty, but
who had been repulsed by her coldness, now discovered, as they always do on
such occasions, that the poor girl was in love: and while the elder ladies
thought her proud, conceited, and full of airs, some of the younger entirely
agreed with them; while others, more candid or more sensible, pitied her on the
supposition that she had an "unhappy attachment;" or, as the damsels of the
lower rank would have expressed it, "that she was crossed in love."

Mrs. Vyvian was too deeply interested to have a moment's tranquillity; and when
the hour of Mrs. Bosworth's return approached, this anxiety became more and
more insupportable: and it was certain that health so delicate could not long
resist such painful solicitude.

After long deliberation and consulting with the Abbe Hayward, who had long
been aware of who Rosalie really was, Mrs. Vyvian determined to write to
Montalbert with the same precautions as those Rosalie used by his directions.
This she executed, not without finding it the most difficult and painful task
she had ever undertaken. To avow the dissimulation of her whole life to her
nephew, to explain to him circumstances of which she knew he must be entirely
ignorant, words were not easily found. At length, however, the letter was
written and sent off: and she returned once more to her long and pensive
conferences with the object of it, with whom also a task yet remained quite as
distressing to her.

This was to tell Rosalie to whom she owed her birth; to give a relation of
circumstances which she knew must appear very strange to her. Mrs. Vyvian saw
her often look as if she at once dreaded and expected this explanation; but
never yet had she acquired courage to begin the conversation, and Rosalie was
too timid to make any inquiries that led to it.

But Mrs. Bosworth and Miss Vyvian would now return in a short time: and then
the mother and daughter must no longer indulge themselves with being together
for whole days as they were now -- a heavy presentiment of future evil, to
which the former was too apt to yield, told her, that if the present time was
lost, future opportunities might be wanting. -- The next morning, therefore,
after having made her resolution* she put it into execution.

Rosalie, whom she had desired to come early, was seated at work by her
bedside, for she was too much indisposed to leave it; when Mrs. Vyvian,
opening a little casket which she had previously placed near her pillow, put
into the hand^ of Rosalie a miniature picture, and, in a trembling voice, said,
"It is the likeness of -- your father! -- It represented a man of two or three
and twenty: the countenance expressed understanding and vivacity of sentiment,
and the whole figure was remarkably handsome. Rosalie gazed on it in silence,
and with sensations that cannot be described. "Do you see no resemblance, my
Rosalie," said Mrs. Vyvian, "to a face you know? -- Ah! do you not trace in
these features the likeness you bear to.......? -- Believe me, my child,"
continued she, unable to restrain her tears, "this morning is the first time
for many years that I have allowed myself to look at that picture; and now I
resign it for ever. -- Take it, my dear girl, and may you not resemble him in
fortune as in features."

"Does my father yet live, Madam?" Rosalie would have said; but she could not
articulate the sentence. Her mother, however, understood her. "He does,"
replied she, "but not in England. I shall never see him more -- nor am I guilty
or wretched enough to wish it. -- Never have these eyes beheld him since that
fatal hour when I was compelled to give to another the hand which was his in
the sight of God. But, though my hand was not at my own disposal, never has it
acknowledged any sovereign but him to whom my first vows were given: yet I very
sincerely tried, when under the cruel necessity of giving myself to Mr. Vyvian,
to fulfill the duties that were imposed upon me. He knew that I was compelled to
marry him. He was indelicate and selfish enough to consider only the
convenience of my fortune, and a person, which was then an object to a man,
licentious and dissolute as he was. Yet I think he never has had any just
reason to complain of my conduct since I have borne the name of his wife. He
knew I neither did nor ever could love him -- for I told him so when I married
him. He was contented to possess my fortune and my person -- my heart he never
thought worth the experiment that some men would have made to have gained it."
A deep sigh and a long pause, which Rosalie did not interrupt, now followed. --

In a few moments Mrs. Vyvian seemed to have regained her resolution, and thus
proceeded --

"You should have an idea of what sort of a man, my father, Mr. Montalbert,
was, before you can imagine how I was situated. I do not believe you know more
than his name; for Mrs. Lessington was probably cautious of entering into any
part of my unfortunate history. -- Mr. Montalbert then, my father, was the
elder brother of a family, which, from its name, was evidently of Norman
extraction -- a boast that is generally deemed a sufficient ground for the
pride of ancestry in England. The Montalberts, however, could carry their
genealogy much farther, and were content to begin it only among the Emperors of
the East. As English Peers, they adhered to the unfortunate James the Second,
were banished with him, and lost their property, their title, and their rights
as British subjects. My father, being much connected with noble families more
fortunate, had interest enough to obtain restitution of a small part indeed of
the great fortunes of his family, but sufficient to give him once more a
footing in England, where he was happy enough to marry one of its richest
heiresses. My mother who was the only offspring of an alliance between two
noble houses, inherited all their possessions, and gave them and herself to my
father, in despite of the opposition of such of her family as pretended to any
right of giving their opinion; for her father and mother being dead, there were
only uncles or cousins whose dissent could not prevent her following her own
inclinations.

"This great property was divided between me and my brother, the father of
Montalbert, your husband, but not equally; for he had of course the greatest
share. The noble castle and the estates, belonging to it in the north, are the
principal part of what remains to him in England; for having early formed
connections upon the continent, he never loved or lived long in England. His
life was not long, for he died soon after the birth of your husband; so soon,
indeed, that he had neglected to make for him the provision he ought to have
made, and, by a prior will, Harry Montalbert was left almost entirely dependent
on his mother.

"In consequence of the long absence, and afterward of the early death of my
brother, I ^e to be considered by my father as an only child. Dissatisfied with
a world, which he had, from personal infirmities, no longer the power of
enjoying, he retired to Holmwood when I was about fifteen; and, from that time,
you may imagine, my life was very recluse; for then the country around it was
less inhabited, and the roads less passable than they are now.

"Harsh as my father was, I loved him very tenderly, and therefore did not
murmur at the confinement thus imposed upon me at a time of life when other
young women enter the world and enjoy its pleasures: nor did the fatigues of
constant attendance in a sick chamber, and continuing to read sometimes for
half the night, for a moment deter me from doing my duty, or for a moment
induce me to repine.

"I have since thought, Rosalie, that this period, with all its little
hardships and inconveniences, was the happiest of my life. -- My friend Mrs.
Lessington, though then married, and some years older than me, was still often
my companion, and shared a task which without her I could not have executed so
well. Whenever I was released from the chamber of my suffering parent, I saw
around me scenes of nature, which seemed to put on new beauties as if to reward
me for my perseverance in painful duties; and if I tasted not of pleasures,
which are accounted happiness by very young women, I was at least content.
Thus, without much variation, passed more than three years of my life.

"My father had a relation in Ireland, whose ancestors having suffered in the
same cause as that in which the Montalberts had lost their property, had not
been so fortunate in re-establishing their affairs; but their descendant was,
with a numerous family, obliged to live on a very small estate, and in great
obscurity in the north of Ireland.

"One of the sons, however, having been sent young to the East Indies, had done
so well, that he wrote to have two of his three brothers follow him, informing
his father, that though he could not make remittances for the purpose of
sitting them out, he was sure when they arrived there, of getting them into
situations nearly as advantageous as his own.

"In consequence of this, their father sent his third and fourth sons to
England, to solicit among their friends and their relations the means of
equipping them in such a way as might enable them to avail themselves of these
advantageous prospects. The eldest of the two soon found assistance in London,
and departed; but the younger having been seized with a violent fit of illness
in London, was under the necessity of seeing the last ship of the season sail
without him; and at the invitation of my father, who had taken most of the
expense of his equipment upon himself, he came down to Holmwood to recover his
health, while he waited for an opportunity of following his brother, which was
not likely to offer for some months.

"Ormsby was about one and twenty when he was thus received into the house of
my father, who soon learned to consider him as a son; becoming so attached to
him, that he was not easy in his absence.

"Even at this distance of time, I reflect with wonder on the carelessness with
which my father suffered two very young people to be continually together,
without appearing to think of the probability there was that they might form an
attachment to each other. It is true that I have myself discovered inattention
of the same sort in regard to you and Montalbert; but besides the prepossession
of your predilection in favor of Vyvian, with which my mind was distracted,
the character of Montalbert was so different from that of Ormsby, that it never
occurred to me that there was equal hazard in your being continually in his
company." --

Mrs. Vyvian now seemed to be so much fatigued, and to be so little able to
continue a narrative so affecting to her spirits, that Rosalie entreated her to
forbear concluding it till she was less likely to suffer by dwelling on scenes
which it gave her so much pain to recall. But the probability that their long
and private conferences might be less frequent when they were continually
liable to be broken in upon by Mrs. Bosworth and her sister, and the necessity
there was that Rosalie should know the circumstances of her birth, and what
were Mrs. Vyvian's wishes as to her future conduct, determined her, to exert
herself to the utmost of her power, to conclude all she had to relate -- the
singular circumstances of her former life.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the evening Mrs. Vyvian found herself able to proceed, and thus continued
her narrative: --

"My friend Mrs. Lessington, who had now a family of children, was no longer at
liberty to give me so much of her time as she had hitherto done; but, at this
period, the living of Mayfield, which was in my father's gift, becoming vacant,
I was fortunate enough to procure it for her husband, and had the comfort of
seeing her settled within four miles of Holmwood.

"Greatly, indeed, had I need of the prudence and steadiness of a friend.......
Imagine, my Rosalie, how I was at this time situated. Ormsby, though he lived
so much with me, was yet so sensible of the distance fortune had placed between
us, that, for many months after he became an inmate in our house, he never
breathed the most distant expression of his affection. Yet, young as I was, I
could not mistake the meaning of his looks, and those silent attentions he
incessantly paid me. He seemed -- ah! he was -- too artless to disguise
entirely his sentiments. But the ineffectual struggle he made to do so, was a
spectacle infinitely more dangerous for me than the warmest professions could
have been. He had even the generosity to avoid me for some time, and, as if by
tacit consent, we met only in my fathers room, where he now almost always
supplied my place, and sat whole days, and often whole nights, with a
tenderness and patience that, in my opinion, overpaid the debt of gratitude
which he owed him. But sometimes, when my fathers old servant was able to give
that attendance for which he was often disqualified by illness, Ormsby was
unexpectedly released; and it was at one of these periods that the explanation
was brought on, which afterward cost me so dear.

"My father had been extremely ill for many days. It was spring, a season that
always brought on the most painful paroxysms of the gout: his old servant,
hardly less a victim to this disease than himself, had been laid up, and Ormsby
had been my father's attendant for ten days, almost without taking off his
clothes, and certainly without having had any interval of rest.

"Barford, my father's servant, having a little recovered, came down to his
relief; for no other person was suffered to enter the room, but Ormsby, myself,
and this man.

"At this time Ormsby was so much fatigued, that he could hardly support
himself. He hastened to procure what refreshment a change of clothes afforded,
and then to relieve a violent headache, the effect of want of sleep, he
wandered into the garden for the air...... You remember, Rosalie, the temple at
the end of the avenue of stone pines -- thither I often went with my work, or
with a book, when I was alone; behind it is, you recollect, a copse, which, at
the season of the year now present, for it was the middle of May, echoed with
the music of innumerable birds. Every object breathed of peace and beauty; and
as my heart had long since learned to associate the idea of Ormsby with every
scene that gave me pleasure, I was meditating on future possibilities of
happiness, when the object of my dangerous contemplations suddenly appeared
coming toward the place where I sat.

"To the lively interest he always inspired was now added, that which arose
from the fatigue he had evidently undergone. He was pale, and his eyes were
heavy for want of rest. I saw him with a slow and languid step ascend the
little turf hill on which the temple is situated. I could not have escaped from
it without his seeing me, if I had wished to have done so. But, in truth, I had
no desire to fly from him; and though I trembled as he approached me, it was
with a sort of delightful apprehension; for I fancied he would now speak to me,
if not in direct terms -- yet in such as would leave me no longer in doubt as
to his real sentiments: yet while I wished this, I dreaded it: and when he
entered the place where I sat, I know not which of us appeared the most
confused. He had long studiously avoided me, and certainly did not now expect
to meet me. But as he knew I had seen him, and perhaps had not resolution
enough to deny himself the unexpected opportunity of speaking to me, he came
into that wing of the temple, and, after the common salutation of the morning,
sat down near me.

"I inquired after my father, though it was not an hour since I had been in the
room; but it gave me occasion to say, though in a faltering voice, how much I
was obliged to Ormsby for his cons^nt attendance. I had not concluded the
sentence, when* he said, 'Obligations, Miss Montalbert! -- surely all
obligations are mine; but were it otherwise, were not your father my best
friend -- that he is your father would be enough to induce me to make any
sacrifices. There is a happiness in being able to serve him as my benefactor;
but there is somet^ing more than happiness in thinking that* in attending on
the respectable parent of Miss Montalbert, I save her from one hour's fatigue,
or mitigate to her one hour of anxiety.'

"I will not relate the s^quel of our conversation. Before it ended* Ormsby,
while he a^sed himself at once of presumption and ingra^ professed for me the
most violent, though hopeless, passion. He saw to evidently, that if it
depended on me it would not be hopeless. Already my heart had said to me much
more than Ormsby, even in making this declaration, dared to intimate. It had
whispered that my father's partiality for him mi^ht very probably conquer the
objections that his total want of fortune might raise. I had fancied that it
was impossible my father could leave us so much together, unless he m^nt to
give a tacit consent to an affection which was so likely to arise between two
young persons. I had imagined, that, finding us both necessary to his comfort,
he intended to unite us. My fortune must be such, as I supposed, made any
consideration as to that of my lover entirely needless. -- Alas! how little is
the inexperienced mind of youth capable of judging of those motives that
influence men in advanced life. Though my father was retired from the world, he
had not lost in retirement the passions that influence the men of that world.
On the contrary, living where he was the lord of many miles, where none, either
in his house or around it, ever disputed his will, he had, like a despot,
entirely forgotten that others had any will at all. Of a marriage of love he
had no idea; nor did it ever occur to him, as a thing possible, that a
dependent relation, who was indebted to his bounty for a subsistence, could
dare to lift his eyes to a daughter of the house of Montalbert, for whom,
though he had never yet hinted at them, my father had very different views.

"But love, too apt to listen to the voice of hope, suffered us not to see the
misery we were laying up for ourselves; and even amidst the reproaches Ormsby
often made himself, for what he termed treachery and ingratitude, the
flattering illusions into which we were betrayed by youthful inexperience, not
only quieted these alarms of conscience, but made us listen with something
bordering on resentment to the remonstrances of my friend, Mrs. Lessington, who
took every occasion of representing the danger of my indulging a predilection
for Ormsby. I endeavored to persuade her, as I had persuaded myself, that I
should one day become his wife, with the permission of my father. Mrs.
Lessington, who undoubtedly knew the world and my father's temper much better
than I did, left nothing unsaid that was likely to convince me of this
dangerous error. She even threatened to inform my father of the truth, unless I
endeavored to conquer this fatal prepossession; and she assured me if she did,
the consequence would be the immediate disgrace and dismission of Ormsby. This
menace which I knew she would never execute, had an effect exactly opposite to
that which she intended. The idea of Ormsby driven from the house, suffering
poverty and mortification, and abandoned by the world only for his attachment
to me, endeared him to me infinitely more than he would have been had I seen
him surrounded with affluence and prosperity. Nothing is so dangerous as pity;
and my friend, in attempting to save me, hastened my ruin by exciting it.

"I cannot, Rosalie, trace the progress of this fatal passion. My confessor,
who alone might have checked its progress, was surely careless of his charge,
or was possibly become indifferent to the welfare of a family he was soon on
the point of quitting. He went to Rome exactly at the time when he might
perhaps have saved me, and it was some time before he was replaced by Mr.
Hayward.

"During that interval, as Mrs. Lessington was gone into the west on a visit to
her husband's relations, Ormsby was more than ever alone with me. ^very hour,
indeed, in which the attendance of the one or the other was not necessary in my
father's room, we passed together. From an habit of indulging myself in the
illusive hope that I might one day be his wife* I insensibly learned to
consider myself already so in the sight of Heaven...... Ormsby was young and
passionate: he was not an artful seducer; but I had no mother, I had no friend,
and those who heartily reflect on my situation will surely compassionate,
though they may not perhaps acquit me.

"How soon, alas! was this deviation from rectitude and honor severely and
bitterly punished. Though my father had been wilfully blind or strangely
negligent, the servants, and from them the neighbors, saw enough to make them
suspect more. We had little or no communication with the gentlemen's families
around us, divided from them as we were by the difference of religion, habits
and connections. But in ours, as in every other neighborhood, there were
officious and impertinent people, whose greatest pleasure was to inquire into
the affairs of others, and disturb as much was in their power the peace of
families. The country town adjoining to Holmwood produced at that time, as
indeed it has done since, but too many of this description. -- I, who hardly
knew that such persons existed, was, however, marked out for the victim of
their malignity; and, as if the terrors that now incessantly beset me were
insufficient, for I found myself likely to become a mother, one of th^se
officious fiends completed, or rather accelerated, the evil destiny that hung
over me.

"While I waited with agonising impatience the return of Mrs. Lessington, whose
counsel was so necessary in my present alarming situation, Ormsby, more
wretched than I was, attempted to sooth and console me; and I was insensible of
any other comfort than what I derived from weeping in his arms. Little dreaming
of the storm that was ready to burst upon us, I sought him as usual one morning
in the plantation, where we were accustomed as it was yet early autumn, to meet
in a morning before either the family were likely to interrupt us, and before
my father demanded either his attendance or mine. I found him not. Supposing it
earlier than I had believed, I traversed for some time the walks of the wood
without uneasiness -- but at length his absence surprised and then alarmed me.
I returned slowly toward the house, more and more amazed that Ormsby did not
appear -- I met the under gardener, and, without any precise design, I asked
him some trifling question -- the man, instead of answering, looked at me with
a countenance expressive of terror and surprise; then without answering,
hurried away; while I, dreading I knew not what, quickened my steps toward the
house, and was met in the lawn that immediately surrounded it by my own maid, a
young woman who had been lately sent to me from France by a friend, and who was
already much attached to me. Her countenance startled me infinitely more than
that of the man I had just passed -- I hastily inquired what was the matter? --
Helene attempted to utter a few words in French; but her voice failed her; and,
seizing my hands, she looked at me with such an expression of terror and an^h,
that the only idea it conveyed was the death of my father. Before my incoherent
and breathless inquiries, or her attempts to answer them succeeded, my father's
old butler came out, and, though he seemed equally terrified, he had just
command enough of himself to tell me that I must immediately attend his master.
Without having any distinct notion of the cause for which I was thus
unexpectedly summoned, I obeyed in such confusion of mind that I know not how I
reached the room.

"My father was not as usual at so early an hour in his bed, but sitting in a
chair. I saw that something had greatly disturbed him, and my guilty conscience
whispered to me that our fatal secret was discovered..... Trembling, so that I
could not move across the room without the assistance of Helene, I at length
approached the place. My father's eyes were sternly fixed on my face. His lips
quivered, and his voice faltered, while he reached his hand toward me, and
gave me a letter he held in it.

'Read that' -- said he sternly -- 'read it -- and hear me for the first and
the last time I shall ever speak again on so hateful a subject. If I thought
you capable of any part of the folly, the infamy, which this letter attaches to
your conduct, I would not hold even this parley with you. But I will not think
it. Though I severely arraign myself for my i^tention, yet I know that (...)
daughter of mine would not dare to encourage any man without my approbation;
still less, is it possible that Rosalie Montalbert should think of a boy, who,
the distantly my relation, and therefore a gentleman* is a beggar... He is gone
-- you will see him no more.'

"I heard* indeed no more; for my senses forsook me and I escaped from the rage
and reproaches of my father; nor was I awakened from this trance till I found
myself on my bed, with Helene weeping by me. -- 'What has happened to me,
Helene?' said I; for at that moment my recollection was confused, and, though I
had the impression of something very dreadful on my mind, I rememebred no more
than that some dreadful evil had befallen Ormsby. Helene could only answer by
tears and s^bs -- I raised myself in my bed -- 'Tell me,' said I 'my dear
friend, what did my father mean? -- what is become of Ormsby?'

'Ah! dear young lady,' replied Helene, 'what would become of you, what would
become of us all, if our master new the truth, which now he will not allow
himself even to suspect. -- Oh! he is so passionate, he is so terrible, when he
is angry, that I believe, upon my honor, he would destroy us all.'

'I wish he would destroy me, Helene,' said (...) sighing deeply; 'but, unless
you now intend to suffer me to die before you, tell me, I conjure you to tell
me, what my father meant by saying that I should never see Ormsby more?'

'Indeed,' replied Helene, 'my dear mistress, I know no more of it than you do.
In this great house you know that what is done at one end of it may very easily
be unknown at the other.... I am as ignorant as you are how -- but Mr. Ormsby
is gone, or -- '

"She stopped and hesitated. -- 'They have killed him,' exclaimed I -- 'I know
they have destroyed him. Do not deceive me -- I will not be deceived. -- But
let not my father, my inhuman father imagine that I will survive -- no, I will
instantly go, I will avow the truth, and follow my husband to the grave.' --
The frenzy that possessed me gave me strength. I sprang from the bed, and, in a
state of desparation, was rushing toward my father's room, when Helene,
terrified at my attempt, threw herself before me, and ^hutting the door, locked
it, and secured the key. This presence of mind alone saved me from the
^^^truction on which I was throwing myself; for I believe, that had I at that
moment appeared before my father, acknowledged my situation and my attachment
to Ormsby, that he would, without hesitation, have stabbed me to the heart.

"Such was the distracted state of my mind, that it was only when my strength
was entirely exhausted that Helene could prevail upon me to listen to her
arguments. At length I sunk into silent despair, because I had (...) longer the
power of speaking; and then Helene ventured to leave me, carefully locking the
door of my chamber after her, as well as that of the anti-room, and hastened
away to procure not only some medicine for me, which she hoped would quiet my
agitated spirits, but the benefit of the counsel she knew she should receive
from the Abbe Hayward, who, though he had not been more than a week in the
house, had gained the confidence and good opinion of every one in the family.

"When she was gone, I endeavored to recall to my mind the words, the looks,
and gestures of my father..... I shuddered as they passed in my memory, and I
dared not think steadily upon the scene I had passed. Even now Rosalie -- even
at the distance of almost nineteen years. I find that I cannot dwell upon it
without horror."

It was true the recollection affected Mrs. Vyvian so much, that a col^
trembling seized her. Her voice sailed, and Rosalie, terrified at the situation
in which she saw her mother, entreated her to forbear any farther exertion till
she was more able to undertake it. It was more than an hour before she was
sufficiently recovered for Rosalie to leave her; at length, finding Mrs. Vyvian
more composed, she retired to the house she used to call her home, having
settled to be again at her mother's bedside at a very early hour the following
morning.

CHAP. XV.
ONCE more seated by the bedside of her mother, who, on this morning, was too
much indisposed to be able to leave it, Rosalie listened in silence to the
continuation of a narrative in which she was so deeply interested.

"While Helene was gone," said Mrs. Vyvian, "I collected strength enough to
rise and go to the window of my bedchamber. It was now night, but there was
light enough to enable me to discern every object on the lawn round the house.
I gazed, however, without knowing why, or on what: -- the thought of Ormsby
gone -- lost to me forever -- perhaps destroyed -- filled me with such
undescribable horror, that my power of reflection seemed to be annihilated.
Impressed with that one idea, my heart seemed petrified; the certainty of
instant death would have been received as a matter of indifference. All that I
wished was, to be assured of the fate of Ormsby -- I thought that if I knew
what was become of him, I could brave the severest anger of my father, and die
content, since I believed my death inevitable... How dismal every object that I
surveyed from my window appeared! -- not a human being appeared round the
house: the woods that you may recollect terminate the lawn on one side were
almost half stripped of their leaves; but they looked black, dreary, and fit
for deeds of horror. -- Yet do not, my dear Rosalie, believe, that however
cruel I at that moment thought my father, I could suppose him capable of so
dreadful a crime as that of directing the death of Ormsby; but I figured to
myself, that, rendered desperate by the force that had been used to tear him
away, he had resisted, and sunk under the numbers of unfeeling men who were
ready at every hazard to obey my father's orders -- no otherwise could I
account, in the present confused state of my mind, for his having disappeared
without sending me one line -- one la^ adieu! -- or having made any attempt to
give me notice of the scene that awaited me, or to arm me with the courage it
required to pass through it.

"I cannot discriminate the various emotions that agitated my mind during the
absence of Helene, who, on her return in about an hour, found me still sitting
at the window, as if I expected to see Ormsby pass, as he sometimes used to do
under it of an evening, when he used to tell me he had peculiar delight in
watching the light in my room, and seeing me pass across it, long before he
dared to tell me he loved me.

"But now, alas! he was to appear there no more -- and when Helene returned and
came into my apartment, carefully locking the door after her, the expression of
fear and dismay which her countenance ^ore renewed all my terrors...... I flew
toward her, and, though unable to speak, she saw that I anticipated the worst
news she could relate to me.

"She tried to command herself, that she might prevail upon me to be tranquil
enough to attend to my own safety. It was, however, some time before I was in a
condition to listen to her.

"Helene at length related to me that the house was now apparently quiet, but
that an a^^ of amazement and conste^nation was perceivable on the faces of all
its inhabitants; all of whom seemed afraid to speak or even to look at each
other. -- The Abbe Hayward, she said, had been ^lone with my father the whole
day, and none of the servants had been permitted to wait but the old butler;
that, on her applying to him for intelligence, he said he had orders to tell
her, when she came down from her young lady, that Mr. Montalbert ordered her
attendance.

'Ah, Madam,' said Helene in French, 'how I trembled when I heard this.........
I went, however, and my master ordering me to approach the place where he sat,
said -- Helene, it is my express orders, as well to you as to every other
servant in my house, that no gossipping, no conversation, not even a word,
shall be uttered as to any circumstance that has happened, or that you may
suppose has happened in this family. The slightest failure in this respect will
be attended with ill consequences -- the least of ^h will be the loss of your
place......... I ask you no questions as to your past discretion -- As to your
lady, tell her from me that I expect she will tomorrow appear before me as my
daughter ought to appear; on which condition only, the folly, or the
affectation of this day, for I know not which to call it, shall be forgotten.
You will tell her, as I have already caused it to be intimated to my people,
that from this hour the name of Ormsby is never to be mentioned within these
walls -- go -- and remember what I say to you -- Your father, Madam,' continued
Helene, 'looked more stern than ever, as he said this; and indeed I trembled
so, that I thought I must have fallen down as you did. That dear good man, the
Abbe Hayward, looked at me as if he wished, but dared not, say any thing to
comfort me. I got out of the room as well as I could, and went, looking I
believe more white than a ghost, into the servant's hall, where I saw no person
but the coachman and the gardener; neither of them spoke to me -- they seem
even afraid of speaking to each other. I passed into the housekeeper's room,
under pretense of asking for something for you: Mrs. Nelson was there, with the
two house-maids and the laundry-maid; but instead of asking me any questions
about you, as Mrs. Nelson almost always does if you are at any time the least
ill, she never inquired after you, though she knew you had been confined to
your room ill the whole day; as to the maids they seemed like statues, and
while I staid on one pretense or other, in hopes of gaining some intelligence,
Mrs. Nelson would have sent one of them to the store-room, but she turned as
pale as death, and said it was impossible to go unless one of the other maids
went with her. Mrs. Nelson gave her a strange look* but said nothing, and they
went away together.'

"All this, so strangely obscure and unacountable, redoubled my inquietude. --
Something very unusual then had happened in the house, which had impressed
terror on the minds of its inhabitants -- What could this be but some violence
that had been offered to Ormsby, which was known to all the servants, but which
none of them dared to speak of? -- There were few events, the certainty of
which could be so dreadful as the state of horrible suspense I was now in. I
think that my intellects, unable to sustain, sunk under it, and that the
artificial calm that followed was the effect of the agonies in which I passed
this melancholy day, and the night that followed it.

"Still placed in the window, with my eyes fixed on the lawn and woods that
surrounded it, I heard the incoherent narrative of Helene, and continued to
torment myself with every terrific idea that my sickening brain could
raise..... Hideous shadows seemed to flit before me -- I almost imagined that,
in the murmurs of the wind, I heard the dying groans of Ormsby -- that I heard
him call upon me, and bid me adieu. -- From the indulgence of waking dreams so
horrible, I was startled by a rapping at the door of the anti-room that led
from the staircase to my bedchamber. Helene, fearing she knew not what,
hesitated, and dared not open it; she asked me what she should do, but I was
utterly incapable of answering, and we were at length relieved from our terrors
by hearing the voice of Mr. Hayward, who desired to be admitted.

"He spoke to me with so much soothing kindness, and reasoned so properly with
me, that tears, which had been for many hours denied me, flowed from my eyes: I
dared not, however, ask -- for I yet knew but very little of Mr. Hayward -- I
dared not ask what was become of the unfortunate Ormsby; but, as if this worthy
man had read the thoughts, I had not courage to express -- he gradually managed
his conversation so as to bring it to the point he wanted to speak upon. -- 'I
was extremely concerned,' said he, 'that the precipitancy of Mr. Montalbert's
manner alarmed you as it did..... Indeed I have told him, that I greatly blame
his needless harshness produced only by an anonymous letter, and certainly
unsounded. I can easily imagine how the abrupt manner in which he spoke to you
might have the effect it had, and I have at length persuaded him to believe,
that without any improper attachment to Mr. Ormsby, you might be affected in
the manner you were. He is become more reasonable since his passion has
subsided, which was raised to a degree of frenzy by that infamous letter, and
he seems concerned for the terror he inflicted upon you, and willing to forget
it (...) one positive condition.'

"Having no courage to ask what (...) ^dition was, I remained silent. Mr.
Hayward thus proceeded --

'As Mr. Montalbert cannot subdue his displeasure, when he thinks it possible
that Mr. Ormsby had or could be supposed to have been guilty of the presumption
of pretending to you, he has thought it proper to remove him from hence
immediately, and, to put an end at once to the very recollection of such a
report, he insists upon it that the name of Ormsby is not mentioned in the
house.'

"I sighed, but dared not ask what was the fate of this unfortunate
Ormsby........... I felt, however, considerable relief from the manner in which
Mr. Hayward spoke of him; for I was persuaded, that had my father taken any
very cruel measures in regard to him, such a man as Mr. Hayward would neither
have tolerated such conduct, or, if he could not have checked it, would he have
spoken of it so calmly.

"Still, however, the sad uncertainty of what was become of him seemed so
heavily to press on my heart, that it was ready to burst.... I could not speak;
but Mr. Hayward who appeared to be well acquainted with the painful sensations
which were probably pictured on my countenance, went on, in the most soothing
manner, to tell me what was, he thought, the best part I could take for my
peace of mind, and for the ^ral tranquillity of the family.

(...) ^t I wish you to consider of, my dear (...) ^ontalbert,' said he, 'is,
whether it would not contribute much to your future ease and comfort, could you
determine, in compliance with your father's commands, not only to mention no
more of this unfortunate young man, but to resolve on appearing before your
father tomorrow, at the hour he has appointed, to hear mass, with a calm and
even cheerful countenance. Let him not suppose that the observance of his
commands is a greater sacrifice than it ought to be -- appear to think, that
whatever is his pleasure ought not to be disputed, and, I think, I can venture
to say, that whatever uneasiness this wicked letter has raised in the breast of
your father will be at an end, as your behavior will prove to him that the
charges in it were entirely unfounded: -- you will be restored to his
confidence and to your own peace.'

"I was still incapable of answering; but, as I remained quiet, and shed not a
tear, Mr. Hayward thought he might venture to proceed.

'I am convinced,' continued he, 'that you feel the force of all I have urged;
but, I believe, it is better to state to you what are my apprehensions of the
consequences, if you fail of acquiring this command over yourself........ It
will, I fear, make your father suspect, that this malicious informer had some
ground for the assertions he or she has dared to make. It is much to be
apprehended, that Mr. Ormsby who is wholly. I believe^ in his power, will
suffer if such an imagination predominates in your father's mind; and I should
doubt whether the extreme indignation which he suffers himself to feel might
not so far annihilate his tenderness for you, as to urge him even to so harsh a
measure as that of sending you to a convent in Italy, and compelling you to
take the veil.'

"Mr. Hayward stopped, expecting that I might by this time have so far
recovered my spirits, as to be able to promise that I would attempt at least to
regulate my behavior by his advice -- but I remained silent...... Rendered
desperate by what I had heard, I became incapable of attending to the
consequences of the step I was about to take: the moment, however, I could find
voice and words, I related, in a slow and solemn tone, the dreadful truth; but
before I had entirely finished my melancholy narrative, the room turned round
with me, my eyes became dim, and my senses forsook me.

"When I recovered, Helene was chasing my temples, and taking other means to
bring me to myself; the Abbe Hayward was traversing the room in the agitated
manner of a person who has received some alarming intelligence, and knows not
how to act. When he saw that I was a little restored, he approached me, and, in
a voice hardly articulate, said, 'Most unhappy young woman, this is no time to
flatter -- destruction hangs over you, and it is only in your own power to
escape it; for without your own efforts, nobody can save you. I will not
deceive you, Miss Montalbert -- I will tell you what I really believe, that if
your father was assured of what you have now entrusted me with, the life of Mr.
Ormsby would be insufficient to satisfy his vengeance -- though he would be the
first victim... Heaven direct me for the best!' cried the good man 'Heaven
direct me! -- What can I do?'

"He again traversed the room in silent anguish; but what were his feelings
compared to mine!

"At length he recovered himself enough to speak again with composure.

'Something must be done,' said he; 'but till I have more time to consider
what, let me once more ask you, if you cannot, my dear Miss Montalbert, command
resolution ^ough to appear before your father tomorrow with some degree of
serenity? -- Reflect a moment how much depends on this exertion on your part:
(...) otherwise than by this necessary dissimulation can you hope to avert the
impending danger -- danger that may so fatally affect more lives than one.'

"I now acquired steadiness of voice enough to say, 'Let Ormsby live -- let him
but escape the vengeance which ought not to fall on him, and let me, who alone
am to blame, perish under the indignation of my incensed father....... One
victim will perhaps satisfy him -- I desire to die -- and when I am dead, the
resentment raised by injured honor may surely be appeased.'

"That I spoke at all, and spoke calmly, though it was with the sudden sadness
of despair, seemed to Mr. Hayward to be a favorable symptom. He pursued his
argument, therefore, and endeavored to convince me whatever hope remained of
concealing the fatal secret, must rest entirely upon my own resolution and
discretion.

"The life of Ormsby, he said, was in my hands: -- he recalled to my mind the
temper of my father -- the fierceness of his anger -- the steadiness of his
resentment........ I listened and shuddered.

'If,' said he, 'the mere information that the suspicion of such an affection
between you and Mr. Ormsby was entertained in a neighborhood, where he cares
nothing about the people, has so enraged Mr. Montalbert as to induce him to act
as he has done in regard to Mr. Ormsby -- what would there no^e to dread from
the fury of his resentment, were ^e to know what you have tonight related to me
--

"I took advantage of a pause Mr. Hayward made to repeat some of the words he
had used. -- 'Acted as he has done,' cried I 'in regard to Ormsby? tell me then
-- I conjure you tell me -- how has my father acted? -- By what stratagem or
force, could he tear away that unhappy young man, even before he knew that
there was the least ground for the charge that was made against him? -- Oh, Mr.
Hayward! -- if you are capable of mercy -- if you really pity the agonies that
rend my heart, tell me, I conjure you tell me, what is become of Ormsby? -- I
think, that if I once knew, I should become calm -- I think I could summon
resolution enough to consult my own safety; but, indeed, the misery of this
uncertainty is such..... All my thoughts are so full of horror, that the death
with which I am threatened would be a welcome release from such intolerable
torture.'

'I solemnly assure you,' replied Mr. Hayward, 'that I do not know what is
become of our unfortunate friend, nor, perhaps, shall I ever know...... I dare
not make any inquiry; and all I have been able to learn is, that, on receiving
the infamous scrall last night, your father ordered every body out of his room,
and remained alone, or only with Ormsby, for some time. He then directed two of
the grooms to be sent to him, and that the steward might also attend...... Mr.
Ormsby appeared no more. These two men, the grooms, have never been seen since;
but there is no track of a carriage around the house, nor has any body been
seen to leave it. The steward observes the most profound silence, and all that
is known in the house is, that something has happened which has obliged Mr.
Ormsby suddenly to leave it; that he has deeply offended Mr. Montalbert; and
that it is required of all who would not enrage their master, and be dismissed
from the family, never to mention the name of Ormsby even to each other.

'My father did see him?' inquired I -- 'had they any conversation which urged
on this precipitate violence?'

'I believe they had, but I know nothing certainly -- any attempt on my part to
draw from Mr. Montalbert more than he chooses to entrust me with, would not only
be abortive, but would, in all probability, deprive me of every future
opportunity of softening the asperity of his resentment. Let me conjure you, my
dearest Madam, if you would not hereafter reproach yourself with the fatal
effects of this resentment, to exert your utmost resolution -- endeavor to
command yourself so as to appear tomorrow before your father..... The second
attempt Will be more easy, and I trust, in a day or two, your spirits will be
so much calmed, that you will be able to consider of taking the measures ^o
necessary to be thought of for the preservation of your reputation, perhaps of
your life.'

'You believe then,' said I, 'that the life of poor Ormsby is safe?'

'Believe it!' -- exclaimed Mr. Hayward -- 'surely I believe it.... To whatever
extremities the unhappy prejudices or violent passions of Mr. Montalbert may
drive him, and none can have greater apprehensions on that subject than I have,
hitherto I hope and believe that Mr. Montalbert has taken no unjustifiable
measures in regard to this luckless young man.' -- Then deeply sighing, Mr.
Hayward added -- 'In my opinion his future fate depends entirely upon you -- it
is in your power to save or to destroy him.'

'Gracious Heaven!' -- exclaimed I -- 'what right has my father over this ill
starred young man? -- My life may be in his power -- he gave it me, and most
willingly would I resign it; but Ormsby surely ought not to suffer.'

'Mr. Montalbert,' interrupted Mr. Hayward, 'will consider but little what he
ought to do, or what he has a right to do, when vengeance is in question; but
surely I need urge this subject no further -- you are perfectly acquainted with
his temper -- you know that he is master of the country around for some miles.
His servants, his dependents, his tenants, are in such habits of obeying him,
that he is in some measure capable of exercising a sort of despotism, which,
though frequent enough in other countries, is seldom seen in this....... I will
now leave you, my dear Miss Montalbert -- again beseeching you to consider what
I have said, and to command yourself as much as possible tomorrow.'

"Mr. Hayward then left me, and sent to my faithful Helene to attend me, who
had been absent during our conversation; but my senses were yet stunned by the
violence of the shock I had received -- I could not shed a tear and sat like a
statue repeating almost unconsciously to myself -- 'Ormsby is gone! -- he is
lost for ever -- he is condemned to ignominy and disgrace, and it is I who have
undone him, who may perhaps occasion his death!

"I know not now by what arguments Helene at length prevailed upon me to take
some refreshment, and to undress myself....... I believed that by the
contrivance of Mr. Hayward, who, as I afterward found, kept a small dispensary
of medicines in his own room, Helene gave me some remedy that assisted in
quieting my spirits -- for after passing some time in a state of mind which I
cannot even at this distance of time reflect upon without horror, I sunk into
insensibility, from which I was suddenly startled by a fancied noise, and awoke
only to recollect all the bitterness of my destiny."

The narrative of Mrs. Vyvian, which became every moment more interesting to
Rosalie, was now interrupted by a letter which announced the arrival of Mr.
Vyvian, Mrs. Bosworth, and her sister, in London. Her spirits were already
agitated by recollecting scenes in which he had formerly suffered so much, and
this intelligence contributed to overwhelm them. The visit from her family was
not to be made till the second or third day after the present; there was yet,
therefore, time enough for her to relate the sequel of her story; which at the
request of Rosalie, who sacrificed her own impatience to consideration for her
mother's health, was postponed to the following morning.

CHAP. XVI.
MRS. Vyvian on the following day thus proceeded --

"When I look back on the situation I was now in, I am astonished that ever I
supported it -- description at this distance of time could but do little
justice to the state of my mind, even if I were capable of discriminating now
the variety of miseries I then suffered under. It seems, on retrospection, the
most extraordinary circumstance in the world, that in such a state of mind as I
was in, I should have acquired resolution enough to appear before my father, as
Mr. Hayward recommended, on the following day; but this I did do: and though I
cannot but suppose that my figure and countenance bore sufficient testimony of
the state of my heart, he seemed determined not to notice the deadly paleness
of my countenance, or the feeble and uncertain step with which I approached
him: yet, when he supposed I did not remark him, he cast toward me looks of
indignation and resentment, the meaning of which I could not mistake. I
shuddered when I observed them, but in my turn affected to be as tranquil as
before this storm that had wrecked for ever my happiness and my peace.

"It was highly probable that the violent agitation I had undergone, as well as
the dreadful uneasiness that preyed on my mind, for the fate of my unfortunate
lover, would finish my inquietudes for the future, and bury in oblivion the
fatal secret of this hapless affection; but this did not happen, and now every
hour as it passed added such insupportable dread of what was to happen in
future to the miseries of the present moment that to exist long in such a state
seemed impossible ^et were my sufferings but begun.

"Nothing could be more dreary and desolate than every object appeared round
the house. It was the dark and melancholy month of November, and nature seemed
to be in unison with my feelings. I looked now on the same scenes as I had so
lately beheld luxuriant in foliage, and illuminated with the summer sun -- the
same scenes in which Ormsby had so long been a principal object.... Now -- as
the leaves fell slowly from the sallow trees, they seemed to strew his grave --
the wind, as murmured hollow through the perennial foliage of the pines and
firs, sounded to my ears as if it was loaded with his dying groans -- I heard
him sigh among the thick shrubs that bordered the wood walks; he seemed to
reproach my calmness -- yet it was not the tranquillity of indifference, it was
the torpor of despair.

"I went out alone, that I might weep at liberty; yet, when I found myself in
the silent solitude of the woods, I was unable to shed a tear, but sat down on
one of the benches, and gazed on vacancy with fixed eyes, and without having
any distinct idea of the objects I beheld. In these dismal rambles rain and
tempest, and once or twice night, overtook me. I was careless or insensible of
outward circumstances; and certainly if my father had not determined to shut
his eyes to the truth, as if the only alternative was between extreme severity
and total ignorance, he must have discovered from my conduct that all his
suspicions did not go beyond the reality.

"Some very fatal catastrophe would have followed the state of mind I was in,
had not the pi^ and friendly councils of the Abbe Hayward, and the assiduous
care of Helene, saved me from myself: the one exhorted me to patience, and a
reliance on the mercy of Heaven; the other soothed and flattered my sickening
soul with the hope of better days, and enabled me to endure the present by
encouraging me to look forward to the return of Mrs. Lessington, who alone
seemed to be likely to advise and succor me in a situation which every hour
and every day rendered more perilous.

"Mr. Hayward frequently followed me into the depth of the woods, argued,
remonstrated, and then soothed and endeavored to console me. I heard his
arguments, and even his reprooss, with submission and calmness; but when he
told me that I ought to be cheerful, to be resigned, to endeavor to conquer my
affection for Ormsby, and to attempt by every means in my power, to conceal
that it had ever existed to so fatal an excess -- I lost my patience, and my
respect for this good man did not prevent my flying from him with something
like resentment and disgust.

"So passed a month -- a wretched month, during which time the name of Ormsby
had never reached my ears, save only when Mr. Hayward, in the conversation
which he thought it necessary to hold with me, reluctantly named him, or when I
could so far command the agonies with which my heart was torn as to name him to
Helene, and listen to the conjectures with which she attempted to relieve me as
to what was become of him.

"Of this, however, she knew no more than I did; yet, from the looks and
manners of the servants with whom she conversed at the times when they were
necessarily altogether, a thousand vague ideas floated in her mind, to which
she sometimes gave utterance with more zeal than prudence. From her I learned,
that the two men who had disappeared when Ormsby was so suddenly sent away had
never since returned, and that the places they filled were now occupied by
others. I heard too, that though the name of Ormsby was never mentioned
whenever the steward, my father's old servant, or the housekeeper were present;
yet that the inferior servants were continually whispering strange things, and
that the people in the neighborhood talked of nothing else; some of them going
so far as to say, that inquiry ought to be made by people authorized, for that
Mr. Ormsby had certainly been spirited away; while others gave dark hints,
that, considering the revengeful temper of Mr. Montalbert, it would be well if
something worse than being spirited away had not befallen the poor young man.

"All this I heard with alternate anguish and depression, of which it would be
difficult to convey any idea to another. The fatal predilection that I had for
Ormsby was then known, for no other reason could be given for such conduct
toward him as was imputed to my father. I now saw none of the neighbors, for
of the very few who had been accustomed to visit at the house, not one at this
time approached it, and as ^ believed curiosity would have prompted them to
come if they had no other motive, I thought it certain that my father had taken
measures to prevent their visits. This I was not displeased at, for their looks
would have been more uneasy to me than were those of the servants; whenever I
saw any of them I was covered with confusion, and fancied they would remark and
account for the sad change in my face and figure, of which I could not fail to
be myself conscious.

"But if I fled thus from the observation of servants, what was my fear when
compelled to appear before the severe and scrutinizing eyes of my father? -- I
had always an awe approaching to dread of him, even in those comparatively
happy days when no reproaches of conscience assailed me..... Now I endeavored
to attend on him with the same assiduity as I used to do before Ormsby became a
sharer in the task, or rather undertook it entirely; but whether it was that my
timidity made me awkward, and that, therefore, I was incapable of acquitting
myself as I formerly did, or whether my father, more really angry than he chose
to avow, took these occasions to vent in peevishness some part of the
resentment and indignation he felt. Certain it is, that his harshness and
asperity were almost insupportable, and the unkind expressions he sometimes
used, the looks of rage and disdain he cast upon me, were not unfrequently such
as affected my spirits so much as to throw me into fainting fits, (...) which I
reproached my poor Helene for re^ng me.... Death, which alone seemed likely to
end my miseries, I continually invoked, and I know not what would have been the
consequence of such a series of present suffering, added to the dread of the
future, had they continued much longer.

"Yet before the return of Mrs. Lessington, to which only I looked forward with
the least hope of mitigating my woes, I had some trials of fortitude to
encounter more difficult to sustain than any I had yet experienced.

"At the end of a long row of elms, of which now a few single trees only
remain, you recollect a high mount now planted with firs, poplars, and larches,
into which, as it is railed round, nobody now enters; you perhaps remember too,
the very large yew tree that shadows a great space of ground near it, and which
is also railed round. That mound covers the ruins of a small parish church, and
that yew tree was in the churchyard.

"An avenue of ancient trees was terminated by this church, at the distance of
something more than a quarter of a mile from the house. It was merely the
chancel of a larger edifice which had belonged to a monastery, some of the
ruins of which remained scattered over the ground, and when I and my brother
were children, we had been told by the servants many of those legends that
almost always belong to such places. It was said too among them, that beneath
these vestiges of buildings, which were not con^ble above the ground, there
were arched (...) and subterraneous passages, which formerly served as burial
places for the religious persons of this monastery. Their coffins, placed in
niches along the walls, had been formerly seen by several persons, who had
given a very terrific account of the skeletons in these dismal recesses;
accounts which were now traditional in the neighboring villages, and were of
course greatly exaggerated. -- The mournful relics that had been seen under the
earth were imagined to visit its surface, and the place was universally
believed to be haunted. The style of the building that remained, where light
was admitted through long windows obscured by pieces of colored glass, and now
darkened by the ivy that mantled almost the whole edifice; the walls of great
thickness, in some places green with the damps that continually streamed from
the roof, in others marked with the remains of Latin sentences, surrounding the
half-effaced representations of the crucifixion, all contributed to give an air
of wildness and horror to this almost-deserted building; where, though at the
Reformation, as it is called, under Henry the Eighth, it became a parish
church, yet service was performed in it only once a year, as a mere matter of
form, for the parish contained only the house of Holmwood, and three cottages
belonging to my father, and (...) pulled down. So that when it was his pleasure
to destroy this small church entirely, and unite the parish it belonged to with
another, there were none to oppose the act of parliament he solicited and
obtained for that purpose. At the time, however of which I am speaking, this
desolate spot inspired all that melancholy sort of horror which naturally gives
rise to the reports of supernatural appearances; there was not a servant who
would on any account have gone thither of a night, and even the gardeners and
workmen, who were at any time occupied near it, related strange stories of
uncommon noises, as of mourning and complaint, and more than once have ran in
terror to their fellow laborers, declaring that some obscure figures had
issued from the vaults beneath, and then melted into air.

"Such was the stern spirit of my father, and he so little knew how to make
allowances for any weakness which he had never felt, that had any domestic
betrayed fears of this sort before him, they would have been dismissed with
disgrace, nor did my brother and I, while children, though we knew all the
legends of the country, ever dare speak to him of the stories we had been
taught. Thus compelled to stifle our infantine fears, they were gradually
subdued as our reason became stronger; and we were accustomed not only to find
our way in the dark all over the extensive old buildings of Holmwood, but to
traverse without fear the avenue that led to, and even the area that
surrounded, the ruined church, though we credited the probable account that in
the ^aul^'^ beneath rested the remains of the former inhabitants of the decayed
monastery.

"At the time I am now speaking of, I mean about six weeks after the departure
of Ormsby, such was the gloomy temper of my soul, (...) I was pleased only with
horrors, and (...) the avenue of elms, and toward the (...) that I now
frequently directed my solitary walk, I observed, however, that when, in
compliance with Helene's earnest entreaty, I told her which way I was going,
she ^^uddered and turned pale* and if I seemed disposed to go thither, when she
was with me, she would find every possible excuse, such as that it was dewy
from the high grass, or dirty* of the wind was in our faces, or any other
objection she could raise against our taking that path; but none seemed to suit
me so well.... I found a melancholy sort of satisfaction in indulging the sad
thoughts that incessantly pressed on my mind, in a place where I was sure none
would interrupt my sorrows: even the labourer fatigued with the toils of the
day, or the benighted traveller from one village to another, would not, to save
a longer journey, cross my father's grounds near this place. An adventurous
sportsman, perhaps, might violate the gloomy shade with his gun; but, at the
season of which I now speak, the end of December, even the hostile sounds of
field sports were seldom heard -- a ^e^ry and mournful silence reigned around
Holmwood, for it was long since the voice of hospitality or gaiety had been
heard. The rooks returning in the evening to the high elm trees that led to the
churchyard, and the owls that inhabited the ivies that half mantled it seemed
to be the only living creatures that could endure the melancholy solitude.

"My father, who had at this time an interval of (...) ^gh the asperities of
his temper were (...) ^itigated, sometimes released me from my attendance after
dinner early enough to allow me to take my solitary walk before it was too dark.

"The intelligence I had received on this particular evening from Mr. Hayward,
that he had heard Mrs. Lessington would be at home in two or three days, had
given some relief to my spirits, and, rather less ^ressed than usual, I
strolled almost mechanically up the avenues. It was a calm and still evening --
so still, indeed, that every bird was heard whose slender feet perched on the
leafless boughs, or flitted among them, and the bells of the sheep folding in
the distant fields, and the remoter sound of a mill and mill stream, were
brought in low murmurs to the ear.

"The well-known objects around me were becoming indistinct, but I continued to
walk slowly on -- I even sat down for a few moments on the remains of a rustic
tomb, and listened to the dull sighing of the wind as it sung round the
buttresses, and waved the black boughs of the old yew tree. As I sat musing, I
recollected the stories I had often heard of specter being seen, and strange
noises being heard round these receptacles of the dead. -- So little pleasure
had I in looking forward to any thing that life could now afford me, so long
had my thoughts been accustomed to consider death as the only end of all my
miseries, that I felt no horror in the idea of seeing, or, if it were possible,
of conversing with departed spirits. A sort of chilly and shuddering sensation,
however, warned me to return before it was (...) dark to the house. I arose
from the (...) stone on which I had been sitting, and, advancing a few paces to
return into the elm avenue, I fancied I saw a form glide before me among the
trunks of the trees; but beneath the trees it was so dark, that I could not
distinguish what it was. I continued, however, to gaze steadily on the place
where I fancied this shape had appeared: the illusion was over -- I saw
nothing. Without any emotion of fear I proceeded, therefore, exactly to that
spot, for it was my direct path to the house; I entered it, and, looking down
the avenue, again fancied I saw an object moving at a distance about fifty
yards (...) but almost immediately my (...) by something white that lay just
before me in the path. It seemed to be a book, a letter, or a folded
handkerchief: I stooped and took it up -- it was a sheet of paper, folded like
a large letter, and tied with a bit of black ribband. The circumstance rather
surprised than alarmed me: I wondered what it could be, because I knew that the
path was never frequented, or at least never by persons who were likely to drop
a paper. I put it into my pocket, and went hastily toward the house; when I
got thither, I found my father had been enquiring for me, and I soon discovered
that his temper was much disturbed... For more than two hours I was compelled
to stay with him, and to listen to reproaches and sarcasms uttered with the
utmost ill-humour. Alas! I should have borne these more calmly, had I not felt
that I deserved his indignation; but now they pierced my (...) soul* -- At
length, however, I was dismissed to my own room, where the vision, or fancied
vision, of the evening immediately recurring to me, I hastily drew the paper
from my pocket. Ah, Rosalie! imagine the sensations with which I read these
lines --

'Vivo oh Dio! -- ma piu non ti vedro -- Prima di scriverti in questo modo,
pensa quante pene, e quanti martiri bisogna aver soffe^i^ o piu tosto che il
tuo bell cor non fa riflessione sopra la nostra sort tiranna. Abbia cura della
tua precioza salute; ora non si puo far 'altro per il ^ventura^o O.'

'I exist -- but we never meet again! -- Think what I must have endured before
I could write thus; or rather do not reflect on our inevitable miseries, but
take care of your health -- it is all you can now do for the unhappy O.'

"The writing appeared to be Ormsby's; but the lines were crooked, and the
letters ill formed, as if they had been traced by a weak and uncertain hand. As
I gazed on the paper, that, and every object round me, swam before my eyes --
again I read the words, again attempted to recall what I had seen, or supposed I
had seen, in the elm walk, and it seemed possible that it was Ormsby himself --
for who else could have appeared there? -- Yet, from whence did he come? --
Where had he so long been confined, or how could he now escape? -- If it were
indeed himself, why did he not approach? -- if it had been but to have spoken
one word to me, with the assurance that he lived.... Ah! it could not be
Ormsby! -- Ormsby would never have seen me so near him, and have left me to
tears, conjectures, and terrors; but if it were not himself, who could have
been in the avenue? -- Who could have written the billet I found there, in a
language, in which, though Ormsby himself was only a scholar, no other person
in the house, except my father and the Abbe Hayward, knew a syllable? -- Who
was likely to write a hand resembling Ormsby's? -- Who, indeed, except my
father, whose fingers being entirely disabled by the gout, had almost always
employed Ormsby to write, knew his hand well enough to attempt an imitation of
it? -- Any conjecture that led to a supposition of its being a forgery, seemed
even more improbable than that it should be Ormsby himself -- if any thing
could be more improbable than that he was so greatly changed as to be so near
me, and yet fly from me. This uncertainty, and my own conjectures, equally
endless and uncertain, soon became so insupportable, that my reason once more
threatened to forsake me, and I believe I should have lost it, had I not
communicated to Helene what had happened, and explained to her the purport of
the letter. (...) ^his, I observed her countenance cha^ (...) pale and trembled
-- then, in a (...) in her own language, that I shou^ (...) often she had
entreated of (...) the elm walk -- not to frequent (...) ^ut the ^pel.

"I eagerly inquired what those precautions (...) to do with what I was now
talking of. Helene ^^embling and weeping, at length told me, it (...) the
general opinion in the family, that Mr. Ormsby had been killed in attempting to
resist the force that was used to remove him from the house; that he was buried
in the vaults under the old church and ruined monastry; and that his spirit had
been frequently seen since. This at once accounted for the apprehensions I had
seen Helene so often express, and renewed all the terrors for the life of
Ormsby, which the assurances of Mr. Hayward had a little appeased..... My heart
sunk within me, and again I seemed to be on the point of losing my misery and
my existence together. The horrible idea thus conveyed, could not be a moment
sustained without forcing the mind to an effort for its own relief. The moment
I had recovered myself enough to reflect, my reason returned to dissipate this
hideous phantacy. I might have believed that I had seen the shade of Ormsby
lingering about the place of his interment -- for to what weak^ might not such
sufferings as I underwent sul^ (...) ^he understanding? but I knew that the
spirit^ ^e dead write no letters, and by whom (...) ^by could the lines I held
have been wr^ (...) ^o, but either himself, or some age^ (...) ^yed, could have
dropped the (...) had found? As soon as the tu^ (...) ^ere a little calmed by
these (...) ^urage to question He^ (...) that had passed on this ^ct in the ^y.

She told me that ever since the sudden disappearance of my unhappy lover,
strange stories had (...) been whispered in the family at every opportunity,
when the inferior domestics had an opportunity of escaping from the observation
of the steward and housekeeper; that the most frightful reports had gone abroad
in the country; and that it was every where believed that Mr. Ormsby had fallen
the victim of my father's violence, and had been buried in the vaults: a report
which was the more strongly credited, as the two men who disappeared with him
had never returned. To this account, which was nearly the same in substance as
that which she had at first related, she added many wild stories of noises
heard, and sights seen, every one of which some person might be brought to
attest. Nothing could be more dreadful than to reflect on these imp^s among the
neighbors which, from the account given by Helene seemed to be gaining ground,
and might not improbably bring on some inquiry that would irritate to phrenzy
such a temper a^ my father's, and overwhelm me with shame and disgrace."

The recollection of this part of her life, adde^ to the fatigue of having
spoken so long, was more than Mrs. Vyvian could now sustain; and Rosalie once
more prevailed upon her to delay the rest of her strange and melancholy
narrative till the next day, which was likely to be the last they should
uninterruptedly pass together.

CHAP. XVII.
THE narrative of Mrs. Vyvian thus went on --

"I had not yet recovered any degree of composure after the strange
circumstance of finding the letter, which I continually read and studied, when
some of the apprehensions, (...) which the intelligence I had got from Helene
had given rise, w^ (...) too ^ly realised. Such, indeed, were the various
tortures in which I had b^ kept for fa^ime, that is astonishing, in the
situation I was in, how I survived it. I might well say in the words of a
favorite air which I should have sung, had not my heart been too heavy to find
relief even in music -- Lasciami Metastasi^.
, o Ciel! pietoso,
Si non ti vuoi placar,
Lasciami respirar,
Qualche momento!
Rendasi col riposo,
Almeno il mio pensiar,
Abile a fostenar
Nuovo tormento. --


"I know not whether my mind dwelt most continually on the circumstance of the
letter, or on the dread of the inquiry that might be made from the reports that
had been spread in the country. In regard to this last, however, I endeavored
to persuade myself, that Helene, understanding English imperfectly, might
misconceive or exaggerate the expressions made use of by the rest of the
servants; and while I attempted to mitigate part of my anxiety by this
persuasion, I endeavored to acquire courage to investigate the grounds of the
other; and for this purpose I took again and again the same walk alone, for not
even Helene's sincere attachment (...) me would, I knew, have engaged her to
ha^ companied me without great reluctance. I thought too, that if by any
strange means which I could not comprehend, nor hardly think possible, Ormsby
yet lingered round Holmwood, he would be prevented by the presence of a third
person from speaking to me. Life was now in my eyes of so little value, that to
fear, unless it were fear of my father, I was insensible; and I believe that I
should have met with indifference, or rather torpor, the most terrific figures
that imagination has ever dressed out to deter from crimes, or to enforce
repentance. In my solitary and gloomy walks, however, I saw no more any object
like that which had before alarmed me, nor did I hear any noise but such as I
could easily account for. Every evening, without any regard to the weather, or
any thing but the precaution necessary in regard to my father, I took the same
lonely walk, and for many evenings returned more astonished and depressed; for
the longer this mystery remained unexplained, the more I became the prey of
wild conjectures and tormenting solicitude.

"But imagine, my Rosalie, if it be possible, imagine what I suffered, when,
about five days after the circumstance of my finding the letter, I was alarmed
by the sudden entrance of Helene into my room, who breathless with some new
terror, endeavored to explain something, which it was long before I
understood. At length I made out, that a neighboring gentleman in the
commission was come, as the servants believed, to apprehend my father with
peace officers, for that a regular complaint had been laid, it was not known by
whom, of the sudden disappearance of Ormsby; and at length the accusation of
having murdered him had been so often repeated, and the clamours of the
country, where certainly my father had many enemies, had become so loud, that
the gentleman in question could act no otherwise than he did.

"Endeavor to imagine what I endured while such a conferrence as this lasted,
which it did for upwards of two hours; at the end of that time, the magistrates
and his myrmidons departed together. Helene, who had watched them, came to tell
me so: they had been out for some time with the steward and the old butler, and
she was sure, she said, they had been up to the church; then they returned to
the house, and, after a few moments of farther conversation with my father
^uitted Holmwood apparently satisfied.

"So confused, so mingled with horror and amazement, were all my ideas, that I
recollect nothing of what passed in my mind, till I saw myself seated at table
as usual to help my father, who sat opposite in his great chair; when I
falteringly made the usual inquiry of the day, he did not answer me. I began,
however, to carve as usual for him, but he fixed his eyes on my face, with a
look so menacing and stern, that it was with the utmost difficulty I supported
myself....... I looked in vain for comfort in the faces around me; the old
butler looked as if he pitied, but could not assist me; and the footman seemed
to be under such terror, that having made two or three awkward blunders, he
received a very severe reprimand, and was ordered to leave the room. Our silent
and melancholy meal was soon over, for my father ate little, and I in vain
attempted to swallow. The table cloth was removed, and I collected voice enough
to ask him, as nearly as I could in my usual manner, whether I should read to
him? -- He answered loudly and angrily -- No --

"Then, after a pause, a dreadful pause, during which I was afraid I should
have sunk upon the floor, my father spoke thus --

'If I thought only for one moment, that the infamous reports, which have gone
forth in the country, had originated in your folly, or rather wickedness, I
should not hesitate what to do. As for the ungrateful villain, who might,
perhaps, have had the insolence to attempt, as a return for my receiving him
into my house, to steal my daughter and my property from it, you will never see
him or hear of him more; nor can a matter of self-defence be again tortured
into what the laws might here call a crime. But for yourself, know that it is
my pleasure that you immediately prepare to receive, as your husband, a friend
of mine, whose estate is such as you have no pretensions to expect, unless it
be as my daughter. I will not suffer myself to suppose you have forfeited that
title. On your part you will be pleased to make up your mind, and to divest
yourself of a manner and behavior which I will suffer no longer. I should have
forborne to have given you my commands in regard to Mr. Vyvian, till his
arrival, if I had not remarked your perseverance in a sort of conduct which I
will not understand, lest the most terrible vengeance should follow.......... I
have said enough. Go to your own room, and learn to obey.'

"This terrible sentence, which ended in so loud a tone as almost to stun me,
deprived me for a moment of my recollection. As soon, however, as I was able, I
arose from my chair, and with difficulty reached the door, my father's eyes
following me with a look so scrutinizing and angry, that I wished at that
moment the earth might open beneath my feet, and swallow me for ever. I found
Helene near the door; for, alarmed by the transactions of the morning, and
probably by the report of the footman, she waited there for me. Without her aid
I should never have got to my own room. I sat down in a state of torpid
despair, which it is impossible to describe. Helene (...) to me in vain. The
words I had heard, (...) dreadful command I had received, still vibrated in my
ears: and the horrors of my fate were so forcibly presented to my mind, that
the few distinct thoughts that passed through it pointed to suicide as the only
way to escape from a destiny I was utterly unable to support. At length the
tears and prayers of my faithful Helene restored to me some degree of
recollection. She knelt at my feet, imploring me to have mercy on myself and on
my infant, and to exert myself, if it were only to save my sa^ from the crimes
to which his furious revenge ^ht excite him. She endeavored to persuade (...),
that what he had said of Mr. Vyvian might be only a finesse; or, that if there
was such a marriage in agitation, I might delay or escape it by the
interposition of Mrs. Lessington, who was probably by this time, or would be in
a few days, within four miles, and from whose prudence, as well as influence
over the mind of my father, much might be hoped.

"Though I knew great part of this reasoning was fallacious, I affected to be
more calm, that Helene who would not be dismissed, might talk to me no longer.
But what a night did I pass! and when I obtained by opiate half an hour of
unquiet slumber, with what anguish did I recollect, the moment I awoke, all
that had passed the preceding day, with what dread look forward to what might
befall me in that which was begun?

"One consolatory circumstance happened in the morning, which enabled me to go
through it. I received a letter from Mrs. Lessington, to inform me she was
arrived at home, and would see me the next day. This prospect of alleviating my
sufferings gave me the power of going down to dinner with some degree of
resolution. I even took courage to meet the piercing eyes of my severe, my
sometimes cruel father, and to repeat, when dinner was over, my question,
whether I should read to him? -- He again answered, No -- though with less
harshness than the evening before. He felt himself indisposed, and said he
should endeavor to sleep.

"I no sooner had left (...), than in despite of the earnest entreaty of ^lene,
who incessantly besought me to have more regard to my own safety, I went into
the avenue, though it was nearly dark. An early moon, however, lit up, with
faint but cheering radiance, the winter sky, and her rays glancing through, the
leafless trees, and falling on the gray trunks of a few arbeals and birches
that were scattered among the more gloomy elms toward the middle of the line,
I could have indulged my shuddering fancy in supposing them, indistinctly seen
as they were, to be specter beckoning me to the only sure asylum of all
sorrows in the cemetery beyond.

"Why should those fear who have nothing to hope? -- Of beings of this world I
had no dread; for I was so miserable that religion only arrested my feeble
hands, or they would have been lifted against a life which might have been
called a living death. Supernatural beings I had never learned to fear. If such
were ever permitted to appear, I hoped it might be with tidings of mercy. Thus
arguing and reflecting, I had reached the (...) of the avenue, and stood a
moment looking at the half-ruined church, and meditating on the horrible idea
taken up by the people of the country, that Ormsby was destroyed and buried is
this place..... What an opinion must they have of the violence and ferocity of
my father's spirit! What an idea of the provocation he had received before they
could have supposed him likely to be driven to extremities so dangerous and
dreadful! -- It was impossible but the cause for such vengeance must be
suspected. The secret of our attachment, my disgrace and shame, then were
known, or, what was nearly the same thing, guessed at. Though I no longer
supposed it possible that my father could for a moment harbor a thought so
contrary to humanity as the destruction of the unhappy Ormsby; yet there were a
thousand daggers for my heart in the reflection that such a history was the
conversation of the surrounding country, and that the real or imaginary crimes
of our family were discussed by the ignorant, and enjoyed by the malicious.

"But even these reflections were ease compared to those that assailed me when
I remembered the conversation of the evening before, and repeated to myself the
dreadful name of Vyvian. -- There is a kind and a degree of grief that
annihilates the feelings from its violent pressure, as the extremeties of
bodily pain are said to deprive the sufferer of sensation. This was the effect
which the commands of my father had on my mind, now that, alone, and amidst the
silence of the night, I re^ed on them. Lost in the terrible contemplation of
the future, I forgot the present, and was unconscious of the dreary scene
around me, till I was startled from my reverie by the sight of a man, who,
coming from among the ruins, slowly approached. Rivetted to the spot by fear,
mingled with a strange desire to know whether this was a being of another
world, or whether it brought me intelligence of Ormsby, I had no power to stir.
The figure approached, and, as if encouraged by my remaining where I was, spoke
to me in a low voice, and said something as if entreating me not to be alarmed.
But I heard only the beginning of the sentence; the voice was, I thought,
Ormsby's, and a thousand sensations, which I could neither discriminate then,
nor can describe now, contributed to deprive me of my senses. The predominant
idea, however, was, the hazard Ormsby was in, in thus returning round the
house, for of any supernatural appearance I had none.

"On recovering some degree of recollection, I found myself on the ground, and
a man kneeling by me, whom I still believed to be Ormsby, till he explained
himself nearly in these words --

'I have long waited for an opportunity of speaking to you, Miss Montalbert --
recover your recollection -- your presence of mind -- the life of Ormsby
depends on you.'

'Of Ormsby?' cried I faintly.

'Of Ormsby!' answered he -- 'my unfortunate brother..... It is you who must
either release him; who must either restore him to life and liberty, or condemn
him to end his miserable days in poverty and imprisonment.' -- I have not
strength* Rosalie, to relate every word as it passed; suffice it therefore to
tell you, that it was one of the brothers of poor, unhappy Ormsby, who related,
that he had come from Ireland on finding that my father had imprisoned Ormsby
for debt; and that he had declared to the elder Mr. Ormsby by letter, that he
never would release him, unless under the most positive promise, that he would
go immediately to India -- never again see or correspond with me, and renounce,
in the most solemn manner, every claim that I might have given him to my person
or my affections. This Ormsby had positively refused to do. My father,
irritated to phrenzy by a circumstance that renewed all his suspicions,
declared, in terms of the greatest violence, that Ormsby should perish in
prison. His father could do nothing for him; but sent over his second son, only
two years older than Ormsby, to endeavor to appease the anger of Mr.
Montalbert, by engaging his brother to make the concessions that were required
of him.

'I have now,' said the young man, 'lingered about the place more than a
fortnight, in hopes of having an opportunity of speaking to you. At the risk of
my life I have attempted to make my way into the house, and probably have owed
my preservation to the notion impressed upon your father's servants, that the
restless spirit of my brother, whom they supposed to have been murdered,
haunted the house and gardens....... Now, dearest Madam,' continued George
Ormsby, 'if you have, indeed, honored my brother with your regard, resolve to
save him -- resolve to restore to my poor, unhappy parents the peace this fatal
circumstance has robbed them of.' -- I asked faintly, what I could do? -- He
answered, that by consenting to marry the man proposed to me by my father, I
should end at once the persecution of Ormsby, and secure my own peace. I
shuddered, and was on the point of declaring why it was impossible for me to do
this, when the noise of voices at a distance compelled him hastily to quit me.
He retired again among the ruins; and I, without knowing how I found strength,
walked toward the house. I met Helene and one of the men servants coming in
search of me. Helene, in accosting me trembled so she could hardly speak -- I
leaned on her arm and reached the house, where I had again to encounter the
angry looks and fierce interrogatories of my father. I know not how I answered.
Overwhelmed by the scene I had just passed, I sunk once more under the violent
agitation of my mind, and could hardly be said to be sensible till the soothing
voice of Mrs. Lessington, at my bed side the next morning, restored me in some
measure to my reason. But notwithstanding the perfect reliance I had on her
friendship, I should never have had courage to relate to this dear friend the
extent of my imprudence and its consequences; but Helene had already told her
so much, that she entered at once upon the subject as soon as I appeared in a
state to attend to her. By transferring the blame from me to my father, she
reconciled me in some measure to myself; and, with some degree of composure, I
suffered her to speak of what could be done in circumstances so dreadful and
distressing.

"Nothing, however, could be immediately determined upon. I agreed with her,
that it was necessary her husband should know my cruel embarrassment, for
without his assistance and participation she could do nothing. She gave me in
the mean time every consolation in her power; but I thought I perceived,
notwithstanding she evaded the conversation, that she thought I ought to
relinguish every idea of ever again seeing Ormsby, and that if I could escape
from the perils of my present melancholy situation, I should dispose myself to
act in compliance with my father's commands.

"Many were the conferences we now had; but probably it would have been
impossible to have saved me from that death, which my father might have thought
could alone wipe away the dishonor I had brought upon his family, had not
providence interfered in my favor.

"Mrs. Lessington now met and conversed with George Ormsby. They agreed that
the only means of saving his brother was to procure his renunciation of every
pretension to me in whatever form my father should dictate. This I alone could
engage him to do; and this at length Mrs. Lessington extorted from me in a few
lines, by which I asked this of him. With a trembling hand, and eyes
overflowing with tears, I signed the fatal paper. Mrs. Lessington assured me,
that George Ormsby went immediately with it to London. -- In about ten days
afterward, Mrs. Lessington, who remained at Holmwood, informed me she had
heard from him; that his brother Charles was released, and on his voyage to
India. There was something in all this that I could not comprehend; but I dared
not trust myself either with inquiries or conjectures -- Ormsby was lost to me
for ever; and I, sometimes in the bitterness of my soul, accused him of having
abandoned me, though, in more reasonable moments, I was compelled to
acknowledge that his stay would have been destructive to us both...... My
father, who, as it appeared from his conduct, knew much of the truth, though
the loss of my honor was yet unknown to him, became somewhat less severe
toward me. Yet I shrunk more than ever from his eye, and my timidity and
terror must have betrayed me, if the change in my person, now every day more
evident, could have escaped observation; but whether it was that the violence
of temper, which my father had yielded to in regard to Ormsby, had aggravated
his athritic complaints, or whether his constitution was entirely breaking up,
he became at this period so ill, that a physician, who had always successfully
attended him, was sent for from London; he gave him some relief, but declared,
that unless he went to town, where constant attendance could be given him, the
consequence would be greatly to be apprehended.

"The result of this advice was, that we removed to London. Thither also my
friends Mr. and Mrs. Lessington removed. And Mrs Lessington being then near her
time, it was so managed, that when the hour arrived when you, my beloved child,
came into the world, you were concealed by Mrs. Lessington for three weeks, and
then produced as twin with the daughter of which she was delivered, who is
since dead.

"You may imagine, my Rosalie, how very difficult it was to conceal the fatal
secret of your birth -- you may imagine, for I cannot describe, what were the
terrors I had to encounter -- the anguish of heart with which, when I had once
beheld you, once pressed you to my heart, I saw you torn from me, and knew that
I should never dare to call you mine, or again to shed over you the tears
excited by the resemblance your infant features bore to those of your father.

"But, on calmer reflection, I agreed with Mrs. Lessington, who represented to
me incessantly, how thankful I ought to be for the good fortune with which I
had saved my reputation, if not my life. The suspicions that had been
entertained, in consequence of my father's violent conduct toward Ormsby, were
now, she said, blown over and forgotten. His family had reported, that so far
from his having undergone any persecution from Mr. Montalbert, it was to (...)
he was obliged for the advantageous situation in which he was gone out to
India; that the circumstances which had given rise to such strange reports in
the neighborhood of Holmwood originated in (...) and misrepresentation; and,
in a word, that ^e Ormsby's, instead of showing any resentment toward my
father, every where made his eulogium as the benefactor of the whole family. I
was not however, the less miserable, though I owned the truth of all Mrs.
Lessington urged; and whenever I was alone, I gave way to that anguish of
heart, which, while I was with her, I endeavored to repress or conceal,
because I would not be thought ungrateful, or insensible of the obligations I
owed to her friendship.

"During my father's very severe illness, I heard no more of Mr. Vyvian. Indeed
I seldom saw my father, and when it was unavoidable, only for a few minutes.
Mrs. Lessington, in whom he had great confidence, and expressed a regard
unusual for him to feel, had contrived to obtain his leave for me to stay with
her while she was very ill and unable to come to me; and by this management
only it was that I escaped observation at the period when I could so little
bear it. As my father recovered, however, my more constant attendance was again
necessary. He now sometimes ordered me to read to him, and, when he was still
more at ease, to play at chess with him. I was, indeed, but a poor substitute
for Ormsby or Mr. Hayward; but I fancied that the latter sometimes got out of
the way, as if on purpose to make me more necessary to my father, and to leave
us together.

"It was in one of these tete-a-tete parties, that my father, without much
ceremony or much preface, asked me, whether I had reflected on what he had
determined upon in regard to Mr. Vyvian, who would now in a fe^ days be in
England, whither he came on purpose to receive my hand?

"The violent effect of this intelligence was evident on my countenance. I
tried in vain to speak. My lips refused to articulate a syllable. Not only
disregarding but enraged at the pain I seemed to feel, he declared in a voice
that made me tremble like a leaf, that if I did not determine to obey without
remonstrance, or hesitation, he knew how to punish, and would punish me as I
deserved. He added, that I had already been the occasion of his undergoing
uneasiness, which had brought on his late illness; of scenes the most
disgraceful to his character, never fullied until he found a curse instead of a
blessing in his daughter; and that not content with having once been nearly the
cause of his death, I now was disposed to complete my work, and destroy him who
had given me life. -- Figure to yourself, if (...) be possible, what I endured
at this moment, and if it be possible to carry your imagination farther,
suppose what I must have suffered before I was compelled to give my hand to Mr.
Vyvian, while my heart was devoted to Ormsby; while I would most willingly have
shared with him the most obscure destiny; while I would have followed him to
India, or to Nova Zembla, and have exposed myself to endure any hardships in
any region of the world rather than have been mistress of the world on
condition of being the wife of Mr. Vyvian.

"My friend Mrs. Lessington, however, and the Abbe Hayward, joined in this
cruel persecution. The former removed you from my sight entirely, and sent you
into the country. The latter seemed to have lost his usual humanity and
tenderness, and to think that duty, which I had once violated, had now stronger
claims upon me than before the fatal indiscretion I had been guilty of. From
your father I heard nothing. His family reported every where that he was
married to a woman of fortune, with whom he became acquainted on her voyage to
India, whither she was sent for by an uncle, whose heiress she was. This I
believed, as I had done many other stories that were among the artifices that
were used to force me into this detested marriage. They succeeded but too well,
or rather the extreme terror I had of my father left me no means of escape. I
became then the wife of Mr. Vyvian. I have been ever since the most miserable
of women; my son only, and the consolation of having sacrificed myself to duty,
alone supported me. Before, however, I was driven into this miserable union, I
executed, as I was then of age, a deed of gift, in which I made over, during my
life, to Mr. and Mrs. Lessington, the interest of four thousand pounds, which
was the gift of a relation, and which I possessed independent of my father, but
without the power of alienating the principal. This is part of the money which
Mr. Vyvian has so often reproached me with wasting, as he terms it, on begging
monks and canting hypocrites; though, had I really bestowed it on my
necessitous fellow creatures, I should have thought myself well justified in
such a disposal of it.

"I had not been married above fifteen months when my father died, and left Mr.
Vyvian in possession of that fortune, which was undoubtedly his chief motive
for overlooking my reluctance which I repeatedly avowed to him, and which he
well knew accompanied me to the altar. After my father's death, he no longer
affected to treat me with the least regard. We went abroad for some years,
which served in some measure to relieve and dissipate the heaviness of my
heart. I had often the consolation of hearing from Mrs. Lessington: and in her
letters, with the account she gave me of her family, my Rosalie, as one of that
family, was always mentioned. When I returned to England, I found you, child of
my fond affections, all that my fancy could form of loveliness and perfection.
So many tears had my fatal error cost me, and so much, I hoped, had been
expiated by the subsequent sacrifice I made* that I trusted it was not criminal
to indulge myself with a sight of you. You know how easily I enjoyed that
happiness; but I only knew (...) exquisite happiness it was till you grew up,
and till Charles, returning from abroad, showed so much partiality for you, as
made me tremble for the consequence. This fear, which a thousand circumstances
contributed to irritate, rendered my life miserable. I thought, that as the
heaviest punishment it could inflict, Heaven might permit a fatal passion to
take place between you. This was the cause not only of the deep melancholy into
which I fell, but of conduct which you then thought and I felt to be unkind and
cruel."

Mrs. Vyvian here ended her long narrative: and, kissing the tears from the
cheeks of her daughter, she dismissed her for that day, referring till the next
any farther conversation in regard to Montalbert.

CHAP. XVIII.
AT home and alone Rosalie had time to reflect on the story she had heard; and
though she knew very little of the world, and Mrs. Vyvian (...) failed to be
very minute in many parts of her story, it seemed certain that the family of
Mr. Ormsby had been the principal instruments in terrifying her into a
marriage, which would have rendered her life miserable even if her heart and
her person had not belonged to another. The Italian letter, which was probably
written in that language, lest it should fall into other hands, and might have
been read had it been in English; the improbability that George Ormsby should
venture to appear about Holmwood, unless with the connivance of some of the
family, if no^ of Mr. Montalbert; and the eagerness with which Mrs. Lessington
and Mr. Hayward had adopted the views of Mr. Montalbert, though they knew her
situation, were a combination of circumstances which seemed to leave no doubt
in the mind of Rosalie but that her mother had been betrayed by some or all of
those whom she considered as her best friends. Their motives were probably
good; but Rosalie could not help reflecting, that had not such been their
conduct, she might now have been the acknowledged daughter of the most tender
and affectionate of mothers; she might have known and been blessed by the
fondness and protection of her father; and they might in a happy union have
effaced the remembrance of their early indiscretion; for the death of Mr.
Montalbert would soon have left his daughter at liberty: and her life would not
have been passed in the miseries of such a marriage, nor her spirits have been
overwhelmed with the consciousness of being the wife of one man while her whole
heart was another's. "I should not then," said Rosalie, as she considered these
events, "I should not then have been despicable in the eyes of Montalbert's
relations. I might have been received by his mother with pride and pleasure,
from the hands of my own; but now I am an outcast, and have no right to claim
the protection of any human being, unless it be thine, Montalbert* and thou art
far, far from me! -- (...) ^nows whether we shall ever meet (...)

A shower of tears fell from her eyes while she indulged these melancholy
thoughts; but, from longer meditation, she was roused by a short note from Mr^*
Vyvian, who informed her, that her daughters had just been with her; that they
should now seldom be at liberty to meet, for that Miss Vyvian, who, for some
reason or other, did not seem happy and satisfied with her sister, was to come
to her mother during an excursion Mr. and Mrs. Bosworth were about to make to
Scarborough. -- "She is my daughter," said Mrs. Vyvian, "and I cannot refuse
her my protection -- alas! I will fulfill to the end of my life the duties that
have been imposed upon me. Hitherto the consciousness of having acquitted
myself of a very arduous task, to the utmost of my power, has sustained me in
many an hour of anguish; it will smooth the bed of death, and no inconvenience
I can sustain, no ingratitude with which I may be repaid, shall for a moment
weaken the resolution I have made to acquit myself to my own conscience.......
Come to me, however, my Rosalie, tomorrow, as Bab will not be here till
evening. Mr. Vyvian staid only a day in London. He is now gone into the west to
visit the borough for which he is representative, and is afterward to make I
know not what tour, with I know not whom, which is likely to detain him all the
summer. Alas! I dare not hope that the monotonous life I lead can be pleasant
to Bar^ (...) who probably comes with reluctance that w^ (...) us both equally
miserable. How differ^ (...) Rosalie, could I indulge myself with (...) always
with me, would our hours pass: but I will not add a word more on this subject."

Rosalie saw that, from this unlucky arrrangement, she should be deprived of
the consolation she might derive from the advice and conversation of her best
friend, when she most wanted such comforts. The aversion that Barbara Vyvian
seemed to have to her was even greater than that of Mrs. Bosworth; and on
recollecting several circumstances that had happened since the estrangement the
sisters had shown toward her, Rosalie could not but imagine that they knew, or
suspected, her near relationship to their mother........ Ingenuous and liberal
as her own heart was, she imagined not that it was possible for envy only,
malignant hatred of superior excellence and beauty, to call forth the
ill-humour and provoke the ill offices of these young women, though she had
already had a specimen of the effect of those odious passions in the behavior
of the Miss Lessingtons, whom she once thought her sisters.

In this family she now seemed to be almost a stranger. The character of Mrs.
Lessington, since the death of her husband, seemed totally changed; and her
passion for cards, and for the society of the set of people among whom she now
lived, absorbed almost every other feeling but her passion for money. To
Rosalie she was not only become perfectly indifferent; but seemed weary of the
task of affecting sentiments she did not feel. From the present situation of
Mrs. Vyvian, it was probable she would never be able to increase the ^al gift
she had made as a consideration for adopting her daughter, and her former and
long attachment to her, seemed, if not entirely forgotten, at least
insufficient now to urge her to any exertions of friendship and attention. She
seldom saw Mrs. Vyvian, and, when she did, her conversation related entirely to
people with whom the latter held no intercourse, and her visit appeared to be
always a matter of ceremony rather than of choi^. Though the solitude in which
Rosalie was left, was infinitely the most pleasing circumstance of her present
residence, yet she could not but imagine that the style in which she was
treated in the family must occasion suspicions of the truth. The difficulties
of concealing for a series of years such a secret, appeared the more wonderful
the longer she thought of it. But, from these meditations on the extraordinary
events Mrs. Vyvian had related to her, she recovered herself only to reflect on
what was to be her future fate. Her mother had been abandoned by the man to
whom she had sacrificed her honor and her peace. And though probably it was to
preserve her life and his own that this separation had been submitted to,
though it was certain that compulsion had at first been used to bring about
this cruel separation, and that reason and a respect for the object of his
unfortunate love had afterward prevented Mr. Ormsby from making any attempt to
write to her, Rosalie could not think, without extreme pain, that even such an
attachment was not proof against time and absence. Mrs. Vyvian had said, that
she believed that though Ormsby still lived, he had forgotten (...) entirely.
She added, that she most sincerely hoped he had; but, as she said this* her
tears fell more abundantly, and her heart seemed to feel all the bitterness
that attends the conviction of being forgotten by those we have fondly loved.
Rosalie thought that nothing could ever induce her even to say, that she wished
to be forgotten by Montalbert.

It was now some weeks since she had heard from him. There had even been time
for an answer to Mrs. Vyvian's le^r. Should he long delay answering it, what
agonies of mind should she not be exposed to! she trem^ to look forward to such
a possibility, and felt ^at it would be difficult for her to exist long under
doubts of Montalbert's affection.

When she saw her mother in the morning, it was with increased concern she
observed the deep dejection into which Mrs. Vyvian had sunk. The little
strength which she had collected to enable her to relate to Rosalie what it was
necessary she should know, was now exhausted: and pale and languid, she
appeared to sustain with difficulty the fatigue of leaving her bed to receive
her daughters, who were to be with her at noon: the one to take leave of her
again for some time, the other to become a resident in a house which offered
scenes so different from those to which she had long been accustomed.

As the sight of Rosalie seemed rather more deeply to affect than to relieve
her mother, she shortened her visit, and returned to her usual home, where she
passed the day entirely alone; Mrs. Lessington and her daughter being both in
town, and not likely to return till the following morning.

In the evening she sat down to write to Montalbert, and had nearly finished
her letter, when a maid (for there were only two female servants in the ^ouse)
came to tell her, that there was a person at the gate who desired to speak to
her; who, upon her asking his business, answered that he could communicate it
only to herself.

As Rosalie had no acquaintance likely to make such a visit, nor any business
to transact, and as so nea^ London there is always danger of admitting
strangers, she bid the servant tell him, she could speak to no person with
whose name and purpose she was unacquainted. The girl staid some time, and then
returned with a piece of paper, on which was written with a pencil, "Be not
alarmed. It is Montalbert, who, compelled to return in secret, has been to Mrs.
Vyvian's, and finds persons with her before whom it is impossible for him to
appear."

The mingled joy and surprise, not without some alloy of fear, with which
Rosalie read this, may be easily imagined. But it would be difficult to
describe, in adequate terms, the transports of Montalbert on meeting after so
long an absence, or with what tenderness and gratitude Rosalie learned the
purpose of his journey. When they were calm enough to converse upon it, he told
her, that as soon as he had rec^ed Mrs. Vyvian's letter, he determined to (...)
over himself to England at every hazard. -- It was not very easy," said he, "to
prevail on my mother, who has, unluckily for me, projects in her head for
establishing my fortune, which made her more unwilling to allow of my absence.
But a young Sicilian nobleman, with whom I was brought up, and who is distantly
related to my mother, was exactly at that period returning to Sicily for a few
months. I communicated my distress to him, and he managed the difficulty so
well, that I obtained a short leave of absence, and am now supposed to be with
him in Sicily. A thousand circumstances may happen to betray me. But I trust
much to the friendship and prevoyance of my friend to guard against detection
at present; and, for the future, I know my Rosalie will not shrink from any
trial of that affection which makes the happiness of my existence -- even
though a greater sacrifice were required of her than to quit her present abode."

The answer that Rosalie gave to this was, that with him every place and every
country would be equally pleasant to her. He then explained to her his views.
-- "Unable to live without you," said he, "I have never ceased, since I have
been in Italy, to meditate on the means of conciliating my happiness, and the
deference I owe my mother. That friend, of whom I have just been speaking, is
now master of his fortune. He has offered me a small, but beautiful villa in
Sicily, about seven miles from Messina, and not more than two and a half from
the sea. There you may live, my Rosalie, unremarked and unquestioned; and there
I can pass months with you, without incurring, on the part of my mother, any
suspicion, or any other remonstrance, than must in every event arise from my
refusal of the match she wishes to make for me. When, however, she finds I am
determined, and loses her apprehensions of my forming some attachment to an
English-woman and a Protestant, I shall be left at liberty to wander about
Italy occasionally as I used to do: and we may be happy at the present with
each other, without risking the loss of that prosperity hereafter, in which it
is the first wish of my heart to place you."

This plan appeared to Rosalie not only practicable, but delightful. The
unfeigned pleasure with which she embraced it seemed to redouble the
satisfaction with which Montalbert expatiated on their future prospects. He
appeared, indeed, to have thought of every thing, and settled what should be
said to persons in England, to account for her departure. It was to be given
out, that Mrs. Vyvian had procured for her a situation in a foreign family of
distinction, who were desirous of having a young Englishwoman as instructress
to their daughters; an establishment, which, as Rosalie Lessington was left
entirely without fortune, was extremely advantageous and desirable. -- However
improbable such an arrangement might appear to those who were acquainted with
Italian customs and manners, Rosalie and Montalbert agreed, that there were
none of that description among those who were likely to inquire of the
Lessington family; she had appeared, indeed, so little in their societies, that
it was probable she would soon be wholly forgotten.

Mrs. Bosworth and Miss Vyvian were certainly more likely to inquire after her
with more active malignity, and, doubting any story that was at all unlikely,
to form conjectures to her disadvantage. But, as the journey of Montalbert, at
this period, was unknown to them, as they had no communication with the
Lessington family, and were both too proud to annex any consequence to Rosalie,
except what she had derived from their fears of their brother's or their
mother's too great affection for her, it was probable that when they saw her,
and heard of her no more, they would cease to think about her.

It was, however, a very inconvenient circumstance to them, that the presence
of Barbara Vyvian prevented Montalbert's seeing her mother, with whom it was so
necessary for him to consult. As he could not stay more than a week in England,
there was not a moment to lose. Many purchases were to be made for Rosalie, as
well as many precautions to be taken; and it was proper that Mrs. Vyvian and
Mrs. Lessington should meet to adjust several points relative to a person in
whom both were interested.

After some debate how to obtain admittance to Mrs. Vyvian, it was agreed that
this could be done only by the means of Mr. Hayward. To him, therefore,
Montalbert immediately wrote, engaging him to meet him at a tavern early the
following morning. Then reluctantly, and not without her repeating her
remonstrances on the impropriety of his staying any longer, he took leave of
Rosalie, and retired for the night to the house, where, in pursuance of his
appointment, Mr. Hayward came to him the next day at six o'clock.

They together contrived so well, that Mrs. Lessington was admitted to the
apartment of her friend without any suspicion on the part of Miss Vyvian; and
in a few days every necessary arrangement was made, and Rosalie ready to depart.

There were in England only two persons, of whom to take leave for so long a
time, perhaps for ever, gave her severe pain. These were her real mother, for
whom her affection seemed to be greater than if she had been accustomed always
to consider her in that endearing relationship, and the eldest Mr. Lessington,
from whom she had for so many years received instruction, and toward whom she
had been used to look for future protection and regard. To him, however, she
could have no opportunity of saying farewell, as he was gone into Wales with a
young man of fortune, from whom he had expectations of preferment. Rosalie
dared not even write to him, as Mrs. Lessington, for some reason or other,
objected to it; she was compelled, therefore, to go without bidding him adieu.

Her parting with her mother was attended with many tears on both sides; but
each wished to shorten a painful scene, which it was not safe long to continue,
as Rosalie and Montalbert were introduced into the house by stealth. This sad
farewell being over, they got into a hackney ^ch with their baggage, and being
set dow^ (...) an inn in Holborn, a quarter of the town where Montalbert was
little likely to be observed by any of his acquaintance, they there found his
servant waiting with a post-chaise according to his orders, and immediately
proceeded on their way to Dover.

CHAP XIX.
THE fatigue of traveling, and the suffering^ from sea-sickness, were rendered
supportable to Rosalie by every care and attention which vigilant love could
dictate. Having recovered from the latter, and wondered at the novelty which a
French town presents to one who never before crossed the channel, the
travelers proceeded, after a few days rest, to Paris, and from thence to
Lions. Rosalie, though delighted with her journey, and acquiring new ideas at
every step, was impatient to proceed, because she dreaded nothing so much as
that the mother of Montalbert should discover, by his protracted stay, that he
had been to England; while he, more solicitous for the health of his lovely
wife, than influenced by any other motive, regulated his journey rather by her
convenience, than by the necessity of appearing in proper time from his
supposed Sicilian voyage, leaving to his friend, the Count of --, the care of
keeping up appearances for him as well as he could.

Had not apprehensions of what might happen to embitter his future felicity a
little derogated from the enjoyment of the present, it would have been
difficult to have found a happier being than Montalbert. While he pointed out
to Rosalie the beauty of the country through which they were passing, every
scene, every view, seemed to acquire new charms. The pleasure which the varied
prospects of nature gave to her young and unadulterated heart, the desire of
information she expressed, and the sense and solidity of her remarks,
communicated to him delight more exquisite than that which he felt in
contemplating the beauty of her form and face, which he could not but observe,
attracted universal admiration wherever she appeared, even in the haste of a
journey, and under the few advantages of a traveling dress.

In France, superior or even common beauty is generally much noticed; and
almost at every post town Montalbert heard some observation on the loveliness
of la jeune Anglaise: or, if they remained in any city more than a day, had an
attempt made by some gay young man or other to be introduced to his notice.

From these sort of acquaintance, however, Montalbert shrunk, with a
sensibility unusual on such occasions to his natural character, which was open,
unsuspicious, and sociable. He not unfrequently was sensible of something like
jealousy, for which he failed not to reason with himself. But still his dislike
of the adulation which he saw likely to be offered to his wife, wherever she
appeared, conquered the sense he had of the absurdity of feeling such a
sentiment in regard to her, who was all innocence and simplicity; who certainly
lived but to please him, and was so unconscious of her personal attractions as
not to have the least idea of the reasons which made him avoid every sort of
society on the road. She imputed his shunning it, to the fear he had, lest he
should be met by some of his former acquaintance, who might betray to his
mother his present expedition. -- There was, however, in this reserve of
Montalbert's less of personal jealousy than of another sentiment. The mind of
Rosalie, unadulterated by the false refinements of modern education, and yet
new to the world, seemed, to her husband, capable of being adorned with all
that lends grace to beauty, and gives perfection to genius. She had seen so
little of society since her short residence near London, that the bloom of the
mind (if such an expression may be allowed) had not been tarnished by any
commerce with inferior society, or the common studies of a circulating library.
Her natural understanding was excellent: and she had more judgment than
generally attends on so much genius as she possessed; but hitherto this
judgment had been unexercised, and this genius dormant.

The little she had read was but ill-calculated to form the first: and the
society she had been usually among, had allowed her little scope for the
latter. But, at a very early period of her life she became conscious, that such
sort of people as she was usually thrown among, people who only escape from
dullness by flying to defamation, were extremely tiresome to her, though she
saw that nobody else thought so, and suspected herself of being fastidious and
perverse. The cold, and sometimes contemptuous treatment she had met with from
her supposed sisters, the little real affection she had ever found from the
persons whom she believed to be her parents, had rendered her timid and
diffident. -- As nobody but Mrs. Vyvian seemed to love her, she supposed that
to none but Mrs. Vyvian she seemed worthy of affection. Since the explanation
that had been given, all the passages of her former life appeared in a new
light: and she accounted for the indifference of her supposed, and the
tenderness of her real, parent.

This extraordinary discovery was a frequent topic of conversation between her
and Montalbert as they pursued on their journey: and they often canvassed the
circumstances that would, if the narrative of Mrs. Vyvian had been less
authenticated, have given rise to incredulity. -- Montalbert, when he first
heard it from Rosalie, had remarked these circumstances -- "It is strange" said
he "that the account you have given of your father's present situation is so
vague, so indistinct, that you have no clue to guide you even to the certainty
of his existence, none by which you can identify yourself to him. I can make
every allowance for the singular circumstances in which Mrs. Vyvian was placed;
for the timidity of her temper, and for the violence of my grandfather, whom I
have always heard represented as a tyrant, who was not to be, would not be,
contradicted. Still it appears equally unfortunate and strange, that she
omitted to tell you whether he knew of your birth? whether the family of Ormsby
were apprised of it?"

In answer to these remarks, the justice of which she however acknowledged,
Rosalie bade him recollect, how much of all the circumstances most interresting
to her might be unknown, even to Mrs. Vyvian herself.

"When I remember" said she "the countenance and manner of my mother, when she
recalled those scenes in which she suffered so cruelly, when I think how little
capable she was, even at this distance of time, of dwelling on those parts of
her story, where she had occasion to name my unfortunate father, and the awe
she had of her own, as well as the tyranny she had since experienced from Mr.
Vyvian, and the necessity there has ever been for secrecy as to a part of her
former life, which would undoubtedly have aggravated her actual sorrows, I
cannot wonder, though, perhaps, I may have occasion to lament the incomplete
information this dear unhappy parent has given me..... I have seen her lips
tremble, and cold and death-like dew on her temples, while, in a languid voice,
she was relating what I have repeated to you; and I know that no motives less
powerful than her love and her fears for me could have engaged her to write as
she did to you. Long years of sorrow have so broken her spirits, that the most
gloomy ideas sometimes take possession of her mind; she trembles, lest
incidents in her life, for which surely she has already been punished
sufficiently, should still draw the anger of Heaven on her children, as well as
hazard her future happiness. She thinks, that she should not have deceived Mr.
Vyvian; though, had she not done so, there is no imagining what might have been
the consequence from the furious temper of her father; and the consciousness of
having done so has made her patiently submit to every unworthy treatment --
offering" to use her own pathetic phrase "her sufferings as a sacrifice to the
God whom she had offended, and hoping their bitterness and duration might
expiate the errors of her early life. -- From hence I account for many parts of
my mother's conduct," continued Rosalie, "that before appeared mysterious --
her severe penances, her voluntary resignation of the world -- and her patient
submission to the undutiful and even cruel conduct of her daughters. And from
the pains these ladies took to alarm her about their brother's attachment to
me, though ignorant of all the agonies they were inflicting, I have an
explanation of that forced and involuntary neglect of me, which rendered me so
very wretched for some time, and of which I am persuaded nothing but this cruel
idea could have induced her to assume even the appearance."

Montalbert listened silently to this natural and sensible vindication of
conduct, which appeared to him more extraordinary and less accountable than it
did to Rosalie. He thought it, indeed, almost impossible that Mr. Vyvian should
be so ignorant of his wife's former attachment as he seemed to be; and he was
sure that her father had known, if not all, yet so much of the truth, as had
induced him to act in concert with Ormsby's family, or at least to compel them
so to act with him as to have saved his daughter's reputation at the expense of
her happiness.

The conversation on this subject was frequently renewed during the progress of
their journey: and the tears of Rosalie as often flowed from the recollection
of the sad state of spirits and health in which she had left her mother. So
great were Mrs. Vyvian's apprehensions of any accident, that might discover the
secret so long cherished like a serpent in her bosom, that she had desired
Rosalie and Montalbert not to write to her on the way; thus depriving herself
of what she owned would be one great alleviation of the restraint and misery
under which she was condemned to repine. The moments of reflection, therefore,
on the uneasy hours of this beloved parent, were the only moments that passed
without pleasure, amounting sometimes to rapture, when, as she approached the
Alps, the most sublime and magnificent views of nature were opened to her
astonished view.

Accustomed of late to the flat, monotonous, and uninteresting views round
London, she had frequently sighed for the more animating landscapes of her
native country; and had no ideas of beauty superior to that which is formed by
those green and undulating hills, in some places fringed halfway up by beech
woods, in others rearing their turfy mounds, covered with sheep on one side
above the once impenetrable forests of the weald, on the other gradually
declining toward the apparently boundless ocean that forms the English channel.

But when she saw the rich and luxuriant country, which nature, "with all her
great works about her," spreads before the astonished traveller, between Lions
and Civita Vecchia, the port from whence Montalbert determined to embark for
Sicily, in order to avoid both Rome and Naples, her mind was exalted by scenes
so much superior to any she had ever formed an idea of either from the efforts
of the pen or the pencil. She seemed transported to a world of higher rank in
the universe than that she had inhabited while she was in England; and she was
of an age and disposition to forget, or at least be indifferent to those
circumstances which can hardly fail to remind English travelers, that, though
other countries may have more bold and attractive scenery, their own is that
where life is enjoyed with the greatest comfort.

Arrived at Civita Vecchia, after an absence of ten weeks, from England,
Montalbert felt some degree of uneasiness when he knew he must hear from his
friend, the Count d'Alozzi, what had passed during his absence. From this he
was relieved by finding a servant of the Count's waiting for him with a small
vessel hired to convey him and Rosalie to Messina, where the Count waited his
arrival, that, after Rosalie was fixed at the habitation he had prepared for
her, they might return together to Naples.

Montalbert, who now saw himself freed from the painful solicitudes that had so
long perplexed him, would not, however, listen to Rosalie's entreaties to
embark immediately. But, fearful of exposing her too soon to sea-sickness after
the sati^e of so long a journey by land, he remained a few days at the port,
while Rosalie, who had no terror so great as that of meeting the mother of
Montalbert, and no idea how far she was from her, concealed herself at the inn
where she lodged, and could not, without alarm, suffer Montalbert to quit her
for a moment.

Montalbert, however, who knew that this was not a place where it was likely he
should be known, remained with great tranquillity for three days. All seemed
(...) favor their voyage, which he considered, not without some pain, must be
twice as long as if he had sailed from the Bay of Naples. The weather, however,
was mild, and the wind favorable; and a voyage begun thus propitiously was as
happily concluded, though not till they had been eight days at sea. On the
evening of the last, by as bright a moon as ever enlightened the swelling waves
of the Mediterranean, they entered the port of Messina. Never did the
magnificent spectacle it afforded give more delight than Rosalie felt, as,
sitting upon deck, Montalbert pointed out to her the beauty of the scene. The
inconveniences and tediousness of the voyage were no longer remembered. As the
vessel slowly approached the shore, every object, in the beautiful bay, was
distinctly visible. The bright light of the moon fell on the long line of
magnificent buildings that overlook the Faro of Messina, above which rose the
mountains, whose outline was boldly marked in the deep blue ether, while Etna,
no otherwise distinguished than by its towering grandeur, rose sublimely above
the rest. The sea, calm as the Ce^lean above it, scarce broke in trembling
lines as it approached the shore, but seemed to be with all nature in deep
repose. At the distance of two or three miles were seen floating lights of the
fishermen employed in taking the pisca spada, or sword-fish, which gave to the
gently undulating tide the appearance of being enchanted, and of bearing fairy
lights on its bosom.

Arrived at the lodgings provided for him by the active friendship of hi^
friend, the Count d'Alozzi, Montalbert saw his beloved Rosalie in safety, and
all his cares were for the present suspended; but this could not, he knew, last
long. He had many acquaintances at Messina, and many people were there
occasionally who knew his mother; it would, therefore, be unsafe for him to
appear publicly with his wife, and, after one day of repose at his lodgings,
they removed in a carriage, with which they were accommodated by the Count to
the villa he had lent them, at the distance of hardly three miles from Messina,
where they found every thing that could contribute to their convenience; and
were, in a few days, as much settled, as if they had already inhabited this
enchanting spot for many years.

CHAP XX.
WHILE Montalbert felt himself highly gratified and obliged by the car^ his
friend had taken to provide every thing in their new abode that could render it
convenient and agreeable to Rosalie, she was never weary with contemplating the
beauty of the scenery around her. A garden, which even the false Italian taste
could not spoil, arose behind the house, and its orange trees fringed the foot
of a hill, which would in England have been called a mountain. Even the verdure
of England was in some measure enjoyed here amid the glowing suns of Italy; for
the higher lands are refreshed by dews, which prevent their being parched like
the plains. Beyond the enclosure, shrubs, which are carefully cultivated in
England, grew spontaneously, and formed a natural wilderness of the gayest
colors and lightest foliage. From hence the most glorious view presented
itself that imagination could picture: the sea, and the opposite coast of
Calabria; the Lipari islands; Strombolo, marked by a black wreath of curling
smoke staining the mild and clear sky; innumerable vessels scattered about the
blue expanse of water; and the faro of Messina giving to the whole a new and
singular feature, connecting the varieties of an extensive sea view with a
port, seemed almost to unite the island to the opposite continent.

Divested of every care that related to the past, save only her solicitude for
Mrs. Vyvian, Rosalie would have fancied herself in Paradise, had not Montalbert
been reminded by the Count of the necessity of their immediately departing
together for Naples.

This zealous friend had forborne to visit them till some days after their
being settled in their new habitation. He appeared ^o feel for Rosalie all that
respectful admiration which beauty and sweetness, like hers, naturally
inspired. Her manner of speaking Italian was particularly interesting to the
Count, who seemed to be delighted to instruct her. He lamented to her the cruel
but necessary representations that he thought himself obliged to make to
Montalbert, that he must either determine to go back to Naples, or give up the
plan of concealment which had already cost him so much trouble. Rosalie in her
ingenuous and interesting manner, confessed their obligations to him, but
sighed, and with difficulty restrained from tears; while acknowledging the
truth of his observations, she trembled at the necessity of yielding to them.

Montalbert, with whom reason and love were at variance with each other, became
every day more gloomy, pensive, and uneasy. Sometimes he determined to hazard
every thing rather than leave her. "After all," said he, as he entered into
these arguments with himself -- "after all, what is it that I am contending
for? -- for what is it that I am sacrificing those hours that will return no
more? -- for money which I may never enjoy -- for high prosperity which is not,
that I know of, conducive to real happiness. Is it not true, that a day, an
hour, at this season of my life, is worth half an age toward its close? -- Yet
I am throwing away these precious hours of youth and health, in hopes of being
a very rich man hereafter."

However, these arguments, whatever might be their solidity, if tried by the
maxims of Epicurean Philosophy, sometimes yielded to other considerations. --
He was not devoid of ambition; nor could he wholly divest himself of that sort
of attachment toward his mother, which, though it had more of fear than of
love it it, had become a sort of principle from habit.

His frequent fits of silence, his melancholy look, and long solitary walks by
the sea side, the evident irresolution and deep depression he labored under,
gave to Rosalie the most poignant uneasiness. She sometimes was afraid of
increasing these symptoms of a mind, ill at ease, by appearing to notice them.
At other times she ventured gently to remonstrate with him. At length, after a
conference of some hours with Alozzi, he suddenly took a resolution to depart
the next day. Alozzi was returning to Naples, and they were to embark together.

This resolution he seemed to have adopted in consequence of having reflected,
that, if he did not soon go, he might not return time enough for the hour so
dreaded, yet so desired, when Rosalie might give birth to another being only
less dear to him than herself. This was to be expected now within two months.
To be absent at such a time was infinitely more formidable to his imagination
than leaving her now; and, as if this had never occurred to him before, he now
resolutely determined to tear himself away.

Rosalie saw him depart with anguish of heart, which she endeavored to stifle,
that what he felt might not be increased. But when Alozzi had carried him off,
almost by force, so dreadful did it seem to him to say adieu! -- she was so
much affected, that she could not remain at the window till they were out of
sight; but, shutting herself in her own appartment, she gave herself up to
tears.

The remonstrances, however, of her Italian woman, who was already much
attached to her, and the care which, under such circumstances, she owed to her
own health, even for his sake, whose absence she lamented, roused her at length
from this indulgence of useless regret. She now sought to amuse her mind by
contemplating anew the scenes around her; but their charms were in a great
measure lost. Montalbert was no longer with her to point out the beauties that
every where surrounded their abode, or to enjoy them with her. There was an
aweful sublimity in the great outline of Etna, its deep forests, and
magnificent features, which afforded a kind of melancholy pleasure. Not in
situation to explore the scenes it offered more minutely, yet feeling infinite
curiosity, she endeavored to amuse her mind with the prospect of future days.
Montalbert would return to her; she should be blessed in beholding his
tenderness for his child; she should again listen to his animated description
of a country replete with wonders, or be able, perhaps, to visit it with him.
In the mean time she determined to pass the heavy, heavy hours in cultivating
the talents he loved. She took up her pencils, and, strolling into the garden,
placed herself on the seat where, as they often fat together, he had pointed
out to her some points of view which were particularly favorable to the
painter. She would have sketched them, but her efforts were faint and
uncertain. In spite of all her exertions, ^ark presentiments of future evil
hung upon her spirits. Their depression she imputed to her personal sufferings.
The period, to which it was so natural for her to look forward with dread, was
now near. She had heard, indeed, that in the climate of Sicily infinitely less
was to be apprehended than in England. But this she only knew from the report
of persons who might say it to appease her sears and reassure her spirits.
Perhaps it was her destiny to be snatched from Montalbert, to release him from
his embarrassment, and to make room for the Roman lady, to whom his mother was
so desirous of uniting him. -- While these thoughts passed through her mind, in
gloomy succession, she repeated, from the little, simple ballad of Gay --
"Thou Wilt meet a happier maiden,
"But none that loves thee so!"
At length, however slowly, the tedious hours wore away. Montalbert returned.
He returned apparently more enamoured than before this absence of nine weeks,
and Rosalie forgot that she had ever been unhappy.

When, the first joy of their meeting being a little subdued, Rosalie spoke to
her husband of his mother, she fancied that though he declined conversation on
the subject, he was in reality less anxious about the future consequences of
his marriage than she had ever yet seen him. When he could not wholly evade
speaking on the subject, he affected an indifference, which made Rosalie
believe he was himself at ease; for, little skilled herself in dissimulation,
she did not for a moment imagine that this tranquillity was artificial.

At length the hour arrived when real joy succeeded to this external calm.
Rosalie brought into the world a lovely boy: and her own health was so soon
re-established, that, in a very few weeks, her beauty appeared more brilliant
than before her confinement. More attached to her than ever, Montalbert could
hardly bear to have her a moment out of his sight; yet the time was come, when,
if he followed the dictates of that prudence to which he had already made so
many sacrifices, he must return to Naples.

Alozzi, whose friendship for him appeared to be undiminished, failed not to
remind Montalbert of the necessity of this return. But his remonstrances,
however reasonable and gentle, were always received with uneasiness, and
sometimes with impatience and ill-humour. The visits of Alozzi had not been
more frequent than formerly; on the contrary, he had been more rarely their
visitor than during his former stay at Messi^ though he returned thither before
Montalbert, he never appeared at the residence of Rosalie till his friend
arrived there. Notwithstanding these precautions, however, the fault of
Montalbert's temper found food to nourish itself in the looks of Alozzi, who he
fancied, regarded Rosalie (...) too much admiration, and sometimes fixed on her
eyes in which passion and hope were too evidently expressed. This idea having
once seized the imagination of Montalbert, became a source of inexpressible
torment: and when he reflected, that he must soon leave his wife in the house
of this friend, who was, he persuaded himself, in love with her, neither her
virtues, nor her attachment to him, neither the honor of his friend nor the
confidence he ought to have had in Rosalie, were sufficient to quiet his
apprehensions, though he felt them to be alike injurious to his own peace, and
to that of those whom he most loved.

Sometimes he gazed on Rosalie as she sat with his boy sleeping in her arms,
and tried to persuade himself, that if once his mother could see these
interesting creatures, she would not only pardon him, but receive them to her
protection and tenderness. Then, recollecting what had passed during his last
visit to this violent and impracticable parent, he felt that all such hopes
were delusive. He became ashamed of what often appeared to him an unpardonable
meanness, and resolved, at whatever pecuniary risk, to throw off a yoke which
degraded him in his own eyes; to produce his wife and his child and abide the
consequences of his mother's displeasure.

While Montalbert was thus deliberating, and every hour forming and abandoning
projects for the future, a letter he received from Naples, compelled him to
adopt the measure of immediately going thither. It was from a female relation,
who usually resided with his mother; and who now informed him, that she was
extremely ill, and it was absolutely necessary for him to see her as
immediately as possible.

Wretched is the policy which too often puts at variance the best feelings of
human nature; which sets the parent against the child, because expenses either
affect his ease, or are painful to his avarice; which estrange the brother from
the sister, and make enemies of the amiable and lovely group, who, but a few, a
very few years before, were happy associates in the innocent* thoughtless hours
of childhood. -- Ah! wretched is the policy which makes the son too often
rejoice when she who bore him and nourished him mingles with the dust; when
those eyes are closed which have so often been filled with tears of tender
anxiety as they gazed on him! -- and yet all the contrivances, which cunning
and caution have invented for the security of property, have a direct tendency
to occasion all this, while mistaken views of happiness, unfortunate mistakes
in the head, or deficiency of feeling in the heart, do the rest, and occasion
more than half the miseries of life.

Montalbert, on receiving the letter that gave him notice of his mother's
danger, felt, for a moment, that he was her son; but almost as soon this sense
of filial duty and affection was lost in an involuntary recollection of the
release which her death would give him from the pain of concealing a
clandestine marriage, or reducing himself and his posterity to indigence if he
betrayed it.

He had no sooner felt this sentiment arise in his mind than he was shocked at
and resisted it; but again it arose: and he found all his affection for his
mother weak, when opposed to the idea of the advantages he might derive from
her quitting the world where she alone was the barrier between him and
happiness with the woman he adored.

It was not, however, a time to investigate these sentiments deeply, but to act
in pursuance of the letter. He hastened, therefore, to inform his wife of its
contents, who agreed with him entirely as to the urgency of his immediate
departure, yet wept and hung about him as if impressed with some unusual
apprehension of future sorrow; and, as she kissed her child, she almost drowned
it with her tears.

Montalbert, who felt none of this violent grief at an absence, the duration of
which would, as he thought, depend on himself, consoled her with views of
future prosperity and uninterrupted happiness. Alozzi had a few days before
left Messina, and was gone to Agrigentum, where he intended to remain some
time. Montalbert, therefore, who had no doubt but that he should return within
five or six weeks, felt no uneasiness at the thoughts of leaving to frequent
interviews with his wife, in his absence, a man whom all his reason did not
enable him to see with her, in his presence, without pain.

The letter Montalbert had received was written in such pressing terms, that
there was no time to be lost; and he determined to begin his journey on the
next day.

Rosalie, far from feeling the usual tranquillity, saw the moment of his bidding
her adieu arrive with agonies of sorrow, which she knew not how to account for
-- yet could not stifle or command. Nothing new had occurred in her situation
to make this absence more dreadful than the two preceding ones. Indeed it
should have been otherwise, for the presence of her infant, on which she doated
with all the fondness of a first maternal affection, was what was most likely
to console her in this temporary parting from its father: nor had she to say,
with the unhappy Dido -- "Si quis mihi parvulus aula
"Luderet Aeneas, qui te tantum ore referret;
"Non equidem omnino capta aut deserta viderer."
VIRGIL'S AENEID.

The servants about her were the same as those with whom she had formerly
reason to be satisfied. The situation around her offered all that the m^ lively
scenes of nature could do to assuage the pain inflicted by her husband's
involuntary and short absence. All this she urged to appease the tumult of her
spirits. She owned the justice of it all: but nothing gave her any consolation;
and, when she at last allowed him to tear himself away, the resolution to see
him depart was acquired by an effort so painful, that he was hardly out of
sight before her senses forsook her; and it was many hours before the
remostrances of Zulietta, her Italian maid, and of an older woman who assisted
in the care of her infant boy, so far roused her from the despondence into
which she fell, as to engage her to attend to the care of her own health, on
which depended that of the child she nourished at her breast.

By degrees, however, she became more composed. She received a cheerful letter
from Montalbert, sent by a vessel which passed them at sea. It ^ntioned, that
they were becalmed, but that he ^as perfectly well, and had no doubt of writing
to her the next day from Naples. Ashamed of fears and of despondence, which
seemed, as soon as she could reason upon them, to have so little foundation,
she returned once more to the amusements which used to beguile the hours of her
husband's absence: and all that were not dedicated to the care of her child,
whom she attended to herself, she passed in cultivating those talents which
Montalbert loved, and in which he had assisted and marked her progress with
such exquisite delight.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

