TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART, A NOVEL. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY MRS. ROWSON, OF THE NEW THEATER, PHILADELPHIA, AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE, FILLE
DE CHAMBER, INQUISITOR, etc. etc.

-- If there is a power above us.
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he must delight in virtue.
The soul secured in her existence, smiles,
At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
VOL. I,

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY WRIGLEY and BERRIMAN, NO. 149,
CHESNUT-STREET, SOLD BY MESSRS. CAREY, RICE, CAMPBELL, ORMROD, YOUNG; AND THE
AUTHOR, CORNER OF SEVENTH AND CHESTNUT STREETS. M.DCC.XCV.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
MRS. BINGHAM, Philadelpia, twenty-six copies. Mrs. Washington, Philadelpia,
do. Mrs. Knox, Philadelpia, do. Miss Knox, Philadelpia, do. Mrs. Clymer,
Philadelpia, do. Mrs. Lee, Annapolis. Thomas Lee, Esquire. do. Ninian Pinkney, Esquire.
do. Nicholas Caroll, Esquire. do. Richard Cook, Esquire. do. Mrs. Murray, do. William
Pinkney, Esquire. do. Rev. Ralph Higginbottom, do. Mr. James Williams, do. John
Randan, do. John Givim, do. Samuel Green, do. Thomas Harris, do. Charles
Wallace, do. F. Harris, do. John Callaghan, do. Mr. John Muir, Annapolis. John
Stewart, do. Randolph B. Latimer, Esquire. do. Mr. William Wells, do. Henry
Ridgely, do. William Marbury, do. Benjamin Harwood, do. George Man, do. John
Davison, do. Maj. Christopher Richmond, do. Mr. Joseph Clarke, do. William
Alexander, do. Horatio Ridout, do. Jonathan Welmer, do. Willim Carmicheal, do.
Truman Tyler, do. John Edmondson, do. Mrs. Steel, Dorchester County Mr. Isaac
Steel do John L. Wilmer, Queen Ann's County. Thomas Clark, Prince George
County. Edward St. Calvert, do. 2 copies. Richard Sprig, jun. do. Samuel J.
Covlidge, do. John Madox, Charles County. William Cambell, Arundel County.
Stephen Steward, do. Edward Hall, do. Jonathan Sellman, jun. do. William
Brogdon do. Charles Stewart, do. Mr. Joseph Leonand, Arundel County. Matthew
Beard, do. Jones, Philadelphia. Caldwell, do. R. Yates, do. 3 copies. Carr, do.
Mrs. Butler, do. Thomas Wignell, Esquire. do. A. Riengle, Esquire. do. Mr. Anderson,
do. Mrs. Anderson. do. Mr. Anderson, jun. do. Mrs. Cleveland, do. Marshall, do.
Mr. Wright, do. Mrs. Francis, do. Whitlock, do. Mr. Johnson, Annapolis. Miss
Lydia Wells, Philadelphia. Mr. John Parrington, do. Mr. Patrick Maddon, do.
Robert Kidd, do. West, New Jersey. Miss West, do. Maria West, do. M. Penrose,
Philadelphia. S. Penrose, do. Hazlewood, do. A. Dougherty, do. Mr. Noble, do.
H. Anthony, do. Mr. Kell, Baltimore. Seth Barton, do. Mrs. Martin, do. Mr. E.
Jarratt, do. Mr. A. Jarratt, Hartford. Mr. Lux, Baltimore County. Theophilus
Elmer, M. B. N. Jersey, 2 copies. James Smith, S. M. Baltimore. Mr. T. L.
Bristoll, Philadelphia. Miss Eliza Bristoll, do. Mr. Moreton, do. Franklin, do.
Green, do. Chalmers, do. Abijah Maskhill, Greenwich Cumberland County. W. D.
Brown, Philadelphia. G. Davis, do. M. Carey, do. 20 copies. Messrs. H. and P.
Rice, do. 20 copies. Mr. Joseph Bloomfield, do. William Young, do. 20 copies.
Thomas Dobson, do. 20 copies. Robert Campbell, do. 6 copies. John Ormrod, do.
20 copies. Genesis Jeremiah Wadsworth, do. Mr. Cadwallader Morris, do. Mrs. Mary
Black, do. Mr. Adam Guier, do. Aaron Levy, do. 2 copies. Mountford, do.
DEDICATION. TO MRS. BINGHAM.
MADAM,
I AM not ignorant that the style of dedications in general, is that of
panegyric, where the author endeavors to elevate the character of their patron
or patroness, above that of every other human being. But I am sensible were I
to address a person of your understanding, in the language of adulation, I
should only excite your contempt. Nor is it necessary for me, to set forth, the
many amiable traits, in a character so well known, so universally esteemed and
respected as Mrs. Bingham's.

I sincerely wish Madam, that this work was a more perfect performance, that it
might be more worthy your acceptance, and the honor you have done me, in
permitting me to dedicate it to you. Such as it is, it may perhaps innocently
amuse a leisure hour; and under the protecting sanction of your name, I do not
fear its meeting a favorable reception from the public in general. For however
trifling its own merits, your patronage will stamp a value on it, and raise it
into that consequence, it otherwise could never attain.

I have the honor to be, Madam, your much obliged And very humble servant,
SUSANNA ROWSON.
Philadelphia, April 13 th, 1795.
PREFACE.
AS a person of sensibility, whom business or necessity, forces into the house
of an entire stranger, (especially if that stranger is his superior in genius,
education or rank,) experiences a sensation undescribably painful, in being
necessiated to announce himself, and explain the intent of his visit: so I feel
myself inexpressibly embarrassed and timid, whilst performing the unavoidable
task of writing a Preface. It is addressing myself to, and calling up the
attention of a multiplicity of strangers; it is introducing not myself indeed,
but what is nearly the same thing, the offspring of my imagination, to their
notice, and conscious as I am, that it will be perused by those, who are
infinitely my superiors, this awkward timidity increases, to an almost
unconquerable degree.

"The works of fiction," says Dr. Johnson, with which the present generation
seems more particularly delighted; are such as exhibit life in its true state,
diversified only by accidents that daily happen in the world, and influenced by
passions and qualities, which are really to be found in conversing with
mankind. In narratives, where historical veracity has no place, I cannot
discover why there should not be exhibited a most perfect idea of virtue, not
angelical, nor above probability; for what we cannot credit, we shall never
imitate; but the highest and purest that humanity can reach, which exercised in
such trials as the various revolutions of things shall bring upon it, may, by
conquering some calamities, and enduring others, teach us what we may hope, and
what we can perform.

Upon this plan I have endeavored to form the "Trials of the Human Heart." My
Heroine, though not wholly free from error, (for where shall we find the human
being that is so?) I trust is not altogether unworthy imitation. Through
various trying situations, as daughter, wife, and mother; I have strove to
conduct her with propriety, tempering the weakness of humanity with the
patience and fortitude of a Christian, and that dignified pride, which will
ever arise from a just sense of the moral virtues.

It is with reluctance I find myself obliged to remark, that the literary world
is infested with a kind of loathsome reptile, of the class of non-descripts,
for it cannot be ranked with propriety amongst either authors or critics, not
possessing the qualifications necessary to form either, and being in itself
remarkable for nothing but its noxious qualities: its only aim is to prevent
the success of any work of genius; and swelling with envy, should the smallest
part of public favor, be conferred on another, spits out its malignant poison,
in scurrility and detraction. One of these noisome reptiles, has lately crawled
over the volumes, which I have had the temerity to submit to the public eye. I
say crawled over them, because I am certain it has never penetrated beyond the
title page of any.

Perhaps it would be as well, did I suffer this circumstance to pass unnoticed;
the arguments used, I must confess, are unanswerable, being in some parts
incomprehensible, and in others of such a nature, that no woman can glance her
eye over them, without feeling the blush of offended delicacy crimson her
cheek. Yet, as I have been accused of writing in an improper style in my Novel
of the "Fille de Chamber," and of expressing sentiments foreign to my heart, in
my Comedy of "Slaves in Algiers," I think it necessary to assure the candid and
impartial public, that both these assertions are equally false and scandalous.

Though many a leisure hour has been amused, and many a sorrowful one beguiled,
whilst giving Fancy the reins, I have applied myself to my pen, it has ever
been my pride, that I never yet wrote a line that might tend to mislead the
untutored judgment, or corrupt the inexperienced heart; and heaven forbid I
should suffer ought to escape my pen, that might call a blush to the cheek of
innocence, or deserve a glance of displeasure from the eye of the most rigid
moralist.

As to my opinion of the political concerns of America, or my wishes in regard
to her welfare, I cannot better explain them, than by giving a slight sketch of
my private history, with which, I rather imagine, the creature alluded to, is
entirely unacquainted.

It was my fate, at a period when memory can scarcely retain the smallest trace
of the occurrence, to accompany my father, (Mr. William Haswell, who is a
lieutenant in the British navy) to Boston in New England, where he had married
a second wife, my mother having lost her life in giving me existence. Blessed
with a genteel competency, and placed by his rank and education in that sphere
of life, where the polite and friendly attentions of the most respectable
characters courted our acceptance, and enjoying a constant intercourse with the
families of the officers of the British army and navy, then stationary there,
eight years of my life glided almost imperceptibly away.

At that time the dissentions between England and America increased to an
alarming degree: my father bore the king's commission, he had taken the oath of
allegiance; certain I am that no one who considers the nature of an oath,
voluntarily taken, no one who reflects, that previous to this period, he had
served thirty years under the British government, will blame him for a strict
adherence to principles which were interwoven as it were with his existance. He
did adhere to them, the attendant consequence may readily be supposed; his
person was confined, his property confiscated.

Then it was that the benevolence and philanthropy, which so eminently
distinguish the sons and daughters of Columbia made an indeliable impression on
my heart, an impression which neither time or chance can obliterate, for while
their political principles obliged them to afflict, the humanity, the Christian
like benevolence of their souls, incited them to wipe the tears of sorrow from
the eyes of my parents, to mitigate their sufferings, and render those
afflictions in some measure supportable. Would to Heaven it was in my power to
render their memories as immortal, as my gratitude is unbounded.

Having been detained as a prisoner two years and an half, part of which was
spent in Hingham, and part in Abington; an exchange of prisoners taking place
between the British and Americans, my father and his family were sent by cartel
to Halifax, from whence we embarked for England. I will not pretend to describe
the sorrow I experienced, in being thus separated from the companions of my
early years: every wish of my heart was for the welfare and prosperity of a
country, which contained such dear, such valuable friends, and the only comfort
of which my mind was capable, was indulging in the delightful hope, of being at
some future period permitted again to revisit a land so beloved, companions so
regretted.

Too young at that time, to have formed any political principles of my own, I
may naturally be supposed to have adopted those of my father, but the truth is,
that equally attached to either country, the unhappy dissentions affected me in
the same manner as a person may be imagined to feel, who having a tender lover,
and an affectionate brother who are equally dear to her heart, and by whom she
is equally beloved, sees them engaged in a quarrel with, and fighting against
each other, when, let whichsoever party conquer, she cannot be supposed
insensible to the fate of the vanquished.

During a period of twelve years a variety of painful circumstances unnecessary
here to recount, contributed to deprive me of a decent independence inherited
from my paternal grandfather, and at length to bring me back to America, in a
very different situation, I must confess, from that in which I left it; but
with a heart, still glowing with the same affectionate sensations, and exulting
in its evident improvement: the arts are encouraged, manufactures increase, and
this happy land bids fair to be in the course of a few years the most
flourishing nation in the universe.

Is it then wonderful, that accustomed from the days of childhood, to think of
America and its inhabitants with affection, linked to them by many near
connections, and sincerely attached to them, from principles of gratitude, that
I should offer the most ardent prayers for a continuation of their prosperity,
or that feeling the benign influence of the blessings of peace and liberty,
here so eminently enjoyed, I should wish that influence extended throughout
every nation under heaven.

Before I conclude, I beg leave to say a few words more, concerning my present
publication. I am willing to flatter myself, that in offering this novel to the
public, I am not preparing for my future life, either shame or repentance. That
it is throughout the whole, happily imagined or highly polished, I have not
sufficient confidence in my own abilities to warrant; but whatever may be my
final sentence from the world in general, I have at least endeavored to
deserve their kindness, nor shall I envy the honors which wit and learning
obtain in any other cause, if I may be so happy as to awaken in the bosoms of
my youthful readers, a thorough detestation of vice, and a spririted emulation,
to embrace and follow the precepts of Piety, Truth and Virtue.

TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART.
LETTER I. MERIEL HOWARD to CELIA SHELBURNE.
Woodbine Cot, April 20 th, 1775.
WILL you believe me, Celia, when I tell you, I wish I was at Bologne again;
that I am dissatisfied and unhappy. You are surprised. It is nevertheless
certainly true. We formed erroneous opinions of the world; we thought it a
paradise compared to the solemnity and gloom of our convent. Trust me, my dear,
I have as yet found nothing, in this gay, busy world, half so pleasing, as that
sweet retirement. But I forget that this is my first letter, and that you
naturally wish to know every incident which has happened since our separation.
This innocent curiosity shall be gratified, and to begin:

During our journey, Mr. Verdome informed me that the reason of my being sent
for home so suddenly, was to attend Mrs. Mirvan, my godmother, who had been for
a long time ill, and was supposed to be in a deep decline. "She went to
Bristol," continued he, "a few days before I left England; your mother
accompanied her, your father and Mrs. Talbot were to follow the ensuing week;
we shall, therefore, on our arrival in England, set forward immediately for
that place.

"Who is Mrs. Talbot?" said I.

"She is," replied Mr. Verdome, "a widow lady, who, being left in rather
indigent circumstances, and being a distant relation of the family, has
accepted an asylum in your father's house."

"If she is an amiable woman," said I, "my mother must be happy in having such
a companion."

"She is sensible, well bred, and good antured," he replied -- and here the
conversation dropped.

I was, as you may easily imagine, too much taken up with the disagreeable
sensation of sea-sickness, to be able to reflect much, while crossing the
channel: but no sooner was I in the chaise, proceeding toward Bristol, than I
began to form a thousand different ideas about meeting my parents, not having
seen either of them since I could remember. I pictured them to myself, as very
amiable old people -- and, in fancy, felt their embraces and kissed off the
tears of joy I saw falling from their eyes. Celia, we children of simplicity
form strange enthusiastic notions. In thinking of my dear Mrs. Mirvan, I felt
more lively sensations; because I was certain if she lived, when I arrived, I
should be received by her with heartfelt satisfaction, and should I find her
no more, my own heart would experience the most acute anguish. You must
remember how much I am indebted to her tenderness and affection, and how very
happy I was whenever she visited our convent.

At length we arrived at the end of our journey. I trembled so, that I could
scarcely support myself. Expectation, hope, fear, by turns were predominant in
my bosom. When we stopped, a handsome man, in appearance about five and thirty
or forty years of age, handed me from the chaise, and saluting me, said to Mr.
Verdome, "faith she is a very fine girl." I saw Mr. Verdome frown; but had not
time to make any further remarks, before I found myself in the chamber of my
godmother. Oh Celia! how that dear woman was altered; her face pale, eyes sunk
and so reduced that she could not rise to meet me. She faintly smiled when I
entered the room, I could not speak. I saw nothing, thought of nothing, but
her; and running to her threw my arms round her neck and burst into tears.
"Dear creature," said Mrs. Mirvan (embracing me) "we have surprised her. She
was not prepared to see me thus, but come, my love, dry your tears; here is
another lady, who indeed should have been the first object of your attention."
I turned round and beheld the most beautiful woman, you can conceive, bending
over me, her eyes full of tears. "My child, my beloved Meriel," said she,
taking me in her arms; "have you no recollection of your mother?" Whilst I was
folded in her maternal embrace the door opened, and my mother continued, "come
Mr. Howard welcome your daughter." I raised my head from my dear mother's
bosom, and was surprised to see the same gentleman, who had handed me from the
chaise. "Your father, Meriel," said my mother. I bent one knee to the ground
and kissed his hand. But shall I confess that whilst in that action, which
should have expressed filial respect and love, I felt more of terror than
either.

"Rise girl, rise," said he, "I have no taste for these fine romantic scenes.
You knelt, because you were told it would be expected, not from any genuine
impulse of the heart." My poor mother looked distressed. "I hope," said I, in a
faultering voice, "I hope, sir, my conduct will henceforth convince my dear
parents, that I am wanting in neither duty nor affection." "We shall see," said
he, carelessly. "You women in general talk well, but as to your obedience and
submission, when you are put to the trial you always fall far short of your
professions." I saw the tears stand in my mother's eyes. Oh! cried the
unfeeling man, if you are for a whimpering party, I shall leave you to
yourselves, and go and finish my game at piquet with Mrs. Talbot.

When he was gone, I felt myself relieved, and entered into conversation with
my mother and Mrs. Mirvan: though I could not but observe the hard struggle my
dear parent had to repress her tears; I dared not notice her distress, least by
so doing, I should increase it: besides I judged, that however palpable my
father's errors might be, it would be an ungrateful subject to her, especially
from the lips of a child.

For the first few days after my arrival, we flattered ourselves, that Mrs.
Mirvan was much better; but this enchanting illusion soon vanished. We had been
one morning chatting on her evident amendment, and she told me, when able to
support the fatigue of a journey, she would go to the south of France, and I
should accompany her. She wished my mother to go; but that dear good woman,
says she, can never leave your father for so long a time, (and his fortune
being but small will not allow the whole family to take such a journey.) At
dinner time, she eat the wing of a chicken, and seemed to eat with an appetite;
after which she drank a glass of Madeira; and in a short time complaining of
drowsiness, laid down on the sopha: my mother retired to her own room, and I
took up a volume of Pope's Homer, to amuse myself. For some time, her sleep
seemed composed, but she soon grew restless, breathed quick, and frequently
started, every now and then fetching a deep sigh, which terminated in a kind of
convulsive groan. I was alarmed and rang the bell, but before any one answered
it, I perceived my beloved godmother was in strong convulsions; my shrieks
brought the whole family to the room; a physician was sent for, but alas!
nothing could be done. She was immediately put to bed; but never recovered her
senses until a few moments before the final scene closed. In that short
interval, she beckoned my mother toward her, and putting my hand in hers, thus
addressed me, though with difficulty. "Meriel, you are the only comfort that
dear suffering saint possesses; let mutual friendship cement the bonds of
natural affection; my child never forsake your mother, so shall the father of
mercies never forsake you." I clasped my arms round my weeping parent, and
articulated a vow to heaven, never to let her know a grief or pain, it was in
my power to remove. My fortune, my peace of mind, my reputation, my life, every
thing but integrity of heart, should be sacrificed to insure her felicity.
"Enough, my child," faintly cried Mrs. Mirvan, "the Creator of the universe has
heard, and accepts your vow. Oh Meriel!" continued she, after a pause, "let it
be through life ever present to your memory, that you must one day be as I am
now, trembling on the verge of eternity. Love thy Maker above all things, and
thy fellow creatures a^ thyself; it is that alone can support" -- She could
articulate no more, but her lips still moved. She clasped her hands earnestly;
raised her eyes toward those blissful regions to which her pure soul aspired,
and with a placid smile sunk to eternal rest.

"Oh!" said I, as I dropped on my knees by her bed side, "let me live a life of
purity, that my death may be like hers." Amen, amen, cried my mother, as she
raised me from the ground. We retired to her apartment, where clasped in each
others arms, we poured forth that tribute of affliction, the merits of our lost
friend demanded.

IN CONTINUATION.
April 24 th.
I was so oppressed by the melancholy subject, that I could not for some time
resume it. Pardon me, Celia, I do not mean to trifle with your friendly
anxiety, I shall, therefore, pursue my narrative.

When we had attended all that remained of the amiable Mrs. Mirvan to the
grave; our family returned to Woodbine Cot. I do not speak of the conduct of my
father during this melancholy period, because it could neither excite my
veneration or your esteem. Mrs. Talbot conducted herself with great propriety,
exerted herself to comfort and cheer my mother, though I cannot tell why that
dear woman did not receive her attentions with that grateful sweetness, which
she ever manifested to others. I think Mrs. Talbot a most engaging woman. She
is not so handsome as my mother, but has a great deal more vivacity. She is
tall, well made, and has a very expressive countenance, is affable,
conciliating and extremely sensible; she is so kind as to assist and direct my
studies. You know I am very fond of natural history. She frequently reads to
me, and afterward we saunter through the garden, fields and meadows in search of
subjects to illustrate what we have read. In these rambles my mother
accompanies us, but it grieves me to see such a settled melancholy impressed
upon her countenance. My brother Richard yesterday came from school for a few
days. I can percieve he is my father's favorite, indeed my mother is extremely
partial to him, though it is with pain. I remark many unamiable (...) appear
evident in his disposition, (...) as yet he has seen but thirteen years, being
three years younger than myself. His behavior to me was very ungracious, when
we were first introduced to each other. Though I had never seen him, yet as
children of the same parents I felt my heart drawn toward him by an
irresistible impulse. I therefore on hearing of his arrival, ran down stairs
and was going to welcome him with a cordial embrace, but the frigid coldness
that his countenance displayed repressed my ardour. He advanced, just touched
my cheek and bowing profoundly, wished me joy of my fortune. "Joy,! brother
said I, indeed I have not thought of any thing but regret, for the sad occasion
of my becoming mistress of this fortune; would to heaven! dear Mrs. Mirvan were
still alive to enjoy those few thousands, the acquisition of which cannot
compensate to me for the loss of her valuable society." "She was to be sure a
good old woman," said he, carelessly, "but you know sister, she was very
infirm, so I think she is much happier out of the world than in it." "Come,
come Richard," said my mother with a look, half smiling, half frowning, "I must
not hear you speak lightly of an event, which has so highly distressed us all."
Master Richard smiled contemptuously, turned on his heel, hummed a tune and
walked out of the room. How happens it, Celia, that the child of a woman
possessed of such an excellent heart, and such exquisite sensibility should be
so very unfeeling; perhaps you will say he cannot resemble both parents; true,
too true, it is a just remark; but oh how superlatively. happy would be my lot
if both those parents resembled each other.

We live very retired, my father's income will not suffer him to associate with
the higher class of inhabitants of the village, and his pride keeps him from
those in the middling or lower walks of life. We are, therefore, visited by
very few, nor among those few have I seen one, with whom my heart would claim
acquaintance. Surely, Celia, (...) must be women in the world, and young women
too, who are different from any I have seen here. There are two families whom
my mother is permitted to visit, and there are daughters in each family: but
whenever we meet, which indeed is but seldom; they have so much to tell me
concerning their lovers, their dresses and their petty differences with each
other, that we have not a moment for rational conversation.

By this account you will naturally suppose my time cannot pass in the most
agreeable manner. I devote great part of my mornings to reading, drawing,
music, and needle work, and had I but my Celia here I could be tolerably easy;
though I can never be happy, while I see my mother oppressed with sorrow, which
I can neither participate nor relieve. I have had little or no conversation
with my father; as he still continues the same indifference toward me which I
experienced at our first meeting. I shall continue to write to you my friend,
though I can foresee my letters will contain but little variety: however it will
be the means of keeping alive that friendship, which is to me so valuable, and
a time may come when I shall be again happy in your society. Till then believe
me in sincerity yours.

MERIEL HOWARD.

LETTER II. MRS. TALBOT to LUCETTA ASKHAM.
May 2 d.
MERIEL is returned from the continent, where she has been from a state of
infancy immured in a gloomy convent. Mrs. Howard did not think her own family a
proper place for the tuition of a girl. She was right: her husband is by no
means a brilliant example, and I think, it would be a fortunate circumstance
for young Howard was any thing to happen that might separate him from his
father. Meriel is not what is generally termed a fine girl; she is rather below
the middle size, and inclined to on bon point; her face is not regularly
pretty, but she has a lovely pair of hazel eyes, through which you may read
every emotion of her soul. She is fair, a fine glow of health animates her
face, and a smile of good humor plays about her mouth; a luxuriant quantity of
chestnut hair hangs in ringlets down her neck and shades a forehead that is
ornamented with the most beautiful eyebrows I ever beheld. Yet she is not
striking at first sight, indeed, you would rather be tempted to say she was
plain, but the moment she speaks you must be charmed. I have heard women sing
who have fine voices; but I would rather hear Meriel read a pathetic tale than
listen to the finest singers in England. The melody of her voice, is so ^oft
that she makes the meanest subject interesting; her countenance intelligent,
her mind fraught with every gentle, generous virtue, but withal she is the
pure child of nature. I could not have believed it possible for a girl of
sixteen to be so artless and innocent. An entire stranger to deception, she
seeks not to disguise one emotion of her heart. She loves neither her father
nor her brother. I cannot blame her, their souls are not congenial with her
own. Yet does she strive by respect and attention to atone for the deficiency.
I am so charmed with this dear girl, who is a brilliant model of her mother's
virtues; with this difference, Mrs. Howard's are passive virtues: Meriel's will
prove active ones. I am so captivated with her gentle innocence that I find I
can no longer remain in the family: Lucetta aid me to fly from infamy, from
shame, from a black train of evils that I see ready to encompass me. You start,
you do not understand; nor can I at present assume sufficient courage to
explain my meaning. Oh! my sister, I am not worthy of your affection, I cannot
pursue the subject. Adieu, I will write again soon.

G. TALBOT.

LETTER III. MERIEL to CELIA.
Woodbine Cot, May 3 d, 1775.
CELIA, if you value your own happiness never desire to quit the convent. When
I was there, I imagined my father a worthy character. Had I never left it, I
had never been undeceived: indeed, it is a sad, sad thing to reflect on, but
this man, whom nature, religion, every sacred tie obliges me to respect and
love: this very man is a libertine, and an infidel. He came one Sunday morning
into the library, where I was reading. "Well my pretty rose-bud," said he, for
he generally calls me by some such unaccountable name; "What are your studies?"
"Rowe's letters," I replied. "What do you read such stuff as that for?" cried
he, pulling the book out of my hand, "'It Is time enough for you to read such
serious nonsense some forty or fifty years hence, and here is that stupid
fellow Harvey too," continued he, taking up a book that lay upon the table.
"Why child, these ridiculous books are enough to turn your head; they might
have done well enough in a convent, but surely you may find something more
amusing in this collection." "I read these serious authors by choice, sir,"
said I. "You have a strange taste for a girl of your age then," he replied,
"but I don't believe you speak as you think. Come tell me honestly, Meriel,"
continued he sitting, down beside me, "did you never get any novels or romances
in the convent?" You may suppose I stared at him, for you know we never saw a
book of the kind, during the whole time we were together; of this I assured
him: to which he replied; "then that easily accounted for my taste." He then
began to speak of religion, and the sacred writings in a manner that made me
tremble. At first, I thought he meant only to try me; but finding the more I
opposed his sentiments, the stronger were the arguments he advanced to confute,
as he said, "my foolish bigotry, to a subject which was not worthy the
attention of any but old women and children." I rose from my seat and bursting
into tears, cried, "oh! sir, if these are indeed your sentiments they shock me
to the soul." "Come girl, come don't cry," said he, pulling me toward him; "you
must try to get the better of these superstitious notions, and learn to think
and act for yourself, unbiased by the prejudices of others." I could not answer
for my tears. He took me in his arms and kissed me; but my soul shrunk back
from his embrace. My mother just then passing the window, he left me and went
into the garden to join her. I do not like this Mrs. Talbot, so well as I did
at first; I saw my father take a liberty with her yesterday when they thought
they were unobserved. There was an impropriety in it, which made me shudder;
and a thought darted across my mind which almost stunned my faculties: surely
they cannot be so very abandoned. Oh my poor mother! I fear, this too well
explains the cause of your tears and dejection.

May 5 th.

It is as I suspected, Mrs. Talbot is an unworthy woman. This morning, I arose
earlier than common, intending, the weather being sine, to walk into the
meadows, before breakfast, passing my mother's chamber door I saw it was partly
open; and, looking in, I percieved my dear mother raised upon her elbow in the
bed, the tears streaming down her face, and sobbing, as though her heart would
break. Unable to restrain myself, I rushed into the room and ardently requested
to know the cause of her grief. She hastily endeavored to dry her tears and
compose her countenance, assured me that nothing particular was the matter, but
that she often was seized with those involuntary fits of weeping, for which she
could assign no cause. "Oh! my dear mother," said I, "you cannot thus deceive a
child, who loves you as I do. Long have I noticed the anxiety that weighs heavy
at your heart, and preys upon your spirits. Can you, do you think your daughter
unworthy to be trusted with your sorrows. Believe me I will treasure them in my
bosom as a sacred deposit, and having eased your laboring breast of the
painful burden will pour into it the balm of consolation." "My dear girl, my
only comforter, said my mother; seek not to know what will only" make you
unhappy, I cannot be more so than I am already, said I, for how is it possible
I can be at peace when you are the victim of concealed anguish? "Oh! my child,
said she, I cannot explain to you the nature of my sorrows, without acusing
one, whom it is your duty to respect, I must not make my child despise her
father;" "I will not despise him, I replied. If he can injure goodness like
yours I will pity and pardon him, and pray to heaven to turn his heart." But
where is my father. He has been out all night said my mother. While you were at
Mr. Rowley's yesterday, he went out and has not returned since. Just then I
heard a chaise drive up to the door and looking out saw my father alight and
hand out Mrs Talbot; the mystery is unravelled said I; "go, said my mother, dry
your eyes and appear at breakfast as composed as you can; do not let them have
the triumph of seeing how much they distress us. I did as I was desired, but
when I entered the breakfast parlour, I felt a glow of indignation flush my
cheek, and I could hardly give them the compliments of the morning with any
steadiness of accent. Mrs. Talbot fixed her penetrating black eyes upon my
face; I darted at her a look of anger, she immediately cast them down, turned
pale and seemed much agitated; but whether it was with anger or sensibility I
cannot determine.

May 6 th, 1775.

This Mrs. Talbot is a wonderful woman: her conduct is an inexplicable riddle;
her character undefinable. With some of the finest sentiments that can elevate
human nature, and with the power to act up to those sentiments', she has sunk
herself upon a level the meanest of her sex. I at one and the same moment
admire, love, pity and despise her: but I will inform you of the cause of these
contradictory sentiments. Yesterday afternoon as my mother, Mrs. Talbot and
myself were at tea, my father came in from a walk and throwing a folded paper
into Mrs. Talbot's lap, told her he had met with a traveling pedlar and had
brought her a present. She unfolded the paper, and seeing a piece of fine
chintz, enquired if there was enough for two gowns. "No," said my father, "I
bought but one." "Then certainly, Sir, you did not mean it for me; only your
politeness leads you to offer it; permit me to resign it to the proper owner,"
laying it on my mother's knee. "Then, you refuse my present, Kate," said my
father sternly. "I do indeed," says she, with firmness, "and am resolved on no
account whatever to accept another obligation at your hands. I have too long
forgot what was (...) to this respectable family, to your honor, and to
myself. It is time to amend and fly from errors, which originated in duplicity
on one side, and weakness on the other. I have wrote to my sister, that I shall
leave Woodbine Cot tomorrow, and nothing shall prevent my putting my design in
execution." During the time Mrs. Talbot was speaking, my father stood like one
petrefied; my mother's color went and came alternately red and pale. Indeed I
was afraid she would have fainted. At length she assumed sufficient courage to
ask with tolerable composure, how long she had formed this resolution, which
appeared as sudden as it was unexpected. "Oh! my dear madam," said she, "it is
not a sudden resolution, I have long had it in my mind, but always wanted
fortitude to execute my resolves; it is much easier to rush into guilt, than to
recede from it, and I have long learnt to de^est my own vices without making
one attempt to eradicate them. This dear young lady has completed a
reformation, which your gentleness and virtue had begun. Believe me, madam, had
I sooner known, how very amiable you were, I should never have injured you; but
I was a stranger to your goodness till it was too late to recall my error. When
Miss Howard returned from France, it was impossible to be an inmate in the
house with her and not love her. From loving virtue in others we by degrees
wish to possess it ourselves; because we are conscious that without it we
cannot be respected or esteemed by the worthy part of mankind. I wished to
obtain Miss Howard's friendship; but I knew I was unworthy of the blessing.
From that moment I determined, if I could not merit her esteem, I would at
least avoid her displeasure and contempt; but alas!" continued she; "I am too
late; she already despises me; and I feel I have not even a claim to her pity."

"For heaven's sake! what does all this mean," said my father, "who dares treat
you with contempt, or insult you with their pity?"

"No one, Mr. Howard," she replied calmly; "I only say it is what I have a
right to expect; if you remember I told you a few days since that I was
determined no longer to lead a life of infamy; you thought me then in jest;
perhaps you may think so still; believe me, it is of little consequence to me,
what opinion you may form of my conduct; I am anxious only to obtain the pardon
of these ladies, of whose merits I could wish you to be sensible, before you
have inevitably destroyed both their happiness and your own." She then rose
from her seat, and taking one of my mother's hands, and one of mine, pressed
them alternately to her lips, and bursting into a fresh flood of tears, left
the room. My father followed her, and I heard them speak very high in the
adjoining apartment, but could distinguish nothing that past excepting the
words, "never whilst I have life," which were pronounced by Mrs. Talbot, as she
went up stairs, where she locked herself into her own room. My father went
immediately out, nor was he returned while I sat up with my mother, who seemed
more melancholy than ever, and not inclined for conversation. This morning when
we met at breakfast a heavy cloud hung on my father's brow. Mrs. Talbot was not
come down. I went up to call her. The door was open. I went into the room; but
found, by a letter which lay on the table, that she had left the house at four
o'clock in the morning. The clothes and other presents, which she had received
from my father, were packed up in a small trunk and directed for me. In her
letter to my mother, she takes a long adieu, and says there is not the least
probability of our ever meeting again, as she should leave England almost
immediately. It is impossible to describe the rage of my father, when he found
she was really gone. He swore we had treated her ill, or she never would have
taken such a resolution. In vain we protested our innocence. He vented his rage
in the most ungentleman-like terms, on my dear patient mother, who could return
nothing but tears. He is now taking his usual walk. I hope, when he returns, he
will be calmer. I am weary, my dear Celia, and can write no more. Farewell. May
good angels guard you.

MERIEL.

LETTER IV. MRS. TALBOT to LUCETTA ASKHAM.
Woodbine Cot, May 5 th, 1775.
I FOUND myself at the conclusion of my last letter, my dear sister, totally
unable to continue the subject, which I just hinted to you. I wished you to
conceive the whole without descending to particulars, yet how it that possible.
At this moment you think me (...) virtuous, but unfortunate woman; you also
think Mr. Howard the most benevolent, most disintersted of men: ah! my dear
sister, how have you been deceived. But to make you understand more perfectly,
I must go back to the time when I lost Mr. Talbot.

A stranger in London, alone unconnected with the world, deprived of the means
of support by my husband's death. I was revolving in my mind what plan to
pursue in future; when chance introduced me to Mr. Howard. My dress declared me
a widow. He paid me innumerable little attentions, whenever we met at the house
of an attorney, with whose lady I was intimate, and at length from having
frequently called with my friend, who was employed to settle my late husband's
affairs, he assumed the privilege of visiting by himself. To you, who know him
so well, I need not describe either the graces of his person, or his
insinuating address. Perfect master of the art of deception: he conceals under
the mask of integrity and honor every vice which can disgrace human nature:
with that versatality of temper which makes him appear every thing to every
body; with the religious he is grave and solemn; with the gay cheerful and
affable, with the splenetic he can rail at the vices and follies of mankind,
and with the libertine practice those vices himself: though where it is his
interest he can appear devout, yet no man ever concieved a more contemptuous
opinion of religion, or strove with more diabolical earnestness to corrupt the
young and inexperienced heart. When first I was introduced to him, I was told
he was a married man. What was my wonder, then, when after a few visits he
professed a passion for me. I combated his sophistical arguments as well as my
weak reasoning would permit; but alas! I lost ground in every argument. At
length he told me as a secret, which nothing but the most violent passion could
have extorted from him, that he never did, nor ever could love his wife; that
he had married her solely to oblige his father, who was since dead, and that
she was a cold, inanimate woman, fit only for the frigid rules, and solemn
rites of a convent. Then with the most solemn asseverations, he called heaven
to witness that I was the only woman he ever loved; and called down the most
heavy maledictions on his head, if he should ever forsake me.

Lucetta, I was infatuated; I thought him the tenderest, best of men, and
mourned a fate which had united him to a woman he could not love. Poverty and
distress surrounded me. Mr. Howard offered a settlement of fifty pounds a year
and to take me into his family, as a relation of his own. My sister, do you now
concieve the depth of my shame. I accepted his offer, and a letter was
dispatched, to let Mrs. Howard know, he had met with a relation, whose
circumstances were rather embarrassed and whom he had invited home, as he
thought she would prove an agreeable addition to their family. The return of
post brought such an answer as might be expected from a woman, whose chief
study was to please and render her husband happy. When I arrived at Woodbine
Cot, Mrs. Howard recieved me with a mixture of politeness and affection. Never
shall I forget the sensations, which pervaded my bosom, when entering a neat
parlour, she rose to welcome me. Astonishment riveted me to the spot; unable to
speak or move, I sunk into the nearest chair, and had nearly fainted. Figure to
yourself, my sister, a woman, scarcely thirty years old, elegantly formed, with
a countenance animated and prepossessing; her fine blue eyes beaming tenderness
on the cruel betrayer of her peace. Think you hear her in accents soft as the
music of the spheres, by turns cheering and comforting the very woman who had
robbed her of her husband's affections. And surely then, you will not wonder,
if unable to stifle my emotions, I gave way to a flood of tears. "You are too
much affected, my dear madam," said Mrs. Howard, taking my hand. "Do not I
beseech you give way to immoderate grief: when misfortunes are irremidiable it
is our duty to submit without repining: but I flatter myself, the united
attentions of my dear Mr. Howard, and myself, will by degrees restore your
tranquillity. In the mean time, I hope you will consider yourself at home, and
be assured, we shall think ourselves happy in being able in the least to
contribute to your case or felicity." She then led me to an appartment, which
had been prepared for me, and left me, to that repose which conscious guilt
rendered me incapable of enjoying.

The more I knew of this amiable woman, the greater cause I found for
admiration and respect. She being naturally of an open disposition, I was in
the course of our intimacy, made acquainted with the most material
circumstances of her life: and from her I learnt that she had brought a very
handsome fortune to Mr. Howard; and that they had married contrary to the
advice of their friends on both sides, as they had formed different views for
them: but, said she, with a sigh, "We thought love for each other would
compensate for the privation of the society of our other friends."

I had not been long in this family, before I discovered, that I was not the
only woman, who shared Mr. Howard's attention. He was neither careful to avoid
suspicion, nor delicate in the choice of his companions, as almost every female
servant in the family, who was not proof against flattering vows and presents
of finery, had at some time or other attracted her master's notice. The amiable
suffering wife bore all with angelic patience, nor ever once breathed a murmur.
I had the satisfaction to find that my remonstrances had some effect, and he
became more circumspect in his behavior. I could also at any time restrain him
from the pursuit of any new amor by threatening to leave him, and I flattered
myself, that this in some measure attoned to Mrs. Howard for the injuries I did
her. In this manner I continued in the family near three years, when I found an
evident alteration in the conduct of my hostess. Her manner was cold and
distant; she often avoided my society and retired to her apartment, where I
have surprised her weeping. Conscious guilt would not permit me to enquire the
cause of her uneasiness, as I naturally imagined she had discovered my improper
intimacy with her husband: but one day while we were at Bristol, I overheard a
conversation between them which determined me to quit a life, at once so
repugnant to honor, humanity and religion. It was one morning, as I was
preparing to enter the breakfast room, the door of which was not quite shut,
when I heard Mr. Howard in a high key reproaching his wife for not behaving so
kindly as formerly to me. I wished to know in what manner Mrs. Howard spoke of
me, and therefore descended to the meanness of listening. "My dear, Mr.
Howard," said she, "how is it possible for me to behave with cordiality to a
woman who I am well convinced has usurped my place in your affections; and though
I am willing acknowledge the many amiable traits in her character, I cannot be
blind to that one error, which embitters every hour of my life; nor am I
mistress of sufficient dissimulation, to wear the face of friendship where my
heart feels only dislike, nay almost disgust. I will not scruple to confess, I
once did esteem her: but pardon the expression, if I say, the heart that loves
virtue for its own sake, can never form acquaintance with vice. We may pity,
but we must despise."

"Hold madam," said he, "or I shall be led to suppose you despise me."

"No, Mr. Howard," said she, with (...) animated voice, "you are the chosen
friend of my heart, the father of my children, the husband of my affections, I
have promised to love, to honor, and obey you, and heaven is my witness, I
never have failed in one of those points: to cease to love you is impossible;
to obey you is the pleasure of my life: but, pardon me, if your own conduct has
forced me unwillingly to own, I can no longer honor you (...) peace has been
broken by your ill humor, my fortune dissipated by your extravagance, nay
lavished on the most disolute of my sex, until your family is reduced to the
most mortifying circumstances: my child, my beloved Meriel obliged to be
educated far from me; because her father's morals were too vitiated to be a
proper object for the contemplation of a young and innocent mind."

Here she wept, and Mr. Howard not being able to make a just defense, flew into
a violent passion, as was his usual custom, swore she was a most unaccountable
woman, and wondered at his own patience in bearing with her so long. This
undeserved reproach awakened her stifled passion, and she answered with
intrepidity.

"No, sir, it is my patience is to be wondered at, but do not irritate (...)
beyond the possibility of submitting any longer, I fear I have been wrong in so
long bearing my injuries in silence; perhaps, you think, because I appeared
blind to your immoral conduct, I countenanced it. Let me undeceive you. Mrs.
Talbot should not so long have remained under the same roof with me, had I not
feared, that by depriving her of an asylum, I should injure her reputation and
drive her into an inhuman world, where one false step is never forgiven, and
she might have sunk into the lowest abyss of vice and infamy. I flattered
myself my gentleness might have reclaimed her. I knew, alas! too well, the
inconstancy of your nature, and had determined that when forsaken by you, she
should not want a friend to snatch her from everlasting ruin."

I was so overcome by this generous declaration, that I was forced to catch
hold of the ballustrade of the stairs, to prevent falling. A sudden sickness
came over me, and I could not distinctly hear the remainder of their
conversation; but, thank heaven, I profited so much from what I had heard, that
I resolved no longer, by my presence, to wound a heart so replete with
benevolence toward me. I did not enter the par^our; but returned to my own
apartment^ and, sending an apology for not appearing at breakfast, revolved in
my own mind a variety of schemes, for my future subsistence; but could think on
nothing that appeared in the least probable of success. That afternoon Miss
Howard arrived from France. Had my mind been ever so depraved it must have
returned to virtue after an acquaintance with this dear girl; I therefore
became more firm in my resolves; and having formed an acquaintance with an
elderly lady, of whose sense and goodness of heart I had a very high opinion; I
determined to disclose every particular of my situation to her, and ask her
advice in what manner I should proceed. She heard me with attention, and was
friendly enough not to attempt to paliate my errors. She placed my conduct in a
proper light and encouraged the remorse which was already awakened in my bosom.
She then opened a scene of comfort to my distressed imagination, and having
advised me to return with the family to Woodbine Cot, to prevent any ill
natured remarks among our acquaintance, and afterward to pursue the plan which
she had laid down. Yet, will you believe it, when I returned to this place I
felt my resolution slacken, and found I was relapsing into my former errors;
but this morning the dear amiable Meriel has awakened my sleeping conscience,
and I am determined to leave the family immediately. I went into the garden
after breakfast and found her weeping in a little arbor. "In tears, my dear
little girl," said I. "Have I not cause for tears," she replied, "is not my
beloved mother unhappy?"

"Unhappy!" said I, with an accent of surprise, willing to try if she was
acquainted with the cause.

She fixed her expressive eyes on my face, and replied emphatically; "surely I
need not tell you, Mrs. Talbot, that she is very unhappy; for you profess
yourself her friend, and friendship is quick sighted in discerning the sorrows
of the person esteemed: true friendship is also eagerly anxious to remove the
cause of grief from the bosom of those they love, though by so doing, they
plant a thorn in their own."

I could not answer her; I did not even attempt it; but pressing her hand in
silence retired to another part of the garden.

On Tuesday morning, at four o'clock, I shall expect you will send a man and
horse for me. I shall come but poorly provided with cash, as I am resolved to
leave my settlement behind me, as likewise every present of value, which I have
received. I will not impoverish the family which I have already irreparably
injured. But do not think I shall come to throw myself on you for support. No,
my sister, I have the abilities necessary to earn my subsistence, and they
shall be exerted. I shall stay only one night with you, and then proceed to my
kind friend at Bristol. As to the remainder of my plan, if I succeed to my
wish, you shall again hear from me; if not, I shall sink at once into total
oblivion. Farewell, my sister, forget my errors; remember only (...) penitence,
and let me share your prayers, that it may be sincere and lasting.

C. TALBOT.

LETTER V. MERIEL HOWARD to CELIA SHELBURNE.
Woodbine Cot, May 7 th, 1775.
MY father is more composed, than I could imagine possible in the absence of
Mrs. Talbot; but he is still gloomy and unsocial with my mother; however, I
cannot but flatter myself that time, and her unwearied assiduities, will regain
his affections; and was that to be the happy result of her patience and
forbearance, how great would be our felicity.

Miss Dolly Pringle has just called to solicit my mother's leave for my
drinking tea with her. It is but seldom I am permitted to go without the
boundaries of our garden, except to accompany my father or mother in a retired
walk; but for a wonder, I am this afternoon to be trusted unaccompanied by
either. I cannot think what my father is afraid of, that he should be so averse
in my taking any kind of innocent recreation. I am sure, if I know my own
heart, I have no improper wishes lurking there; yet he is always saying such
strange things about love and lovers that it seems he would be angry if a man
was only to speak civil to me. Dolly knew this odd way of his, and so did not
tell him that her brother was expected to come from London for a few days, and
most likely would arrive this afternoon. "I am sure," said she to me, "you will
like Harry vastly, and if he is not smitten, I shall be surprised. Pray Miss,"
continued she, "were you never in love?"

"In love," said I; "really I don't rightly comprehend what you mean by the
word."

"La! that is vastly odd; but never mind my dear; half an hour's conversation
with my brother will explain it better than I could in a whole day."

"But why Miss Pringle, must your brother talk to me of love; I should suppose
there were many more interesting subjects."

"La! Miss," she replied something tartly, "you talk like a child I think;
(...) what should a gallant young man say to a beautiful young lady, but that
he adored her; or when did you ever read of a young gentleman being left to
entertain a lady, for half an hour, but he fell at her feet, called her a
divinity, and vowed to love her while the vital fluid warmed his heart."

"Bless me!" said I, "I declare I never read such a thing in my life."

"Surely then," she replied with a look of surprise; "you never read the divine
history of lady Frances and lady Caroline, or the loves of Edward and Harriet?"
"No, indeed," said I, "I have never even heard of them."

"Oh! my dear girl, then," cried she, in a sort of ecstasy; "you have a pleasure
to come, of which at present you can form no idea: I will lend you the books;
but you must not let your father see them."

And that you may believe me Celia, I shall not; for he is always ready enough
to abridge me of any thing that can afford me pleasure. As to my dear mother, I
am sure she will gratify every laudable wish of my heart; and sure if Miss
Pringle has recieved so much pleasure in the perusal of them, they cannot be
improper books; at any rate, when one hears a great deal about a thing, one
naturally longs to see it. But after all it appears to me very odd that a man
and* woman cannot converse together without making love: I think it is a very
foolish (...), and in my opinion a very fallacious one; for now I remember, Mr.
Verdome traveled all the way from Bologne with me, and never said a syllable
about love or adoration. To be sure Mr. Verdome is almost fifty years old; but
I should not suppose that would make any great difference.

May 8 th.

Well, to be sure I do begin to be a little better pleased with the society of
our neighbors than I was at first; indeed I feel my heart much lighter since
Mrs. Talbot left us, for I see my dear mother looks happier; and if she is
happy I shall be so too. I spent a very agreeable evening at Mrs. Pringle's,
whose son arrived, just as we had sat down to tea; I thought him a very
pleasing young man. He is an ensign in the army, and has a military, manly
countenance. I know not how it was, but whether from what Dolly had said in the
morning, or whether from my not being accustomed to the society of men; yet I
felt myself awkward and embarressed; however, as Mr. Pringle did not say any
thing particular, I soon recovered myself, though when Mrs. Pringle and her
daughter left the room for a few moments, I was frightened to death lest he
should make love to me, and you know, if he had I should not have known what to
say to him. This fear, I am sure, made me look like a fool; for I felt my face
glow like scarlet. I dare say he thought me an idiot; well, it is of little
consequence to me what he thought: only you know one don't like strangers to
form an unjust opinion of our mental faculties.

Miss Pringle lent me the books which she promised: I did not dare to read any
before I went to bed, as my father often walks round the house to see if all
the lights are out; and if he had caught me reading, he would have immediately
taken the books from me, for he has lately taken it into his head that I read
too much, and that I shall be good for nothing, if I am suffered to pore so
much over a parcel of musty old authors. So, I locked up my new acquisitions in
my closet, and arose two hours earlier this morning to peruse it. Re^ly, Celia,
these young ladies who write so much, and so prettily to each other, must be
very amiable and lovely, for you must know the whole book is (...) letters, it
is indeed a charming history; you cannot think how much I cried whilst I was
reading. Surely, said I, at one time, it must be a sad thing to be in love; and
yet unhappy as it makes many, every body seems to be affected with this strange
passion; it appears to be their whole business. But my father is gone to walk
and my mother retired to her apartment, which she does almost every afternoon;
so, I may now snatch an hour or two to read a little more.

May 9 th.

Well, Celia, would you believe it, after having cried myself almost blind
about the the distresses of the dear ladies, whose history I have been reading,
I was agreeably surprised to find, in the end, all parties were made happy. I
declare I was very much delighted, and cannot say but I should like to go into
more company, and see a little more of life; for then perhaps I should meet
with some such charming women as lady Frances and lady Caroline. Celia, I might
also be admired by some fine gentleman, as they were; for I find country girls
are as much engaged with love and lovers as the great ladies. I wish I could
convey these books to you; or that you could get some just like them. Perhaps
these were the kind my father meant, when he talked about romances and novels;
but yet that cannot be, as this is a real history, the characters drawn from
life. Miss Pringle has promised to lend me some more of the same sort, and some
plays; so I think I shall pass my time much more agreeably than before; though do
not think I mean to neglect those authors our dear sister Constance so
strenuously recommended to my notice. No, no, my friend, I will not neglect the
useful studies of history, geography, and far more necessary duty of public and
private devotion; and now I am on the subject of devotion, I must just mention
something in my father's character, which is to me unaccountable. Though he
talked to me in the profane style I have related in a former letter, yet to my
mother and the families who visit us, he pretends to have a high veneration for
religion and religious subjects, and as we live a considerable distance from
the church, he makes a practice of reading the morning service to the family;
though perhaps the moment he has closed the prayer book, should the most trifling
thing happen to ruffle his temper, he will burst into fits of ungovernable
rage, and swear in such a horrible manner, that I shudder to hear him. There is
a little boy, whom he has taken into the family, and whom he takes great pains
to teach his catechism, etc. I have seen him whip the poor lad unmercifully for
innocently humming a song tune on a Sunday morning, when he himself lives in
the constant breach of almost every duty the christian religion lays days down
for our observation and direction. Are not these inconsistencies, Celia? Surely
the father of children, the master of a family, should set a good example, or
he can never expect others to attend to duties he so evidently appears to
disregard.

My dear old nurse, Deborah, arrived yesterday, from a visit she has been
paying her friends ever since our return from the continent. She enquired when
I had heard from you; desires you will not forget her. Of this I assured her,
she need not be afraid. Her return is another source of comfort to me, as my
mother says she shall continue in the family as long as she pleases, and you
know the affection I have contracted for her, from her attendance on me the
whole time I was abroad, indeed I consider her almost in a maternal light, her
fidelity and attachment to our family has been ever unshaken.

Miss Pringle called this afternoon, and we walked in the garden together near
an hour, during which time she told me her brother was greatly struck with my
person, and that he had told his mother, if he thought I would return his
passion, he should immediately relinquish the idea he had formed of marrying a
woman, to whom the whole family had the greatest dislike, as she was ignorant,
low born and without fortune. "How happy shall I (...) my dear Miss Howard,"
said she, "to call you sister."

"Bless me," said I, "how can you talk so, you know I must not think of
listening to a lover without my father's permission."

"Your father indeed," cried she laughing, "I wonder what your dear little
simple head will fancy next: why child, he would forbid me the house if he only
suspected such a thing; and you know my dear Meriel," (she continned in a soft
soothing accent) "you know, we are bosom friends and sworn sisters and it would
be very hard, you know, to be separated, perhaps forever."

"Indeed Miss Pringle," said I, "my heart feels grateful for the friendship you
profess for me, and I should be very sorry to be deprived of your society."

"Well, then my dear," said she, "take this letter and don't let either your
father or your mother see it." I would have refused the letter, as I feared it
would be improper to take it; but my father just then entering the garden, I
dreaded his anger which is awakened at the most insignificant trifles, and is
always impetuous: so I hastily put it in my pocket.

When we returned to the house and Miss Pringle was gone, he cried pettishly to
my another; "what does that girl do so often here? I shall have Meriel spoiled
by her nonsensical chatter; besides I will lay a guinea there is an intrigue of
some sort contriving between them; I never knew two girls allowed to be so much
together but they hatched mischief." "If you do not like Dolly Pringle,"
replied my mother, "we will try to drop her acquaintance, but you must
consider, Mr. Howard, Meriel must have some society." "Why, pray what society
would she have," said he, "are not you always with her, and has she not plenty
of needle work to do? let her stick close to that, and she will not want to be
gadding and gossiping: she is at present a stranger to the world, and the less
she knows of it the better." This unkindness does not grieve me as it would if
I loved him; but it gives me pain to see how much it affects my mother. I sat
down to supper in silence, and when it was finished, retired as usual to my own
room, where I haistily broke the seal of my letter, and found it wrote in such
a charming style, so tender, so lively, I read it over half a dozen times, but
could not determine whether to answer it or not. Good night Celia, it is eleven
o'clock, and I dare not write a moment longer.

MERIEL.

LETTER VI. MERIEL HOWARD to CELIA SHELBURNE.
Woodbine Cot, June 17 th.
I HAVE been very unhappy, Celia, since I wrote last; indeed I did not know
whether I should be permitted to write to you again: nor could I now enjoy that
satisfaction if good Deborah had not procured (...) pens, ink, and some paper;
which she (...) on conditions of seeing all I wrote; and (...) have left my bed
at the early hour of four, to pour forth my complaints to my dear Celia. In my
last I told you I had recieved a letter from Mr. Pringle, declaring himself my
lover: I will own I was very much pleased with it. Though at first I hesitated to
answer it, yet, when I read a few more books, which Miss Dolly Pringle sent me
by means of our dairy maid, and I found that none of the young ladies mentioned
in them ever hesitated at answering their lover's letters; I ventured to write
a few lines in reply to one which he sent me requesting me to meet him one
night after the family were in bed, and in which he told me, Lettice the maid
would come and let me know, when all was quiet in the house, and that she would
go with me to the place he had appointed for our meeting. Indeed, Celia, I did
not think any harm; so I wrote and told him if his sister would come with him,
I would meet him, for I wished very much to see Dolly, and I knew I should not
have another opportunity very soon.

When we met, his manner was so tender, his language so pathetic, and the
tender attentions of his sister so like what I had read, that I could not help
confessing that I pitied him, and that if it would in the least alleviate his
suffering, I would meet him there again. We went on thus for some time, when
overpowered one evening by his entreaties, I consented to go with him to
London, where he promised to marry me. Dear, dear, Celia, I tremble even now,
when I think of what followed. The next day we had just done breakfast, when an
elderly gentleman who has a great regard for my father and mother called, and
telling the latter he had something very particular to say to her, they walked
together into the garden. When they returned, I saw my dear mother, oh! I shall
never forget it, I saw her look extremely angry, her eyes darted at me such
indignant glances, that my very soul felt humbled within me, I could have
fallen at her feet and entreated to know the cause of her anger: for indeed,
Celia, I did not think, if she had even discovered my correspondence with young
Pringle, that she would have been so very much offended, especially as I could
appeal for a precedent, to the conduct of so many amiable young ladies of even
rank and fortune. But the moment Mr. Sutten was gone, she asked me in a tone
that rent my very heart, how I dared either to receive or write letters without
her knowledge. Her anger overpowered me; something rose in my throat and
prevented my speaking, I thought I should have died with sorrow, when she thus
continued, "Unkind, ungenerous Meriel, thus to (...) the confidence your mother
had placed in you. How, degenerate girl, have you dared to violate the laws of
female delicacy, by openly avowing a passion for a man to whom you are almost a
stranger, and even to make yourself ridiculous by writing such letters to him
as renders you the jest of the whole village." "Oh! my dear mother," said I in
a voice almost choked with sobs; "indeed I did not think any harm." "Perhaps,
Meriel," said she, "had you stopped here, I might have forgiven you: but know,
false disembling girl, I have discovered all your illicit plans, you have left
your father's house at hours, when modesty would have shrunk to venture out,
without a proper protector: and, to complete your imprudence, this very night
you had designed to quit a mother, whom you have pretended to love and respect,
and to throw yourself entirely into the power of a wretch, who regards you only
as a vehicle, through which he may come at the possession of your fortune."

I fell at her feet and would have taken her hand; but she snatched it from me,
and and rising from her seat left me weeping on the ground.

"Unworthy girl," said she, as she left the room, "go hide yourself from my
sight, for you are become odious to me. Never, never, child, can you regain the
confidence you have lost. I had flattered myself with finding in you a
comforter and tender filial friend; but you have added another wound to a heart
already lacerated by many sorrows."

When my mother was gone, I laid my head upon a chair and continued weeping. In
this position my father found me. "So, Miss," said he, sternly, "I find you
were for providing a husband for yourself; you were resolved to lose no time;
but pray what will you say when I tell you this fine lover of yours is already
married and has been so these two years."

"Married, sir" cried I, raising my head.

"Yes child, married, though his friends were unacquainted with it, but this
morning I hear his wife is arrived from London, with one child, to solicit that
support which he has inhumanly refused her." I made no answer, but returning my
head to its reclining posture, continued weeping without intermission. "Ah! my
poor little Meriel," said he, in a tone of voice more soft than usual, "I am
afraid this naughty man has made great havoc with your heart; but, come, come,
you shall not wear the willow long, we will find another lover for you soon."

"Indeed, sir, you mistake the cause of my tears," said I. "It is not the loss
of all the lovers in the world would grieve me half so much as the fear of
having forever forfeited my dear mother's affection."

"Well, well," he replied, "don't let that vex you; if she is unkind, I will
endeavor to atone for it. To be sure, she is very rigid in her notions, but I
dare say, when she sees you heartily repent your fault, she will overlook it
and love you as well as ever."

He then left me, and I retired to my apartment, where Deborah told me my
mother had been, and had carried all my pens, ink and paper away with her. Ever
since she has been cold, distant, nay almost unkind. Oh! my dear friend, what
shall I do to regain her affection, and convince her my repentance is sincere.
Indeed, she is to me the dearest object upon earth, and her happiness shall
henceforth be my only study.

My father, when my mother is present, treats me with equal rigor; but, when
we are alone, he is more gentle. Once or twice he has come to my apartment when
she was out, and even brought me some books; among which were some French
novels. Even my brother has heard of my imprudence, and has wrote to my mother,
enquiring the truth of the report; but he does not write as if he wished it
false. I do not think he loves me; he had expected a legacy from Mrs. Mirvan,
but the whole of her fortune being left to me, has created envy and jealousy in
a bosom, which I had once flattered myself I should find warm with friendly and
fraternal love: and yet, Celia, if he did but know my heart, he would see he
had no cause to envy me, except he should envy those delightful sensations
which I shall feel when I come to the possession of my fortune, in saying,
brother, it is equally yours, command it to its utmost extent.

Deborah has promised me to get this letter conveyed to the nearest post town.
When you write, direct under cover to Mrs. Deborah Ellis, to remain at the
office till called for, I dare not let my mother know I correspond with any
one, least she should discover by what means I got the materials for writing,
and poor Deborah would suffer for her affectionate indulgence. I have no
employment, no amusement, half so agreeable as scribbling to my Celia, so do not
be impatient at the length of my letters.

MERIEL.

LETTER VII. DEBORAH ELLIS to CELIA SHELBURNE.
Woodbine Cot, July 24 th, 1775. DEAR MISS,
I HOPE, you will pardon this freedom in a poor old woman, who is almost broken
hearted, at an accident which has distracted the whole family. I hardly know
how to tell you, because I know you loved and valued my dear young lady; and so
indeed must every one who knew her merits, though since she has returned from
France, I have heard her ridiculed for virtues which few, if any, endeavored
to imitate; and have seen her drawn into errors, by those who, envying the
superior qualities of her heart, endeavored to bring her more on a level with
themselves. She showed me the last letter she wrote to you; for it was only on
condition of seeing all she wrote, that I supplied her with the means of
following her favorite amusement. The sternness of her mother still continued;
and the poor young lady was abridged of the pleasure of even walking beyond the
limits of her father's garden. Mr. Howard's conduct, toward the dear girl, was
altogether unaccountable, sometimes harsh, unfeelingly reproaching her for her
intended error; a method, in my poor humble opinion, by no means calculated to
lead her to renounce the attachment, which hurried her to so improper a step.
At other times, he turned the whole affair into ridicule, and conversed with
his daughter in a gay familiar manner; but though she trembled at his anger, she
never expressed any satisfaction in his company when good humoured; but rather
wished to indulge in solitude and study. About ten days since my mistress was
sent for, into Essex, to a relation, who was extremely ill. Mr. Howard did not
accompany her: she set off in the afternoon, and he having procured a chaise
took Miss Meriel out for a ride, an indulgence she had never experienced since
her residence at this place. When she returned she seemed very melancholy, and
said her spirits were much oppressed, and her mind harrassed with terrors, for
which she could by no means account. She supped with her father and retired at
her usual hour. Mr. Howard sat up much later than common, and to my great
surprise, when I carried in his candle, he seemed intoxicated, though he had been
alone and seldom gave way to excessive drinking, unless he had been led into it
by company. I heard him go into his apartment, and then went to bed myself,
where the fatigue of the day soon made me fall asleep. About two o'clock I was
awakened by Miss Howard, who in a shivering voice asked me if I had not heard a
noise in her chamber, said, she was greatly frightened, and would, if I
pleased, stay the remainder of the night with me. I helped her into bed; she
was cold as death, trembled excessivly, and soonfell into a convulsive hysteric
fit. Greatly alarmed, I called up one of my fellow servants, and by repeated
applications of hartshorn, vinegar, etc. brought her to herself; she would give
no account of the cause of her fright; but seemed to mourn some heavy
misfortune, and repeatedly wished herself with you in the convent again. She
rested but little all night, and the next morning was so indisposed as to be
unable to rise, and was confined to her room for several succeeding days. One
day after she had ventured down stairs; I asked leave to go a few miles, on
some particular business, where I was detained all night, by reason of a
violent storm. Rising early in the morning, and walking home before any of the
family but the house maids was stirring, I went up immediately to see how my
dear Miss Meriel was, for I had been very uneasy about her all night, knowing
she was terrified at thunder, and would not dare to express her fears to her
father, who would only have ridiculed them. On entering the room I was alarmed
to find the bed in great disorder; many of her clothes laying about the floor,
the window open, and my beloved Miss Howard gone. Observing the sheets fastened
to the bed-post, I naturally imagined she must have slid by them into the
garden, and looking out at the window I saw one of her shoes lay on the ground.
Convinced now, of what before I had only conjectured, I gave a scream of terror
which alarmed my master, who came half dressed, pale and trembling into the
room, exclaiming, "for God's sake what is the noise about." "My young lady,
sir," said I, pointing to the window. "Eloped," said he, "with that villain,
Pringle; (...) here I swear never again to suffer" -- "Oh, sir!" cried I
eagerly, "do not swear to renounce her; I Would venture my life upon her innocence;
I am sure some vile means have been used to draw her thus from her duty."

"She is a little hypocrite, nurse," said he, "and will make herself friends
wherever she goes, till she is found out. I suppose she will trump up some fine
story about ill usage, or some devilish thing or other. I (...) to my soul she
had never left the convent; this will go near to break her mother's heart."

About noon Mrs. Howard returned. It is impossible to describe her anguish when
informed of her daughter's absence (I will not say elopement) because I am
sure, if the truth was known, it would not deserve so harsh an appellation. She
sent immediately to Mrs. Pringle's, where she heard that the young gentleman
went away, as he said, to join his regiment the afternoon before. Thus does
this unlucky circumstance tend to make it universally believed, that Miss
Howard and Mr. Pringle are together; but, indeed Miss, I do not think that is
the case; for, certain I am, that a purer heart never inhabited a human bosom,
and that she never would have thought of eloping with a married man: besides, I
am convinced she was not greatly attached to him. He was the first man who had
ever addressed her; she is the pure child of undisguised nature, and being
pleased with his attentions which had the charm of novelty to recommend them;
she fancied herself in love; but after her conduct had been placed in a proper
light, by her mother, she seemed perfectly convinced of her error, and often
used to say, she wondered how she could imagine she loved a man, of whom she
knew so little. "I should think, nurse," said she one day, "that this
unfortunate affair in the end would be greatly beneficial to me, as it will
make me, in future, distrust the emotions of my heart, and be upon my guard
against its deceptions; but I fear it has irreparably injured me in the opinion
of my mother; but I must endeavor, by my future conduct, to regain her
confidence, and in the mean time, submit with patience to that displeasure I am
certain I have in a great measure deserved." Such sentiments as these, madam,
do not argue a depravity of heart. Oh! no, my sweet Meriel is at this moment as
free from guilt as an angel. Three days are now elapsed since her departure,
during which time no tidings can be gained concerning her. Oh! Miss, I fear we
shall never see the dear creature again: some dreadful mystery is certainly
concealed by her thus abruptly leaving her father's house. Would to heaven I
had the means of clearing it up, (...) at the same time removing the cloud
which at present obscures the reputation of the most innocent young lady that
ever existed. I will not finish this letter till tomorrow. If we hear no
tidings then, I shall give her up as lost forever.

July 25 th.

I just snatch up my pen to inform you, dear Miss, that Miss Howard is found,
and is at present in her father's house; but in such a situation that we have
little hope of her ever recovering her senses sufficient to give any regular
account of the cause of her flight, of this we are certain, she was not with
Mr. Pringle.

July 28 th.

I am now sitting by my poor young lady's bed side, who is just fallen into a
sweet refreshing sleep, and shall seize this opportunity to inform you, in what
manner she was discovered and conducted home. A farmer who lives about five
miles from hence, at the skirt of a wood, having occasion for his horse to be
brought from pasture early in the morning, ordered a lad who lived as a servant
with him, to go by four o'clock and fetch it: the lad's way lay through the wood,
and when he returned he declared he had been frightened almost to death by an
apparition of a woman, dressed all in white, whom he saw sitting at the foot of
a tree as he went; that he heard her sigh and groan, and said he supposed it
was the spirit of Fanny Summers, who hung herself there last autumn, and he was
the more positive of this, as at his return, he saw her walking too and fro
with a child in her arms and heard her talk to it. The farmer laughed at the
lad's tale, and rode away without paying any farther attention to it, but a
young gentleman who has a lodgings at the farmers, on account of an ill state
of health, having over heard the boy's story, determined to rise immediately
and go to the wood to investigate the matter farther, as he supposed it might
be some unfortunate human creature, rather than a supernatural being; and
determined, if in his power, to rescue her from misery, and, what appeared more
than probable, a horrid and untimely end. He had not penetrated far into the
wood before he discovered, at the foot of an old oak, a female form stretched
on the ground, and by her side a little spaniel, whose head lay on the woman's
arm, and who at frequent intervals seemed to make most pitious moans. He
approached and found the unfortunate female was in a fit, he gently raised her
from the ground, supporting her in his arms whilst he chaffed her temples with
volatiles, which, on account of his own weak constitution, he always carried in
his pocket. While he was thus employed, the dog fawned upon him licked his hand
and showed every token of gratitude in his power; at length the lady began to
move, and her preserver hearing the voices of laborers passing through the
wood, hallowed to the^^ for assistance. When they came near, the dog flew from
his mistress to one of them, leaping, bounding and howling for joy. What Lubin,
said the clown, how come you here, then drawing nearer to help support the
lady; he started back and cried, body of me, it is Miss Meriel, poor dear soul,
how could she get here, as sure as any thing she has been robbed and murdered.
Almost smiling at the fellow's stupidity, the young gentleman bid him cease his
wonder and assist in bearing her to the farm which was the nearest house. The
dear creaure never spoke during the whole time, indeed she seemed totally
incapable of uttering a word, when they got her to the house she drank a few
spoonfulls of milk, which somewhat revived her, but her voice was still so weak
they were unable to distinguish what she said, and her eyes too plainly
indicated that her mind was disturbed, the good woman of the house had her put
immediately to bed, and Isaac the labourer came home to let his master and
mistress know were their daughter was. When he told the melancholy tale, Mrs.
Howard clasped her hands and cried, my child deprived of her senses! she had
not time for more, for Mr. Howard had fallen on the floor in a fit. I cannot
account for this violent emotion in a man, who had never shown any great degree
of tenderness toward his child, but I think I never saw the fondest parent
more affected.

When the family became tolerably composed, it was proposed that I should take
a chaise and proceed to the farm, when if Miss Howard was able to bear the
motion of the carriage, I was to conduct her home; if not, to remain with her;
and her mother would come to her in the morning. When I arrived at the farm,
and was shown into the room where my dear young lady was; my agitation was so
great I thought I should have died; she had on being first put to bed fallen
into a little doze, but soon started and awoke in great terror, and finding
herself undressed, screamed out, "oh heavens! I am betrayed, I am lost, he is
here; I know he is here, and I will not stay another moment." She then insisted
on being dressed. The neighboring apothecary had been previously sent for; he
felt her pulse and declared that the disorder lay entirely on her spirits; that
every nerve seemed convulsed, and she also appeared to be greatly weakened for
want of proper sustenance. She was prevailed on to eat a bit of bread, and
drink a little weak wine and water; after which she became a little more
composed, and had sunk into a profound sleep on the side of the bed. In this
situation I found her; the faithful Lubin laying on a chair that stood by the
bed side, his head stretched out to the pillow of his mistress, whom he had not
quitted for a moment since her entrance into the house. This dog had been
missing ever since Miss Howard's absence, but our minds had been occupied by
thoughts of so much more distressing a nature that Lubin was hardly remembered;
he was greatly attached to her from her first return, and she remarkably fond
of him. I sat down silently on the side of the bed, and looked at her dear
countenance which so lately wore the bloom of youth and the smile of innocent
cheerfulness: alas! how changed, deadly pale where her cheeks and lips, and
only that I percieved she breathed, I should have thought she was no longer an
inhabitant of this world; my tears flowed plentifully. Her sleep, though
apparently sound, was not of long continuance; she shrieked, awoke, and
immediately started off the bed; I caught her hand, she turned hastily round.
"Oh! it is you (...) is it, well now we will go. If you will accompany me, say
so at once, if not I must go without you; for I cannot stay here another
moment. But where is he now," looking wildly round her, "Who are you talking of
my dear," said I, tenderly. "Ah! there is the thing now, I thought you would
want to know his name, but I cannot tell you nurse, so do not ask me; I have
made a vow, a solemn sacred vow, never to wound the peace of my dear, adored,
mother." "But my dear creature you have almost broken her heart by thus flying
from her protection and your father." "Father," said she, "have I a father? Oh!
that I had never been born." She then began to rave in a most incoherent
manner, and declared she would not stay another moment in the house. I took
this opportunity with the permission of the apothecary to convey her home: when
the chaise stopped at the door she looked out, and clapping her hand to her
forehead, cried "yes I see how it is, well, well, it will not be long before I
am released, and till then, I must be patient." I assisted her in alighting,
she leaned on my arm and walked slowly into the house; Mrs. Howard was so
overcome she was unable to rise from her seat. Meriel looked for a moment at
her attentively, then shaking her head in a most sorrowful manner, she cried,
"oh! I see I have afflicted you, but, alas! my own heart is overwhelmed with
sorrow; and then when I think for a moment, there are some remembrances which
must be ever buried in my heart, that torture me so, my brain seems on fire."
Mrs. Howard attempted to speak, but unequal to the task, she clasped her hands
in an agony, and sobbed aloud: Meriel sunk on her knees before her, took both
her hands, put them first to her head and then to her heart; and breathing a
deep sigh, fell lifeless on the floor. We had her immediately conveyed to bed,
where she soon recovered; but a violent fever come on, and she continued raving
all night. Mr. Howard has not yet seen her, he says if the girl's spirits are
in such perturbation, the sight of him, whom she must be conscious she has
offended, would only irritate them more, when she is better I will see her,
said he, and forgive her, that will calm and comfort her.

A physician was sent for; he said quiet and tenderness from those about her
are the chief things requisite to restore her. In the mean time, my dear madam,
said he, I will send her a composing draught; if when she recovers the use of
her reason, you can prevail with her to unburthen her mind, which, I am certain
labors with some painful secret, it would greatly assist and hasten her
recovery.

Thus far, my dear Miss, have I given you an account of this mysterious affair.
What to think of her sudden departure, and being found in such a shocking
situation, we are all totally at a loss. It appears she has been terrified and
extremely ill used by somebody; but even in the most violent paroxisms of her
delirium, she has never mentioned his name. I have one thought that haunts me
continually; but that is so horrible I dare not commit it to paper. Indeed, it
is too dreadful, too shocking to human nature, to wear even the face of
probability.

The medicines prescribed have taken the desired effect, and she has been in a
composed sleep above three hours. I will not conclude till I can inform you how
she appears on awaking, as I know your affection for her will make you
extremely anxious.

She awoke tolerably calm, instantly recollected where she was, but did not
seem to retain any idea of the late unhappy events. "It is late, nurse," said
she, addressing herself to me "is it not time to get up," then pausing a
moment, "I have had such a horrid dream. Oh! I would not pass such another
night:" she then attempted to rise; but finding herself extremely weak, she
continued, "what is the matter; have I been ill?" "Yes, my love," said I, "you
have been very ill, and are far from well now." "Then perhaps it was not a
dream," said she, putting her hand to her forehead, as if trying to recollect;
she was silent for a few moments, then caught hold my hand, and bursting into
tears, she cried, "alas! it was all a reality."

I did not attempt to stop her tears, as I thought they would relieve her. She
asked for her mother; seemed pleased to see her, but was too weak to talk much.
The physician has just seen her, and declares her in a fair way to do well. I
hope, Miss, you will excuse all errors in this long letter, as I thought you
would be anxious to know all the particulars, I have dwelt on the subject more
than perhaps was necessary, but will now no longer intrude.

I am, dear Miss, Your very humble servant, DEBORAH ELLIS.

LETTER VIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Woodbine Cot, Sept. 10 th, 1775.
ONCE more, my beloved Celia, I am permitted to address you; but I will not
address you in the voice of complaint, because I might have been far more
wretched than I am. Much gratitude is therefore due to that benignant power,
who has protected me through many dangers, and saved me from an evil which I
could hardly have endured and lived. My senses too are restored, my life
preserved by almost a miracle; and shall I, surrounded by these marvelous
blessings, dare to repine because I do not enjoy that tranquillity of heart
which young women of my age and fortune in general possess. I do not repine; I
submit to the chastening hand of heaven, I hope with that patience, which is
the Christian's duty. I do not even presume to enquire, why these things are
permitted; but yet my heart bleeds with my recent afflictions, and would fain
seek ease by pouring forth its sorrows to that dear friendly girl, who will
pity and sooth them. You must, long ere this, have received Deborah's letter,
which has no doubt filled you with amazement. It is my sad task to explain to
you the mystery that invelopes my conduct. To no other person breathing will I
unfold my laboring heart: no, not even to kind hearted Deborah, or my my dear
suffering mother: but to you, Celia, to you whose thoughts are detached from
the world, to you who will consider this confidence as sacred: to you I will
venture to disclose a scene, the remembrance of which, even at this moment,
chills the vital tide that nourishes my heart. But you, my gentle friend, well
I know, though struck with horror at the tale I shall unfold, will join with me
in offering to the throne of grace, fervent prayers for the author of my
sorrows. "Oh thou Father, creator of the universe, look down upon him, pardon
his manifold offenses, touch his heart that he may see his errors, and oh! of
thy infinite mercy, blot this last transgression from the book of life." This
is my daily prayer -- but to proceed in my sad task:

The day my mother went into Essex I felt my spirits unusually oppressed, I
rode out in the afternoon with my father, he was extremely gay in his
conversation, indeed, I thought too much so, as he treated some subjects with a
levity which greatly shocked me, and some expressions escaped him which wounded
my delicacy, but this did not so much surprise me as he had frequently indulged
himself in very improper conversation, not only before me, but other young
women, who visited at the house, for which my mother always reproved him, but
he in general turned it off with a laugh. However, as I had no person with me
in the chaise, his manner was extremely embarassing, nay even distressing, for
he saluted me several times, told me he was afraid of showing much affection to
me before my mother, who in her heart hates me; but, that if I was a good girl,
he would not care for my mother, but show me every kindness in his power; that
I should go where I pleased, and do whatever my inclinations led me to.
Astonished at this conversation, I hardly knew what to answer, and was
extremely glad when we got home. I would have retired immediately to my
appartment, but he insisted on my staying to sup with him, saying he had
ordered a chicken on purpose for me. I reluctantly complied. During supper he
drank very freely and would have had me drink several glasses of wine; which as
I was unaccustomed to I resolutely refused. When I had supped he would have me
play him a tune, after which he sung a song more adapted to the taste of a
libertine than the chaste ears of a daughter. At ten o'clock I retired, and,
though greatly surprised at my father's conduct, yet having nothing particularly
heavy on my mind, I soon fell asleep, I never had been used to lock my door,
and you may imagine my terror when being awoke by a noise in the room, I felt a
man's hand take hold of mine; I gave a faint scream, fright deprived me of much
power, but how were my fears increased, when I heard my father say, "hush!
don't make a noise, it is only me." "You, sir," I replied, starting up, "and
what can be the cause of your coming here." I cannot remember his answer,
Celia, but I know he caught me in his arms. I sprang from (...) with a violent
effort, and quitting the bed, the darkness of the night befriended me and I
rushed out of the room into Deborah's chamber. After this I kept my apartment
for several days, nor did I intend to have left it again till my mother's
return, pretending indisposition; but he wrote me a letter, in which he
asserted that he had mistaken my chamber for the housemaid's, with whom he
confessed he had an intrigue. Oh Celia! what a humaliating confession from a
father to a child, sure none but an unprincipled rake could have brought
himself to make it. He begged I would not mention the circumstance to my
mother, and promised amendment in future. Alas! I was deceived by this letter
and again ventured down to my meals. The day Deborah had leave to go out I
spent the chief part below, he was remarkably reserved in his behavior, and
seemed even indifferent and inattentive to me, scarcely speaking the whole day.
At supper I drank as usual one glass of wine and then retired; I felt an
unaccountable drowsiness come over me; but it had been a storm all the evening,
and the almost incessant flashes of lightning, with distant rumbling thunder,
prevented my indulging it. I had partly undressed myself and was sitting on the
side of the bed endeavoring to compose myself, (for I am greatly terrified at
lightning,) when the door opened, and my father entered; he immediately shut
the door and turned the key. To describe my horror is impossible, or to give
you the most distant idea of the scene that ensued; but never to the latest
hour I have to breathe, will it be erased from my memory. My repeated screams
were of no avail. Deborah was from home, and the other maids slept too far off
to hear me. Oh! how often did I wish that the vivid lightning, which every
moment illumined the room, would strike me dead. At length a most tremendous
clap of thunder burst as it were directly over us. It ennerved, even the arm of
hardened guilt, but it encouraged me. I seized the opportunity to fling open
the window and declare, if he did not instantly quit my chamber, I would throw
myself out, and seeing a penknife lay on the window seat, I snatched it up:
"come not near me, sir," said I, "for the moment you lay your hand upon me,
this shall put an end to your existence." my fury which had wrought me almost
to a state of frenzy, intimidated him. "Be patient, Meriel," said he, "shut the
window and get into bed, you will catch your death with cold." "Better be
dead," said I, "than live with dishonor." "I swear," he replied, "by all that
is sacred, if you will go quietly to bed I will quit the room immediately."

"You shall quit it instantly," said I, in a menacing accent; "am I not your
child, and do you dare invade the virtue it is your duty to protect?" Celia, I
felt at that moment as though I could have encountered almost any thing; that I
could have bared my bosom to the stroke of death, and even met the blow with
thankfulness; he saw my increasing frenzy, and trembling unlocked the door and
left the room. The moment he was gone I locked myself in, and overcome with
horror and distress, fell almost lifeless on the bed: how long I continued in
this state of torpor I cannot tell; but the first use I made of my returning
senses was to think of escaping from the house, and in this I was resolutely
determined, when I heard him again at the door demanding admission: the candle
was now gone out, and the window still open; the thought was momentary: I
formed no plan for support, nor even thought of a place where to seek an
asylum; but, starting up, I pulled the sheets off the bed, and, undressed as I
was, slipped by them into the garden. How I escaped, unhurt, heaven alone can
tell: the moment I felt myself on the ground I thanked God for my deliverance,
and going out of the back garden gate, ran as fast as my strength would permit,
as I imagined, toward a neighboring villages but as the day began to dawn, I
found I had taken a wrong road, and was at the entrance of a large wood; I was
afraid to return, lest I should meet my father; therefore, forcing my way into
the thickest part, I found a little hovel, which had been made by some
unfortunate wanderer, of branches and dry leaves: into this poor shelter I
crept, and here first discovered that my faithful Lubin was with me. The little
affectionate animal crept close up to me, licking my hands and face, as though
(...) wished to comfort me; in this situation, my clothes wet, my spirits
harrassed, and nature overcome, I sunk into a slumber. But here I must drop my
pen, for memory no longer bears any traces of the ensuing scenes, till I awoke
in my own bed and saw Deborah weeping by my side. Farewell, I will write again
soon.

MERIEL,

LETTER IX. MERIEL to CELIA.
Woodbine Cot, Sept. 20 th, 1775.
MY lot is hard, Celia, very hard; but I endeavor to keep up my spirits, as
well as I am able, and conduct myself in such a manner as my own heart may
acquit me.

When I was quite recovered from my illness, my mother called me one day into
her dressing room and assured me, she would pardon my elopement, on condition I
would inform her of the cause, and by what means I came in the shocking
situation already described. You may be certain I felt myself greatly agitated,
as I knew I could not give this dear parent the satisfaction she required,
without planting a dagger in her heart. Indeed, my friend, I cannot but feel
thankful, that in my frenzy I did not discover the whole horrid secret, as it
would have only involved us all in much greater distress than we experience at
present.

I remained silent to my mother's question, but could not restrain my tears.
She repeated it; conjuring me, in the most solemn manner, not to trifle with
her, but to tell her what urged me to desert my home and friends.

"Oh! my dear mother," said I, "do not ask, indeed I cannot tell you. Suffer me
to be silent on this subject; and, in every future action of my life, I will
implicitly obey you." "I fear, Meriel," said my mother, "you have some unworthy
reasons for this concealment: tell me, then, who advised you to this imprudent
step, and who accompanied you in your flight?" "No one," said I, "the
resolution was hastily formed, and as hastily executed; but I had no adviser,
no companion, nor do I think I ever went farther than the wood, where I was
discovered."

"Meriel! Meriel!" said my mother, "I cannot believe you. It appears altogether
improbable, that a young woman, without any apparent cause, should form a hasty
resolution of running away; that she should choose a tempestuous night to make
her escape, without a companion, and hide herself in a wood with a design to
starve herself to death. Tell me, child, and tell me sincerely, did you not
once love Pringle?" "I thought I did, but it was a mistake of the heart."

"I fear, Meriel, that mistake has led to your ruin: he certainly accompanied
you in your flight, and my child is lost to honor and to virtue. Is not this
the cause of your obstinate silence: do you not fear that the villain, whom in
your heart you still love, should be brought to answer for his inhuman
desertion of you."

"Oh! no my dear mother," said I, redoubling my tears, "indeed you wrong me, I
never entertained a thought that I should blush to own, and if it was my last
moment, I could, with safety to my conscience, declare that neither Mr.
Pringle, nor any of his family knew of my going away."

"Strange infatuation," said she, angrily, "to assert such falsehoods. Oh
Meriel! I had hoped better from you; but I am sorry to say, in this instance, I
can place no confidence in your veracity." Here my father entered the room, and
would you believe it possible, Celia, he repeated to me every question which my
mother had asked before. Astonishment riveted my tongue. I could not answer. My
silence was accounted obstinacy, and my dear mother left me with these cruel
words: "Dissembling, obstinate girl, I can never love you as I once did, though
I will strive to forgive you."

My father scarcely now ever speaks to me, and seems in his heart to hate me,
as he takes every opportunity in his power of mortifying me; construes my most
innocent actions into faults, and is continually complaining to my mother of my
indolence, and sulkiness, as he inhumanely terms that want of vivacity, for
which he so well knows how to account. This ill humor I could bear patiently,
but my mother's unkindness is worse than a dagger to my heart. I live in
greater solitude than ever; I never go out, and when any company comes to the
family, I in general retire to my own room; for my feelings are often hurt by
the ignorant, I had almost said inhuman questions, that are asked me by people
who have no other interest in my fate, than as it serves to gratify their
curiosity. Next week I expect my brother home from school; he does not return
again, but is to be articled apprentice to a merchant in London. I shall not be
sorry when he is gone, for I expect to suffer greatly from his unfeeling
taunts. Oh! Celia, heaven and you know how little I deserve them; and that
thought shall be my comfort and support. Adieu my friend.

MERIEL.

LETTER X. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, December 19 th, 1775.
YOU are, no doubt surprised to see from whence this letter is dated, and you
will be much more so, when I inform you of the great change that has taken
place in our circumstances, some little time after I last wrote to you, as I
was sitting in my own room, indulging the most painful ideas, I heard a great
confusion below, and, among the rest, my mother's voice repeatedly screaming
for help. I ran down stairs into the parlour, from whence the noise proceeded,
and on entering saw two ill looking men, one of which had seized my father by
the collar, and the other was assisting to drag him away. "What is the matter,"
said I, to the men, "what are you doing with my father?" "Oh! we will do him no
harm," said one of them: "he must only come away with us to my house, at
Litchfield, till he has paid five hundred pounds." "Five hundred pounds," said
I, "why, dear madam," turning to my mother, "to whom does my father owe so much
money." "Oh child!" said he, "your mother knows nothing about the affair, I not
only owe that, but three times the sum; we are inevitably ruined, and all by my
own folly. I have been bound for a friend of mine, a young man, at Litchfield,
who is gone off, and I shall have all his debts to discharge." My poor mother
sat weeping; and, on hearing this account, lifted up her eyes in speechless
agony. I could not bear to see her distress. "It is a large sum to be sure
gentlemen," said I, "but it shall be paid, so let my father remain, and do you
go away for to night; tomorrow we will send you the money." Alas! Celia, how
very little I knew of the world. The inhuman men laughed at me, and asked me,
"when I ever heard of bailiffs letting go their prisoner on the bare word of a
girl." "If you will not take my word," said I, "leave my fahter and take me,
for it will break my dear mother's heart to have him carried to prison; but, as
to me, it matters not what becomes of me." "That will not do neither, Miss," said
they, "we must either have the money or take the gentleman away." Alas!" said
I, turning to my mother, "what can I do? they will not release him." No my
child," said my mother, with more affection in her voice than I had heard for
some time, "we must submit as patiently as we can till tomorrow, and then see
what can be done. My father went away cursing his evil genius. Why will people,
Celia, when they bring misfortune on their own heads, rail at fate; yet you
will find it always the case, and the more egregrious have been their errors,
the more vehement their compalints.

When they were gone, I exerted myself to console my mother, but her only
answer was, "Ah Meriel! what will become of us, I see ruin approaching; I know
of no way to avoid it, and my poor boy, what will he do." "Let me entreat you
my dear mother," said I, "not to let this accident thus distress you: can you
suppose, that while I have the means of living in ease and comfort, I would
suffer my parent or my brother to feel any embarrassment, which it is in my
power to remove. Did I not solemnly promise the dear departed saint, who made
me thus independent, never to forsake you?"

"But alas! Meriel, have you not already broke that vow?" "Dear, dear madam,
forgive, forget, that involuntary transgression; and believe me, there never
was a heart that glowed with more filial love, or greatful tenderness, than
mine does toward you. My fortune is yours, I will share it with you and my
brother to the last shilling; nay to convince you of my sincerity, I would
freely renounce it all, and depend on my labor for support." My mother was
affected, but it was only for a moment, she again assumed a look of coldness,
and told (...) she feared I often suffered the warmth of my imagination to
hurry me into expressions and promises, the nature of which I did not duly
consider. She then bid me good night and left me.

Grieved to be thought so very unworthy, by the person on earth I most loved,
most wished to see happy, I could take no rest all night. As soon as daylight
appeared I arose, and dressing myself as plain as possible, borrowing a black
bonnet of Deborah, I determined to set out for Litchfield on foot; but, fearing
my mother might be alarmed at my absence, I left a note informing her, in a few
words, that I was gone to endeavor to prove myself worthy of her love. During
my walk I revolved in my mind what steps to pursue. Mr. Sutten was joint
guardian with my father: I had no doubt he had been sent for on account of the
arrest, and hoped to prevail on him to advance sufficient money to make my poor
mother easy in her mind. I therefore determined to go immediately to the house
of the bailiff, and learn at whose suit my father had been arrested. From
thence I would go to the creditor and endeavor to prevail with him to take
half the money now, and the rest when I became my own mistress, which,
according to Mrs. Mirvan's will, was to be at eighteen years old. Here busy
reflection arose, and told me how very unworthy of my attention my father was,
but he is my father still, said I, and though he has forgotten his duty toward
me, it does not follow that I am to neglect mine to him: besides, religion
teaches us to reward evil with good; and surely, if there is any way of
awakening the person who injures us, to a sense of their guilt, it is by
showing them an example of christian charity, and good will; besides, my mother
and brother have not injured me, and why should they suffer for the vices of my
father? Occupied by these reflections, I entered Litchfield, and went directly
to the bailiff's house. My father was not up; indeed I did not wish to see him
if he had, so I only made the necessary enquiries, learnt who the creditor was,
and proceeded directly to the street where he lived. Mr. Leeson is a man, who,
for many years, served a nobleman in London, as I have been told, though in what
capacity, I never heard. In his service, he accumulated a considerable fortune,
and married a lady, a particular friend of his lordship's. Soon after he
procured a pension, with which he came down to Litchfield, the place of his
lady's birth, where he is now reckoned a very great man. This was the person
who had occasioned my father's imprisonment. On knocking at the door a servant
appeared yawning, and examining my dress with a scrutinizing eye, asked what I
wanted. "I wish too see Mr. Leeson," said I, "on particular business." "Humph,"
said the fellow, standing with his back against the wall, his hands in his
breeches pockets, "you must wait a good while before you can see him, for he is
not up yet." "Pray friend," said I, "give me leave to go in and sit down till
your master does get up." "You may go down stairs," said he, "if you will, and
when master is stirring, I will let you know."

Humiliating, as it was, I went down stairs, sat down by the kitchen fire and
dried my feet, which were wet, some rain having fallen in the night; my
petticoat was also plashed with dirt. About nine o'clock, a spruce young woman,
in a long white bedgown, came into the kitchen, and looking at me with a sort
of contemptuous sneer, cries, "servant ma'am, pray who may you want?"
Imagining, from her appearance, and the manner in which she put the question,
that she might be some relation of the family, I rose from my seat, and
answered I had business of much importance with Mr. Leeson. "Aye Mrs. Bridget,"
cried a footman, who was cleaning some silver candlesticks, at the dresser;
"when my lady's bell rings, you must let master know, this here young body has
been waiting here ever since eight o'clock." A young lass, in appearance a
menial servant, now appeared, and spreading a fine napkin on the table, brought
the breakfast things, toasted some oat cakes, and Mrs. Bridget and Mr. James
sat very comfortably down to breakfast; but during their repast, neither asked
me if I would partake, though they endeavored to gratify their curiosity, by
asking, how far I had walked, if I had been long in the country, and many other
questions, equally impertinent and insignificant; to all which I answered in
little more than monosyllables. At length the bell rang, and Mrs. Bridget
making a hasty finish of her breakfast, ran up stairs: soon after, the footman
having equipped himself as a valet, went out of the kitchen. I was now once more
lest to myself, but had not indulged reflection long, before the girl, who had
prepared the breakfast, came and sat down, in order to eat her own. She poured
out two cups of tea, got up and held the oat cake (which was almost cold) to
the sire, then casting a look, first at me, then at the table, in a mild
accent, as though fearful of giving offense, said, "I am afraid you have not
breakfasted ma'am; pray eat a bit, and take this cup of tea," hoiding the plate
and tea toward me. "Mrs. Bridget is very proud ma'am, and Mr. James does
nothing but what he thinks she will like; but I thinks your London folks are
all proud; they serves only to make places uncomfortable. Do ma'am take it; I
wish it was hotter and better." "It is very good," said I, taking a bit; for
the poor girl's goodness of heart was so conspicuous that I could not mortify
her by a refusal. She smiled, began drinking her own tea, and continued: "Mr.
James was quite a different sort of a body, I assures you ma'am before he went
to London last summer with my mistress; dear heart, he and I were so
comfortable and happy, but when they came home my lady brought Mrs. Bridget
with her, and ever since" -- She paused; I saw her eyes glisten. Poor girl,
thought I, James is false hearted, he has forsaken thee for Bridget; and yet,
if he had but discernment to perceive the difference between the two hearts,
how gladly would he return to one so gentle and tender. Here I was interrupted
by Mr. James himself, who told me his master desired me to walk up. I bade the
kind hearted girl good morning, and followed James into the presence of his
master.

"Well, young woman," said Mr. Leeson, who was standing with his back to the
fire, and his hands behind him. (Celia I must here digress to give you some
small idea of his person and manner.) A person rather above the middle size, a
face, the features of which, might have been termed regular, and even pleasing,
had benevolence, good humor or politeness been any way discernable in it,
instead of which there was an insolent pertness, a supercilious, self-approving
smile, that to my idea portrayed nothing but ignorance, pride and conceit.

"Well, young woman," said he, "what may be your commands with me."

"You are sir, I understand, the person who has caused Mr. Howard to be
arrested." He answered in the affirmative.

"I waited on you, sir, to make some proposal concerning this affair, in hopes
of being the means of his obtaining his liberty."

"What, do you belong to Mrs. Belmour?"

"Belong to who sir?" in an accent of surprise.

"To Mrs. Belmour; the woman for whom Howard has thus involved himself."

"I understood, sir, that he was bound for a friend."

"Well child, she was his friend, my friend, any body's friend: why sure you
know her."

"Indeed, sir, I never heard of her before: I am Mr. Howards daughter."

"Bless my soul! Mr. Howard's daughter, are you; well I have often heard of
you, though I never had the pleasure of seeing you before. I remember hearing of
that strange affair of your running away after Ensign Pringle, and when he
refused to have any thing to say to you, being afraid to go home again, you hid
yourself in a wood, and went out of your senses."

Celia, can you for a moment suppose what, at that instant, were my feelings;
unable any longer to support myself I sunk into the nearest chair, (for I had
been kept standing) and burst into tears.

"'Pon honor, Miss," said he, "I beg pardon, I did not mean to make you
uneasy; but when one hears such strange stories, one likes, you know, to come
at the truth: 'pon my soul I wish I had been in Pringles place, I should not
have driven such a pretty little kind soul to despair."

During this speech he had drawn nearer to me and had taken one of my hands,
which I drew from him with disdain. "Sir," said I, with as much composure as I
could assume, "you have been totally misinformed about that unhappy affair;
and, pardon me, if I say, that it can be no business of yours, to enquire,
what were the motives of a conduct, which, I find, has cast a fatal shade upon
my reputation; I do not think myself accountable for my actions, to you or any
other indifferent person: it is sufficient that heaven and my own heart acquits
me of evil. I came here, Mr. Leeson, to consult about the liberation of my
father; let me know on what terms that can be obtained, and I am ready to
comply with them.

"He cannot be liberated Miss, (...) "without the debts being discharg^ costs
of suit being paid." "Well, to how much does that amount."

"To five hundred and twenty po (...)

"Well, sir, if I pay you three (...) now, and bind myself by the most (...)
engagement to pay the other when eighteen, will you set Mr. Howard at (...)."

"There is the interest of the (...) Miss, and (...) the hazard, this money
(...) all (...) out of my own (...) Miss, and (...) only a minor you (...)

"I find, sir," said I, rising from my (...) "that I am totally unfit to talk
on these (...), being but little acquainted with (...) world, or what is daily
acting in it; I (...) therefore take my leave, for the (...) and return in
about two hours with (...) Sutten, my guardian, who will better understand how
to settle the affair."

I now returned to the bailiff's house where I learnt Mr. Sutten was with my
father. I desired that he might be informed I was there, and wished to speak
with him; but I must give you the result of our conversation in my next, as I
have many things to attend to besides writing to my Celia. Ah! my dear girl,
times are strangely altered, but, I thank heaven, I have health and more
spirits than could be well expected after the painful scenes I have gone
through; but no doubt I may have many more trials yet to endure. Pray for me,
my friend, that I may have strength of mind to bear them as I ought, so as not
to disgrace the religion of which I am a professor; and be assured, that every
kind wish of my heart is daily offered up for your felicity; and that the
remembrance of the happy, happy hours we have spent together, is ever present
to the mind of your

MERIEL.

LETTER XI. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, January 3 d, 1776.
I HAVE not had a moment to devote to my dear Celia since I dispatched the
last, but as I know your friendly heart shares all the sufferings of your
Meriel, I will now continue my narrative.

When Mr. Sutten appeared, he was greatly surprised to see me at Litchfield,
and when I told him of my visit to Mr. Leeson, he appeared very angry and said,
"with his good will, I should not pay a farthing, and at any rate I should not
have the money, till I was of age; for I might, if I attempted to extricate my
father from his present difficulites, soon be reduced to beggary, and leave
myself without the power of assisting my mother; who was far more deserving my
affection and duty."

"It is on her account, sir," said I, "that I am thus anxious. Her happiness is
bound up with my father's, and while he is under confinement she will be
miserable; besides, Mr. Sutten, she does not think I love her, does not think
me capable of doing a worthy action. Oh! sir, give me the power to convince
her, that my own interest and happiness is of little value when put in
competition with here is."

"My dear miss Howard," said he, "you must confess appearances have been
strangely against you. I will acknowledge I myself have had my doubts
concerning the rectitude of your heart."

"Oh! I know," said I, "there is a fatal mystery involves my conduct, a mystery
which I never can reveal."

"Nor will I desire it," replied the humane Mr. Sutten, "I see at this moment
such traits of genuine goodness, such proofs of a mind, impressed with a just
sense of its duty, that I shall always think you had some very just cause for
your past conduct, nor will I believe it possible for a heart capable of
conceiving such noble, (...), to harbor inclinations derogatory (...) the
honor and dignity of a virtuous woman."

I thanked him for his good opinion, and he proceeded: "You must consider, Miss
Howard, that you are young, very young; you know but little of the world, of
consequence can form no just value of that independence, which, believe me, can
alone secure you friends. Beauty and merit, my dear girl, are oftener a
prejudice than a benefit to the posessors; it is an object of envy to your own
sex; and, sorry I am to add, in general excites no other ideas in the bosom of
ours, than to lead them to endeavor to vitiate those principles they pretend
to adore; let me entreat you, therefore, to set a just value on that
independence, with which it has pleased heaven to bless you; assist your
parents as far as you can, without hurting yourself, and remember, that to
secure the friendship of others you must not need their assistance."

This, my dear Celia, was arguing like a cold philosopher, and a man of the
world; but it was not speaking with the spirit of christianity, or with the
enthusiasm of a heart that glows with benevolence to all its fellow creatures.
The dear lessons which I imbibed at Bologne taught me to regard myself but in a
secondary light, when any thing praiseworthy was to be performed, and to
remember only the (...) us to do as we would be done by and, like the good
Samaritan to pour oil and wine into the wounds of our suffering fellow
creatures; but to proceed:

Mr. Sutten refused to advance a shilling, and I was forced to return to my
mother, disappointed, dejected, and weary.

Two days after, an execution was sent to Woodbine Cot; my poor mother and
myself were obliged to remove to Litchfield, where we took a small lodging near
the house where my father was, where we remained till the estate was sold and
all paid away to the last farthing, nor was even that enough to answer all the
demands that were continually pouring in from all quarters; besides, when the
estate came to be sold, it was found so encumbered with mortgages, etc. that it
would not sell for above half its value. When all was settled, and my father at
liberty, it was determined that we should set forward to London, where my
father insisted we could live much cheaper than in the country, where we were
so well known. There was still the interest of my four thousand pounds, which
as it was at my own disposal, I determined to devote to the support of the
family. All our servants were discharged, poor Deborah too; you cannot think,
Celia, what I suffered on being separated from this faithful woman. She offered
to stay with us without being paid; but my mother would not consent to reeicve
an obligation from an inferior. I thought the resolution savoured of pride; but
we all have our failings, and perhaps pride in some degree, is laudable.

On our arrival in town, we took a small lodging and hired a young woman to do
the most laborious part of our domestic business; the rest' it is my province
to perform; and, believe me, I do it cheerfully. It employs my mind, prevents
my taking melancholy retrospects, and I think contributes to improve both my
health and spirits. We have paid a visit to my father's eldest sister. She is
married to a counselor, who has made a genteel independence by his profession.
My aunt is a woman whose character I do not well know how to develope. She is
in general affable, condescending, and cheerful; and in conversation, gives
evident proofs of a genteel education, and a brilliant understanding; but, with
all is so tinctured with vanity, and though upwards of forty, still possesses
that spirit of coquetry, that in a great measure obscures her good qualities.
Her daughters, Hester and Susan, have had, what is termed a fashionable
education, that is, they can daub a fan mount, jumble the keys of the
harpsichord, and jabber an unintelligible jargon, which they call French. They
are realy lovely girls. Hester, in particular, seems calculated to inspire love
and respect, wherever she appears. Susan is more volatile, but, with all can
make herself extremely agreeable. They are both spoilt by the mother, who,
having taken it into her head, that their beauty will certainly recommend them
to men of rank and fortune, is continually filling the poor girls' minds with
that kind of vanity, and eager desire of conquest, that in general fails of the
desired effect, and repels the admiration, which it is designed to attract.
Their naturally good dispositions are by these means totally preverted, and
instead of being the engaging, innoecnt, unaffected girls, which nature formed
them, they appear, in a mixed company, a combination of pride, vanity, and
self-conceit.

Mr. Mosop, their father, is haughty, distant, and forbidding in his manner,
posesses a great deal, of what is called family pride: has little feeling and
less good nature, yet on the whole is deemed a respectable character. He is
strictly honest in his principles, pays every one their due to the utmost
farthing, but will not bestow the least trifle in charity, because he considers
constantly paying the poor rate to be a sufficient discharge of that duty. The
query with me, is, whether he would pay that sum yearly if not obliged to it;
if not, where is the merit of paying it now. Oh! Celia, how do I hate those
lukewarm hearts. You may remember I always showed a dislike to the cool
doctrines of philosophy. I could never have a good opinion of a person who
regards every surrounding object with the stoical eye of apathy. I am sure they
must possess hearts, rendered impenetrable by nature to those fine feelings,
which, though at some moments they may distress, in general elevate and expand
the soul. For my own part, Celia, I am as weak as an infant, whenever a scene
of distress or happiness meets my eye, I have a tear of sympathy for the one,
and a smile of gratulation for the other; and the smile and the tear, mingle so
sweetly with each other, that every faculty is harmonized by the union, and I
am at a loss to tell which sensation is the most exquisitely delightful. Then
let the unfeeling boast the philosophic calmness of their tempers. I will not
scruple to aver, that though they may escape many an acute pang, that wrings the
heart of sensibility, they know not what true pleasure is. But I am strangely
digressing from my subject. You will wonder perhaps, how I so soon comprehended
the character of my uncle's family: believe me, Celia, it was not by my own
penetration that I discovered them. From my own observations, I should have
supposed Mr. Mossop an agreeable man, his wife a charming, amiable woman, and
the two young ladies the sweetest, most engaging girls in the world; nay, at
this very moment, I feel so inclined to love the whole family, that I think the
disagreeable traits in their characters have been exaggerated. It was to a Mr.
Rainsforth, that I was indebted for this minute delineation of them. This Mr.
Rainsforth is an agreeable young man, whom I have frequently seen at my
uncle's, and at first thought he was partial to my cousin Hester, but I find I
was mistaken in this supposition, as his intimacy in the family proceeds from
his having been school-fellow with young Mossop, whom I have as yet seen but
little of.

Rainsforth is the son of a merchant, in Plymouth. His mother died when he was
an infant, and his father has, within these few years, married a woman many
years younger than himself, by whom he has a young family. Frederic has a small
fortune independent of his father, and is besides a lieutenant in the navy. My
father seems very partial to him; that, you will say, is no great
recommendation; but I flatter myself, Celia, this unhappy father begins to see
his errors, and will, in future atone for them. I think, though our income is
circumscribed, and our situation greatly altered, my dear mother is much
happier than I ever saw her. I cannot boast of much happiness myself;
remembrance, painful rembrance, damps every little pleasure or amusement that
is offered to my notice; yet, when I look round me, and behold many who are
perhaps my superiors in worth and virtue, perishing for want of the common
necessaries of life; oppressed with sickness; surrounded with children, who
look up to them for that support, which they have not to bestow: when I see
these things, my friend, I lift up my heart in humble gratitude to that
Providence, who has, through life, given a portion into my hand, the over plus of
which may, in some little degree, serve to cheer the sons and daughters of
misery. You smile to hear me talk of having any to spare from my little income.
Oh! my dear girl, had I but a shilling in my pocket, I could not call it my
own, if I saw a fellow creature whose heart would be in the least lightened by
sharing it with me.

My aunt has promised to take me to a play. I am fond reading dramatic works,
and form great expectations of amusement from seeing a performance. I will
certainly give you some account of my entertainment whenever I go. Till then,
and ever, believe me affectionately yours.

MERIEL.

LETTER XII. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 3 d, 1776.
I NEVER shall get used to the ways of London, and I am always bringing myself
into difficulties, and foolish embarrasments, through my ignorance; then my
mother is angry, and what in reality proceeds from simplicity of my nature, is
construed into art or levity.

I have been fretting these two hours about a circumstance that has highly
offended my dear mother; and, I am sure, Celia, I did it without a thought of
harm. I had been out a little way yesterday, and was returning in the close of
the evening, when I heard a very genteel looking elderly gentleman enquiring
the way to a street which lay in my way home; the person whom he addressed
could not direct him, and I, unconscious of any impropriety, stepped forward
and told him, as it lay in my way, I would show him the place he enquired for:
he seemed much obliged to me, and said, "as we were going the same way I might
as well take hold of his arm;" but this, as he was quite a stranger, I refused
to do; however, I could not help answering some civil questions, which he
asked, and when we arrived at the street he had mentioned, he insisted on
seeing me safe home: this I remonstrated against, saying, besides giving him
unnecessary trouble, it would make my mother very angry with me. At this he
declared he knew my mother very well, and he was not at all afraid of her
anger, as he was certain it lay (...) his power to appease it. I was surprised,
you may imagine, and indeed very uneasy all the rest of the way, as I knew how
offended my mother would be, at seeing a stranger come home with me. When the
servant opened the door he walked in without any ceremony, and going into the
parlour which was occupied by the gentlewoman who keeps the house, he thus
addressed her, "Servant, my good madam, your lovely daughter here, having
kindly given me an invitation home, I flatter myself we shall spend a cheerful
evening, and you and I, my good mother, shall not disagree, I warrant." Mrs.
Fermor stared, and I felt ready to fink into the earth.

"You are under a mistake, sir," said I, "pray leave me." "What, leave you, my
little dove, when you have been so very kind, no, no! hardly such a fool as
that; come mother, what shall I order in for supper, and what wine will you
drink?" "Miss Howard," said Mrs. Fermor, "I am overwhelmed with astonishment;
how have you dared to bring this gentleman here to insult me?" "Indeed madam,"
I replied, terrified beyond measure, "I am innocent of any intention to offend
you; this gentleman" -- "Why, I can tell the tale as well as you my pretty
one," said he, interrupting me: "you must know, madam, I was coming into
Westminster, and did not rightly know my way, so, this pretty, kind hearted
damsel was so good as to show me, that is all, ma'am and so in return, I am
only grateful, and would willingly treat you with good supper, and as far as
ten guineas would go."

At this moment my father came in, and seeing me stand trembling in the
parlour, a fresh scene of confusion insued, which ended in the whole family
believing I had invited the old gentleman home with me, merely out of levity,
and as Mrs. Fermor called it, an indiscreet frolic. You may suppose how
rigorous my mother was, how angry my father; for though in his heart, he has not
the least regard for real virtue he always pretends great attention to my
conduct, and this evening declared he would rather follow me to the grave than
see me lost to honor.

Oh! Celia, how my soul detests his hypocrisy. It gives me great uneasiness to
find just as my mother began to have a better opinion of me, I have again lost
her confidence; am again abridged of my walks, and at home see only the frown
of displeasure, sit on that face which once beamed on me the smile of maternal
tenderness.

My brother is at length settled in an eminent merchants counting house; I have
engaged myself to pay the necessary (...) when I am put in possession of my
fortune, and, to tell you the truth, Celia I am resolved to stay in my father's
family no longer than that time; but, by some genteel employment' endeavor to
earn subsistence for myself as I am determined not to deprive my mother of
support, by taking the money into my own hands.

March 5 th.

My aunt has just called, and after a great deal of persuasion, has prevailed
with my mother to let me go to the play tomorrow evening; I am to go out this
afternoon with my cousins, to purchase some few articles of dress necessary to
my appearing at a public place, as my aunt always takes my cousins to the most
conspicuous part of the theater. Well, it will be of little consequence to me,
where we sit; I go to see and not to be seen, I wish to be amused myself, but
have not the least ambition to be the amusement of others, either from my
person, dress or manner.

Well, Celia, had I ever been vain of my person, I should now be perfectly
cured of so ridiculous a vanity; but it is happy for me, that I never thought
my face more than passable; and as to my shape, I knew it had not the smallest
pretentions to either grace or elegance; and, by having this humble opinion, I
have escaped a severe mortification; for you know, my Celia, the severest
reflections loose their force, when we can listen to them with good humor, and
return an answer with a smile.

I accompanied my aunt and cousins to a milliner's; Mr. Rainsforth and young
Mossop were of the party. I am astonished how young men can suffer themselves
to be dragged as it were to such places, and have the patience to listen to a
tedious desertation on gauzes, ribbons, lace and a hundred other trifles,
almost below the notice of a rational being. But, if I was surprised at that,
how much more was I to see a parcel of powdered effeminate animals, for I will
not call them men, stuck up behind a counter, measuring a peny-worth of tape or
a smaller quantity perhaps; telling you with the gravity of a philosopher, that
such a ribond become your delicate complexion; such a cap set off your features
to advantage, etc. And, will you believe it possible, that one morning being in
a perfumer's shop, I saw an officer in the army, purchasing chicken gloves,
violet powder and cold cream, aye, and for his own use too, for the master
informed me he had neither wife nor sister, to whom such things might have been
of use.

Well, to the milliner's we went, where Hester and Susan having chosen their
caps. I was pleased with the choice of the fomer, and said I would have one
like it. "Lord, my dear," said my aunt, "how can you think of such a thing,
pretty women you know may wear any thing, but those that are plain should study
what will most become them." "Aye," cried young Mossop, "my cousin to be sure
should not wear any thing that atrtacts general notice." "Here," said Susan,
"here Meriel, is a very pretty cap, I think it will become you vastly." It was
etremely plain, having no ornament but a knott of white satin ribbon.

"You are quite right, cousin," said I, "this cap will certainly suit me best.
I never love to be fine, and what will be becoming on you, will only appear an
affectation of finery on me." I said this with a smile, as I tried on the cap.
Mr. Rainsforth told my aunt he thought true beauty required few ornaments.
"Come, come, you rally," said she, "you cannot think Meriel handsome." He made
no answer, but smiling, sung the following stanza, which, as it contained a
delicate compliment, you will pardon me if I here repeat it.

She is not fair, but yet I swear,
To me she has every grace,
Her lovely mind I always find,
Depicted in her face.
But, my Celia will say my letters begin to be very insipid, when I can find no
other theme than the repetition of my own praise. Forgive me, dear girl, this
time, I will be careful how I offend again.

March 7 th.

My entertainment last night, exceeded my most sanguine expectations; the
house, the lights, the brilliant and numerous audience, on my first entrance,
filled me with silent astonishment; but my cousins declare they never will go
to the play with me again, for at the pathetic and interesting parts, I could
not conceal my emotion. It was Jane Shore. Long did I struggle to suppress my
tears; the effort was vain, and when in the last scene, they drag the just
reconciled husband from the arms of his dying wife, the half smothered sobs
burst forth, and I fell back in an hysteric. You cannot think, how I was
laughed at, and my cousins declare they were so shocked at my behavior, that
they shall be ashamed to show their faces at the playhouse again this season.
"One would think child," said my aunt, in a peevish tone, as I began to
recover, "you never had seen a play in your life before." "Well, you know I
never did," said I, aloud. This completed my disgrace, and my aunt turning
toward the stage, noticed me no more the whole evening.

I think if I were to go again, I should like to sit in some unnoticed corner,
where I could give sensibility the reins, and whilst I wept the woes of those
whose sorrows now rest in the silent grave, I would so mould my heart, as it
should be ever ready to partake and alleviate the afflictions of those who
still move on the busy stage of life.

One thing, my cousins informed me of, which considerably damped my pleasure
during the evening. They said, that many of the beautiful, elegant women, whom
I saw in the boxes, were the slaves of vice, and purchased the gaudy trappings,
by which they were adorned, by the wages of guilt; and that (but I can hardly
think it possible) some of them are so lost to every sense of virtue, that they
come to those public places with no other view than to attract new lovers; and
what is still worse, that in a few years; nay, perhaps even in a few months, I
may see those lovely blooming women walking the streets, subject to the insults
of every brutal passenger, and sinking into an untimely grave, under the
complicated evils of poverty, sickness and disgrace. I felt my eyes fill as
Hester concluded; and do you not pity them, said I: "La! cousin," said she,
"you are the strangest girl; you make one laugh to see you now, with that long
dismal face, talking about pity for such wretches." "Perhaps," said I, "they
had no friend to teach them better, and surely, though we may shudder with
detestation at their vices, humanity still leads us to pity their sufferings."
"You are as old fashioned in your notions, Meriel," said my aunt, who had
overheard as, "as you are in your dress and manner. You will know better child
when you have seen a little more of the world." I must now quit my pen to
assist in some necessary domestic business. Believe me, Celia, there is no
pleasure so agreeable as writing to you.

MERIEL.

LETTER XIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 30 th, 1776.
LAST night, having spent the evening with my father and mother, at my uncle's;
when we were coming home Mr. Rainsforth put a letter into my hand as he handed
me into the coach: I could not well return it or I would, so was obliged to put
it in my pocket; however, I resolved not to open it till I had first shown it
to my mother. When we got home, it was late, and all immediately retired to
bed. I will confess it cost me no little trouble to stiflle the curiosity that
prompted me to open the letter. I put it in a drawer and turned the key; but,
just then recollecting that I wanted something that was in that identical
drawer, I unlocked it again, took up the letter, read the address, looked
attentively if the wafer was dry; and after viewing it on every side near a
dozen times, resolution at length repelled curiosity, I returned it to the
drawer and locked it again, without once recollecting why I had opened it the
second time.

In the morning I waited till we had done breakfast, and then putting the
letter into my mother's hand, said, "I hope, my dear madam, this will convince
you I would not willingly be guilty of an impropriety, or have a concealment of
this nature from my best friend." She took it with a cold look of suspicion,
and having read it, said "I suppose you know the contents." "Indeed I do not,"
was the reply. "You can guess, I imagine," said she; "no gentleman would have
had the temerity to put a letter into a young lady's hand in such a clandestine
manner, had he not been pretty certain that it would not be refused." "Good
heavens!" said I, bursting into tears, "shall I never regain your confidence?
Must every action, however innocent, be misconstrued or liable to suspicion."
"Why Meriel," said she, "will you endeavor to persuade me, Mr. Rainsforth has
never entertained you on the subject of love." "If I may be believed madam,"
said I, with a firm voice, "he never uttered a syllable to me that could be
construed into more than common politeness." "Well, child, read the letter
then, and tell me your opinion of the contents." I fe^ my face glow as I cast
my eye over the letter, which contained a profession of ardent affection and an
offer of his hand, if my father approved the union.

"You ask my opinion, dear mother," said I, "and I will heartily give it; I
think Mr. Rainsforth a very amiable young man, from what little I have seen,
but it is impossible that I can form any just idea of his character, from so
short an acquaintance; If when upon a greater intimacy, I should find him in
reality possessed of those valuable qualifications, honor and benevolence, and
my father and yourself have no objection, I will not hesitate to confess, I
could give him my hand, not only without reluctance, but with pleasure."

"But suppose, Meriel, your father should object." "If you, madam, should also
disapprove, I hope I know my duty too well to complain; since your knowledge of
mankind in general, must make you a much better judge of what will be really
conducive to my happiness, than I can possibly be myself; however, madam, if
such objections should arise, I hope you will inform me soon, that I may early
begin to teach my heart a lesson which, some little time hence, I may find a
difficulty in making it obey." My mother made no answer, and soon after I left
the room; in the afternoon Mr. Rainsforth called; I felt the color flush to my
face: when he entered he glanced his eyes toward me; but I believe they brought
him no intelligence concerning the reception his letter had met with. He had
not been seated above ten minutes before my mother made some excuse to send me
out of the room; I understood her perfectly, and was not in haste to return; in
about an hour I was sent for to make tea, but it was the most unsocial meal I
had ever partaken of, when Rainsforth was present: he was silent; I was
embarrassed, and my father and mother, as is in general the case, spoke to each
other but little. When tea was over he took his leave, when my father
acquainted me I had his permission to recieve his addresses; said he believed
him a man of honor, and, if his friends raised no objection to the union, he
thought the sooner it was completed the better. Does not this eagerness to
dispose of me, show how painful my presence is to him? Indeed I do not wonder
at it, we seldom like to be much in company with those persons whom we are
conscious of having injured.

And now, my dear Celia, you will perhaps wonder at my so readily listening to
an offer of marriage from a man with whom I have so small an acquaintance, but
indeed my situation at home is far from being agreeable. My mother's affections
seem totally alienated from me, and lavished with redoubled tenderness on my
brother, who, I am sorry to say, repays it with ingratitude and disrespect. He
is continually teizing her for money, and though he is conscious there is no
source from whence that money can proceed, except from me, yet he is
continually tormenting me by some ill natured trick or other. If we are in a
mixed company, every word I utter is turned into ridicule. If I sit silent,
then sister is studying something clever to say; if I deliver my sentiments on
any subject that excites my sensibility or veneration, then sister is going to
turn a sentimental actress, or a methodist preacher; even the respect I pay to
my religious duties is an object of ridicule, in which my pretty cousins always
join. If I express my dislike of cards, gadding, and its attendant scandal, and
my love of retirement, study and domestic employment, then he wonders what Mrs.
Mirvan could mean by leaving me a fortune, who could be so well content with --
pounds threescore,
For meat and books, nor ask for more.
To which my aunt often replies, aye, Meriel would make an excellent poor man's
wife; and these expressions often escape them before people, who think it
degrading to be able to perform, for themselves, any of the necessary offices
of life; and would blush to death were they supposed to know how to make or
mend their own linen; for my own part, I cannot help thinking, if those fine
ladies had a little more useful employment on their hands, they would not have
so much time to investigate and expose the actions of their neighbors.

You must imagine, my dear girl, that I lead but an uncomfortable kind of life;
and Mr. Rainsforth always shows that attention to me, and takes my part, with
such delicacy as must unavoidably awaken my gratitude, if not my affection; and
believe me I now begin to feel the difference between a real attachment and the
illusive wanderings of the heart. I know how to value the virtues of my lover,
at the same time I feel a much stronger inclination to act in all things with
that propriety as may render me respected. I feel now the true value of
reputation, honor and virtue, because I entertain a hope of being one day
united to a man, whose character would be injured by my want of either: and,
oh! my Celia, what a blush of confusion often spreads my cheeks, when I reflect
on the letters I wrote to Pringle; how do I shudder at the bare possibility of
those letters one day coming to the eye of Mr. Rainsforth. Wrote, as they were,
at a time when my imagination was so strongly tinctured with the style of the
books I had been reading, that I almost involuntarily wrote the very sentiments
which I had just embibed, with all the enthusiasm of romantic affection. Ah!
Celia, those books drew very deceitful pictures of human life, their false
coloring had raised my expectations and exalted my ideas, of love and
friendship, far above any thing I can find in the little circle acquaintance I
have formed. Perhaps those elevated sentiments and actions may be confined to
people of an elevated sphere of life, for I never remember meeting with any
hero or heroine of a story, but either were at first, or afterward proved to
be persons of rank and fortune: but those are people so far above me, I can
never hope to form any acquaintance with them. I see them daily pass me in
their carriages, surrounded with affluence, attended with respect; yet surely
if I know my own heart, I do not envy them, except, when I think of the power
they possess to cheer the poor wretch humbled by affliction, and to cause the
broken heart to rejoice. Envy, did I say, oh! no, it is not envy, it is a
sentiment I cannot find a name for, it is a wish to enjoy those transporting
feelings myself, without taking from their felicity; it is an earnest desire to
promote, not decrease, the happiness of every human being.

You, my Celia, secluded from the world, in devout retirement, can form but a
faint idea of the many miseries with which this variegated world abounds. Yes,
my friend, and there are pleasures too, but they are not in general suited to
my taste. I hate a crowd; it may for a moment dazzle the senses, but it leaves
no impression on the heart. In my opinion, we cannot experience real pleasure,
if we are devoid of happiness; and of this I am certain, happiness can seldom
be drawn from external objects, but is sure to dwell in the heart, conscious of
performing its duty. That such happiness, may ever be yours and mine, prays
your

MERIEL.

LETTER XIV. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, May 17 th, 1776.
SINCE my last, few incidents have happened, worthy the notice of my Celia,
except that Mr. Rainsforth, being my declared lover, has astonished all my
uncle's family. My mother says she is sure Hester and Susan are ready to burst
with envy; I cannot think it. That dear woman has met with so many painful
incidents, in her way through life, that her naturally amiable temper, is soured,
and she views every thing with a jaundiced eye. My cousins seem highly
delighted with the idea of an approaching wedding, and declare they will be my
bride maids. They are mistaken in thinking the wedding will be so soon, Mr.
Rainsforth being obliged to join his ship, which belongs to the grand sleet at
Spithead, and I rather wish to remain single till this summer's cruise is past.
If he returns safe, I need not tell you with what joy I shall fulfill my
engagements: if not; if it be his fate to fall in the defense of his country, I
will come to you my beloved Celia, and become a pensioner in the convent for
life. My religion will not permit me to take the veil; but my vow of celibacy
will be as sincere, breathed from my own heart to the great Judge of all our
actions, as though I made at the foot of the altar, surrounded by all the pomp of
monkish superstition. Pardon me, my beloved friend, I mean no reflection on the
religion you profess. I think that it is not the form but the heart that is an
acceptable sacrifice: and the soul that humbles itself before its Maker, and
cries "pardon my numerous transgressions, I am but a worm before thee, the
creature of thy infinite power: if thou should forsake me, who will dare to
be my friend; dispose of me as in thy wisdom thou shall think fit; I will not
complain, but will take the lot appointed, with submission." That soul, my
Celia, let its form of worship be what it may, will one day shine resplendent
in the mansion of its Creator. Oh! with what rapture can we approach the throne
of mercy, when with a heart overflowing with gratitude, we can say, in the
words of our admired Pope: Teach me to feel another's woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
But I know my Celia is as void of bigotry as she is of every other error.

As Mr. Rainsforth is now, I will not deny, the first object of my esteem, I
must inform you of the reasons which have by degrees conspired to raise him
thus in my opinion. The day after that mentioned in my last letter, I received
one from him, a copy of which I have enclosed for your perusal, also my answer,
and his second letter. After you have read them, I think you will not blame my
partiality.

MERIEL.

LETTER XV. MR. RAINSFORTH to MISS HOWARD, (Enclosed in the foregoing.)
MADAM,
FROM a conversation I had lately with Mr. Howard, I find you have made your
parents the confidants of a passion, which I hardly dared venture to disclose,
even to the dear object who had excited it; and pardon me, if I say some
peculiarities in the manner of both Mr. and Mrs. Howard, has been the cause of
my not applying to them for leave to address their lovely daughter; nor indeed,
did I think it quite consonant with the idea of female delicacy, to apply for
the parents approbation, before I could flatter myself that approbation would
be entirely agreeable to the person, whose good will I am most solicitous to
obtain.

I thank you a thousand times, dear, amiable young lady, for the sweet hope you
have authorized your father to give me; your conduct has, if possible, raised
you in my esteem; and I look forward with a certainty of felicity to the moment
that shall unite us by indissoluble ties; for sure a woman who has so high a
sense of filial duty, must ever retain a proper idea of the equally incumbent
duties which will arise from the married state; her husband's honor will be
safe in her hands; her children will look up to her as their friend, and
blessings will attend her footsteps wherever she appears. Oh! beloved Miss
Howard, my heart, that perfectly understands your virtues, exults in paying
them the homage due. The simplicity of your manner first charmed me, and pardon
me if I say, I saw not the charms of your person, till I had learnt to adore
the goodness of your heart; to guard that heart from every approaching evil,
shall henceforth be my study: if you will favor me with a few lines from your
own hand, to say you do not refuse me so charming a guardianship, and to
confirm me in the hope of being not quite indifferent to you, it will be
acknowledged as the highest obligation, by your faithful

FREDERIC RAINSFORTH.

LETTER XVI. MISS HOWARD to MR. RAINSFORTH.
SIR,
GRATITUDE will not suffer me long to remain silent or inattentive, to a
letter, the contents of which, seem to breath only the spirit of sincerity; nor
will I hesitate to confess, that the liberty my parents have granted is
perfectly consonant with the feelings of my own heart. Every one who is
honored with the acquaintance of Mr. Rainsforth, must be sensible of his
worth, and to find oneself the object of the tenderest esteem, to a truly
worthy man, must certainly awaken a degree of laudable pride, in a bosom not
devoid of sensibility. Accept my sincerest thanks for the many obliging
sentiments you have expressed in my favor, and give me leave to mention a few
circumstances with which you may be unacquainted, but which, I think it highly
proper, you should be informed of.

It is in general reported that I have four thousand pounds for my fortune.
This report is false. I have only a fourth part of the sum. My godmother, Mrs.
Mirvan, made the will in my favor, but with these restrictions; that I should
never suffer my family to feel the necessities of life. At that time, Mr.
Rainsforth, there was no prospect of their ever being reduced from a state of
competency, to a dependence on their child; but such is the fluctuating state
of human affairs, that this is exactly now the case. This state of depedence is
extremely painful to me, and I am sure must be so to them. It is, therefore, my
fixed determination, when I am of age, to settle the moiety of my fortune on my
mother. I am under engagements for my father at present to the amount of five
hundred pounds, and the other five hundred must be appropriated to the use of
my brother, during his clerkship, and to help him forward a little when that is
expired.

This disposition of my little fortune, may make a material difference in your
plans of life for the future, and I thought it but right to inform you, that no
interest of my own, shall ever induce me to alter my resolution. If you think
me still worthy of your attentions, I am yours. Do not smile at my frankness,
I have not yet learnt to disguise the feelings of my heart. Do not hesitate to
give a candid answer. If the union is not equally eligible with one, as it
would have been with four thousand pounds, seek not to excuse yourself for
withdrawing your addresses, I will not even require an apology for a conduct,
to which I am certain, nothing but the most powerful reasons, could have forced
you.

I am, Sir, your friend and humble servant, MERIEL HOWARD.

LETTER XVII. MR. RAINSFORTH to MISS HOWARD.
SHALL I not chide you, my dear Miss Howard; shall I not tell you what I felt
at the reception of your dear unkind letter. Dear it will ever be to my fond
bosom, because in the sincerity of your language, I could read the affection of
your heart. "Smile at your frankness;" how could you think of such a thing. No,
I adore you for it, and surely the man who could despise a heart for its
sincerity, deserves not to possess so invaluable a blessing. May Miss Howard
never learn to disguise feelings which, chastened as they are, by honor and
feminine delicacy, become an honor to the heart; but still I must chide. What
could you think, when you say, "if the union is not equally eligible with one,
as it would have been with four thousand pounds." Unkind Meriel, do you suppose
millions could increase my love, or could they make you more valuable. No, they
could not; therefore, dispose of your fortune in any manner you shall think
fit, give me only yourself, and I shall think I possess a jewel, which worlds
could not purchase.

I am every day expecting orders to join the fleet. Will you, my dear Miss
Howard, pardon my impatience, if I wish to call you mine before these orders
arrive. I shall have a thousand doubts and fears if I leave you before we are
irrevocably united. Perhaps some one more worthy; Oh! forgive my suspicions,
but who can love and not fear to lose the object of their fondest hopes.
Methinks could I once call you mine, the thought would inspire me with courage.
Should I be called into action against the enemy of my country, honor,
ambition, thirst of fame should all give way to love. For you alone would I
fight, for your sake alone wish to conquer, and your love should be the reward
of all my toils.

I will spend an hour with you tomorrow evening. Oh! my sweet friend, let your
mild eyes tell me, at meeting, you cannot refuse the ardent prayer of your ever
faithful

FREDERIC RAINSFORTH.

LETTER XVIII. MERIEL to CELIA, (in continuation.)
BUT I did refuse him, Celia, though my little rebellious heart would have fain
played the traitor. Be still little fool, said I, Meriel will learn to be thy
mistress: think not, by thy flutterings and throbings, to counteract
resolutions which reason tells me are right and laudable. So, my dear girl, I
persevered in the determination of not giving Rainsforth my hand, till the
summer's cruise was over, and he was obliged to submit with as good a grace as
he could, though I assure you, he looked quite blank upon it. And now, my dear
girl, I will give you my reasons for thus obstinately opposing the proposed
union. You know I shall be eighteen in September, when being mistress of my
fortune, I may dispose of it as I have already designed, without being
answerable to any one. Now, if I marry first, I certainly make my husband
master, not only of myself, but of all I possess; and how do I know what
objections may arise on his part in the course of a few months. I do not mean,
that I doubt Rainsforth's generosity; but a change of circumstances produces a
change of ideas, and I think it is best not to trust too much to the firmness
of our own hearts.

My aunt laughed the other day, and said she questioned if I should ever be
married, for absence and salt water are in general a cure for love. It may
prove so with some, but I do not much fear the constancy of a man who braves
even the shaft of ridicule, by openly avowing me the woman of his choice; for I
can see many a sneering smile, glance from my aunt to her son, whenever they
are witness to his attention to your Meriel. My father and mother seem totally
regardless, whether I am married now, or when he returns; and I believe, if the
truth was known, and very little concerned about my future welfare. But yet,
Celia, my bosom cannot forget its natural affections, or divest itself of those
strong sensations of duty, love and veneration, which ever have warmed it,
since my infant tongue first lisp'd the tender name of mother. As to my father,
I cannot say I feel any emotions in his favor, nor can it be expected I
should, after the scenes which I have imparted to you, the horrors of which
will never be removed from my mind. Alas! they often recur to my imagination
and cast a gloom over every rising pleasure. Yet, as a man whose happiness is
nearly connected with my mother's; as the man whom nature requires me to
regard, I will pay him every necessary respect, and as sar as the narrow limits
of my power will permit, will promote his interest and felicity.

May 19 th.

Celia, he is gone; I have this moment bade him farewell. I feel there are
moments when all the fortitude, we boast, sinks into nothing opposed to the
struggles of nature; would you believe it, at the moment when I saw him step
into the chaise, I would have given worlds, had I possessed them, to have been
his wife, that I might have gone with him, beheld him to the very last moment
of embarkation, and even then have stood on the shore to catch a last look at
the expanded sails which bore him from me, till by degrees they lessened to my
view, and at length were lost in the vast horizon.

My aunt and cousins where with us drinking tea; Rainsforth came in, when I
instantly saw something was the matter. The order is at length arrived, said I,
mentally, and he comes to bid me adieu; I handed him a cup of tea, he put it to
his lips but did not taste it. "I am come Miss Howard," said he, "to take my
leave; the fleet sails in a few days." "Do you go this evening," said my
mother. "In a few moments, madam," said he, "I just recieved the letter, and
accidently met with two brother officers, who were going in a chaise, and
gladly accepted me as a third; we mean to take two stages to night, and shall
be in Portsmouth by tomorrow noon." At that moment the chaise stopped at the
door. Rainsforth rose, bowed to my aunt and cousins, thanked them for all
civilities, wished my father and mother health, and then turned toward me. My
heart was full, so was his; we neither of us spoke; he pressed my hands to his
lips, bowed low to hide his emotions, and was in the chaise in an instant. I
knew sensibility would be deemed weakness by those who were witness to our
parting; I therefore struggled to suppress my rising tears, offered up a silent
prayer for his safe return, and endeavored at a look of composure, that was
very foreign to my heart.

What may be his fate, heaven alone can tell; yet sure if worth is its peculiar
care, he will not only be protected in this, but in every other danger. But
alas! Celia, how often do we see merit cut off in its full prime, whilst the
unworthy are spared.

Surely, when the brave and good fall in their country's cause, it must be that
their virtues merit such rewards as only heaven can give. They are suffered to
appear on the vast theater of life, to act a little while bright shining parts,
and then are called home to receive the glorious mead of heavenly and unceasing
joys. My mind dwelling on this subject the other evening, (you know I am fond
of indulging in little effusions of poetry,) and painting to myself the
situation of a soldier's wife, who has followed her husband to the very scene
of battle, and in the morn, sending him forth to brave the hostile foe, at
night sees him covered with wounds and in the agonies of death; I for a moment
fancied myself in her situation, and wrote the following trifle. I send it to
my Celia without an apology, because trifles become valuable when they proceed
from the friend we love.

MERIEL.

ANNA. (Enclosed in the foregoing.)
THE day was past, the ensanguin'd plain,
Overspread with many a valiant hero slain;
When Anna to her breast her infant caught,
And amongst the slaughtered heaps her Henry sought.
The pale moon shed a feeble ray of light,
Which added to the horrors of the night.
Trembling with anguish and despair,
To heaven she thus addressed her prayer.
Just power, who saw my Henry fall,
Conduct me where he lies,
And let me bath his wounds in tears,
And let me seal his eyes.
This morn, when he went forth, I prayed
No evil might betide him,
But since he fell, oh guide me where,
And let me die beside him.
Henry though dying knew his Anna's voice,
Cried, "dry those tears, my Anna and rejoice;
For though I Am lost to thee, yet future story,
Shall tell, thy Henry lived and died with glory.
And teach my boy the road to fame," he cried,
"Farewell!" then faintly graspt her hand and died.
Weeping she knelt and kissed the breathless clay,
And vowed his last injunctions to obey.
Yes matchless youth, though lost to me,
By hope inspired, in thought I see
On glory's wings thy spirit rise,
And angles waft it to the skies.
I Will tell my son his father's deeds,
And though my heart with anguish bleeds,
I Will teach his soul, like thine to soar,
And mark the path thou'st trod before.
Then though like thee, he yields his breath,
I Will glory in my hero's death.
LETTER XIX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, July 20 th, 1776.
THIS brother of mine is a sad lad. He will not be content to remain where he
has been placed, but has taken it into his wise head that he must go to sea;
nothing else will suit him, he cannot, he says, be confined to the drudgery of
a countinghouse, where a person may toil all their lives and rise to nothing
above mediocrity. He will go to sea, where, with one bold push, it often
happens that a man gains both honor and fortune. The lad seems to be possessed
of the spirit of ambition, yet not that laudable ambition which acts as a
stimulus to actions great and praise worthy. It is power and wealth he aims at,
and be the steps ever so dirty, by which he must arrive at the desired
eminence, I much fear he would not hesitate to wade through thick and thin.
However, as that is his fixed determination, I must even be content with the
loss of the apprentice fee, though here is a fresh source of expense in fitting
him out as a midshipman, for in that situation I find he can be admitted on
board the ship where Rainsforth is lieutenant. I wish to my soul an intimate
acquaintance with this worthy man, may be of service to him, for we often
insensibly imbibe the sentiments of those with whom we associate.

My father, I fear, is running into his old errors; he has formed an
acquaintance with a Mr. Dell, which in my opinion bodes no good. Dell appears
much of the gentleman in his manner, but young Mossop says he is a professed
gambler, and I am rather inclined to believe this assertion, as my father is
frequently out with him till three or four in the morning, and has drained us
so of money, that we have not a single guinea for house expenses; this will
occasion our getting into debt, and I am afraid my father has already borrowed
money on the strength of my promise, in regard to my fortune; if so all my
endeavors to preserve my mother from want will be ineffectual. This Dell has a
wife, whom he once brought to spend an afternoon with us; I do not like her;
there was something in her dress and manner, bold, forward and disgusting; she
has been pretty, and is vain enough to think she is so now. My mother does not
admire her any more than myself, and only that she thinks it would highly
disoblige my father, she would by no means either recieve or return her visits.

Another source of unhappiness to this dear suffering woman is my father's
giving way to a habit of drinking, for he is almost continually intoxicated,
and so extremely captious and ill natured that it is next to impossible to say
or do any thing to please him. Poor dear mother how my heart bleeds for your
afflictions; how many years have you past wherein you can scarcely say, you
have seen one happy hour; and could I, but lead you to repose your sorrows on
the bosom of your child! but no, you think that child unworthy of your love,
unworthy your confidence; and she dares not clear herself, lest by endeavoring
to remove one sorrow from your heart, she should throw another on it that would
crush you with its weight.

I have heard from Rainsforth but once since the fleet sailed. Oh! Celia,
should he one day afflict my heart, by harshness, cruelty or infidelity; ah! my
friend, if the thought thus wrings my bosom, what would the reality do; and
yet, I would endeavor to bear it with the meekness of a wife, and the
fortitude of a christian; but me thinks I would wish to sink at once under the
dreadful certainty; doubt and suspicion would torture me to the very utmost of
my strength to bear, but to be convinced I had out lived his affection, must, I
am convinced, be instant death or madness.

My letters have now nothing interesting in them; Indeed, Celia, I begin to
think every thing insipid and tiresome, that is not concerning Rainsforth; even
reading no more amuses. If I read of a worthy character, such a one I cry is my
Frederic; then I drop the book to muse upon his virtues, and if I take up my
pen I can write but an invocation to heaven for his safety. The only relief I
find is in constant employment, and therefore, I seldom pass an idle hour, my
needle, my pencil, and my domestic concerns, pleasingly variegate the scene,
and prevent my complaining of lassitude. I go out but little, and see but few
visitors, my cousins indeed frequently call, but as I do not mix in the same
gay circles they do, I can join but little in their conversation; they tell me
many lively anecdotes that amuse me; I listen to their account of a ball, a
concert, or any other fashionable amusement with a smile, because it gives me
pleasure to see them happy. My mother says they give me these accounts only to
mor^^fy me; if so, they greatly miss their aim; I (...) no inclination to mix
in the giddy throng of the votaries to pleasure. Nature never designed me for
dress, bustle, and parade, my highest wish is to steal through life unnoticed,
but by the friends I love, and to die before I know their loss or the privation
of their esteem. Adieu, my Celia. In your prayers remember the beloved of your

MERIEL.

LETTER XX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, November 17 th, 1776.
CELIA, you are happy. You never formed a wish beyond the narrow bounds
prescribed by your monastic rules. Your heart never vibrated with love, with
hope, with sensations undescribably pleasing, when the object of that love
returned in safety from the boisterous elements, and still more dreadful fury
of enemies. And is it, do you ask, a happiness to be deprived of those sweet
sensations? Yes, my friend it is; for then you cannot suffer the keen pang,
which at this moment rends the heart of your friend. Read the enclosed, which I
have just received, and tell me if you do not pity your

MERIEL.

LETTER XXI. MR. RAINSFORTH to MISS HOWARD, (Enclosed in the preceding.)
Plymouth, November 13 th, 1776.
WILL my dear Meriel believe that it is with pain I take up my pen to address
her; that I am at loss for words, yet ardently long to pour out my soul before
her. I have braved the perils of the sea, my love, I am safe arrived at my
destined port, but not within sight of happiness. Alas! that golden dream which
has buoyed me up, and cheered me whilst absent from all my soul held dear, is
vanished. The lovely prize which I thought would have rewarded all my
hardships, is wrested from me. Oh! beloved Meriel, I am lost, forlorn, and
wretched. You never can be mine, Meriel: never! Oh my heart, yet hold a little,
burst not till I have told my gentle love, how much this resignation costs me.
But I am a beggar, and shall I marry thee, my dearest girl, and bring a
wretched race of innocents into a life of penury and woe. Shall I lead my
gentle Meriel to the altar, when I am certain our only patrimony will be want
and misery. Oh no! humanity! honor! love! forbid it.

My father is a bankrupt, nor has he saved enough from the wreck of his fortune
to support even for a few months, his wife and three small children: and shall
not I, who received from him life, education, every valuable gift: shall not I
prefer his happiness to my own? Yes, my adored Meriel, I will, dear as thou art
to this fond doting heart; I will renounce even thee, and devote my little
income to the support of my father and his family.

Adieu my sweet love, may balmy peace, with healing (...) her wing descend to
thy lovely bosom, may thou, (for it will be necessary to thy peace) banish
the hapless Rainsforth from my mind; or think only of him as one lost to thee,
the world, and to himself. And may you, with some happier, worthier youth, find
every blessing, every earthly comfort: but be assured, whilst I retain the
least trace of memory, you, and you only, shall possess the affections of my
heart. Whilst life remains you will be the dearest object of my fond wishes;
and when called from this transitory scene, my last breath will be spent in a
prayer for your happiness. Adieu, dear amiable Miss Howard: may the choicest
gifts of heaven be showered on you. Oh! how my heart bleeds while I write.
Beloved of my soul, farewell forever.

FREDERIC RAINSFORTH.

LETTER XXII. MISS HOWARD TO MR. RAINSFORTH.
London, November 16 th, 1776.
"ADIEU, forever," did you say: no, Rainsforth, no! we shall yet meet many
times, our souls are congenial; they were animated the by same spark of
intellectual fire, and though we cannot claim a nearer tie, we shall be friends
to the latest hour of our existence.

My generous, noble friend, I do not blush to say my esteem, (nay call it love,
if you will) is increased by this proof of your magnanimity; call it not a
resignation, I am yours I will never be another's; unless I can find one your
superior in every virtue, that can exalt and dignify human nature, and in
saying that, I think I am irrevocably bound to you. There may be men who
possess equal goodness of heart, but there can be none who can boast a
superiority.

I am sensibly affected at your father's misfortunes; would to heaven it was in
my power to remove every affliction far from him. Not so much from the idea
that his troubles have interrupted my happiness; but that I am certain your
feeling heart suffers those misfortunes doubly, in seeing them inflicted on one
so deservedly dear to you. But let us look forward my friend; the prospect is
not so dark, but that the sun of prosperity may yet brake forth to enliven it;
you may yet live to see your father reinstated in the afluence, from which he
is at present removed by an all-wise Providence, only to teach him the value of
past blessings. We never know rightly, how to prize a benefit, till we have
known what it is to lose it; I write feelingly Rainsforth, for, I knew not half
your worth till the very moment that I saw an insuperable barrier placed
between us, and now I wish I had listened to your solicitations, for then at
this moment I might have administered comfort to your drooping spirits, and
assisted in the delightful task of soothing the sorrows of your parents. But
why should I be so selfish, the pleasure would have been all my own; for sure I
knew your generous heart too well, to suppose it would not have suffered from
the idea of my sharing in afflictions, which could not have been prevented, and
hardly admit of any aleviation. To say I felt nothing when I read your pathetic
letter, would be to pronounce myself insensible. Believe me, I felt all; nay,
perhaps more than you could have wished; however, of this be assured, that
nothing but a total change in you can occation any alteration in my sentiments.
If it will be more conducive to your happiness; here let the correspondence
cease, and should you hereafter meet a woman, whose merits and fortune render
her worthy your attachment; may you be as happy in the union as the lot of
mortallity will allow. Adieu, every kind wish of my heart is yours.

MERIEL HOWARD.

LETTER XXIII. Between this and the foregoing letter, there are several
omitted, which passed between Miss Howard and her friend. As they contained
nothing but complaints of Mr. Howard's behavior, and an account of young
Howard's going to India, on a three year's station. This occasions a space of
eighteen months.
MERIEL to CELIA.
London, May 6 th, 1778.
IT is in vain to strive against fate. My father is resolved not to pause in
his career of folly, till we are all involved in ruin. The money I presented to
my mother, when I took possession of my fortune, is all mouldered away, and
even the little capital I had reserved for myfelf, broke in upon. I know you
will say I am pursuing my notions of filial duty now to imprudence; I fear I
am, and yet, my dear Celia, were you situated as I am, I so well know your
heart, that I am certain you would have conducted yourself exactly in the same
manner.

About three days since, a gentleman called and presented a bill for payment,
drawn by my brother, who had given my mother notice of his design; but she,
fearful of mentioning it, as she had no means of answering the demand, had kept
it to herself. It was for an hundred pounds. Ungenerous lad! when he knew how
narrow our circumstances were, and how much his inconsistent conduct had
embarrassed us. When the man brought the bill, my poor mother turned pale as
ashes. "What is the matter, madam," said I. She called me into the next room,
and putting the bill into my hand, (for it was some days after sight) she said,
"what must I do." "Indeed my dear madam," I replied, "I cannot tell. It is not
in my power to do any more, the bill must be protested, and I hope it will
teach him frugality in future. I am sure he must have been very extravagant, or
he never could have wanted money so soon, considering the sum he took with
him." She made me no answer, but bursting into tears cried, "then all is over,
my poor Richard." I never can see my mother in affliction, but my heart yearns
spontaniously to fly to her relief. How then could I behold her tears unmoved,
how hold back that comfort she required, when she thus continued to address me.
"I know, Meriel, we have almost reduced you to beggary, I am fully sensible how
much we owe to your generosity." "Dear, dear mother, talk not so," said I,
throwing my arms about her, "I have done nothing but my duty, and I think it
still my duty to preserve the remainder of my fortune, to comfort you in your
declining age." "But think of your brother, Meriel," cried she eagerly, "think
my dear girl, what straits he may reduced to in a foreign land. If this bill is
not paid, my poor boy will be thrown into prison, and be lost for want of a
friend to comfort him. Oh! Meriel, refuse not your mother this one request."
And ah! my Celia, may I never meet such another trial. The dear woman knelt;
yes, my mother knelt to me before I had the time or power to prevent her. "Good
heavens!" said I, "this is too much, take me, dear mother, do with me and mine
as you think proper, only I beseech you do not let me be thus humiliated. It Is
I should have knelt to you, oh! rise, and do not thus distress me. I will pay
the bill."

The next day I took up money sufficient for that purpose, and also to
discharge some few debts in the neighborhood, so that our income is now so
reduced that I must be obliged to turn my thoughts toward some genteel
employment, however repugnant it is to my father and mother's inclinations. In
my opinion, the person who has talents, health and spirits to earn a
subsistence, is in all respects independent, and there is nothing to me would
be more painful, than to eat the bread of indolence. Pride may teach another
lesson, but then it is not the pride which elevates the human heart. It shall
be ever my pride to keep free from obligation. It is always a painful sense,
but more especially when we have no power to return it. Let my habitation be
ever so humble, and my fare ever so coarse, if they are the fruits of my own
industry, they will be sweeter, more comfortable by far, than the greatest
luxuries purchased by the cringe of servility.

May 7 th.

Rejoice with me, my dear Celia, the prospect once more brightens. I yesterday
received the following letter from Rainsforth.

TO MISS HOWARD.
MY ever loved, my constant Meriel will, I am certain, rejoice to hear that my
father is again restored to affluence. A distant relation, lately dead, has
bequeathed the whole of his wealth, which is very considerable, to our family.
To me he has given five thousand pounds. Then let me hasten to bid my beloved
Meriel be prepared to see me; for this day week, I will come to demand her long
promised hand, and seal myself before the altar, here is eternally.

FREDERIC RAINSFORTH.


And shall I now ever dare to complain of past trials, my Celia? has not this
proof of his love and constancy endeared him more than ever to my heart? Oh my
friend, my spirits are so agitated, I cannot write or speak with any coherence,
I must throw aside my pen and endeavor to compose my thoughts.

My cousin Hester has just left me. I showed her Rainsforth's (...) in the
fullness of my heart, and claimed her promise of being bride maid. I thought
she did not look pleased and hurried away very soon after she had read the
letter. I shall make but little preparation against his arrival. I know he
regards me only for myself, and alas! that is all I now have to bestow.

Two days more and I shall see him; think me not weak, if I tell you I shall
count the hours with impatience. After a separation of near two years, how
pleasing to meet a friend whom we know to be so worthy, and whom we had given
up as lost. Farewell, my dear Celia, your pleasures are all of the calm
unrussled kind, like the smooth stream that glides beneath a lofty bank, by
which it is defended from the rude blasts of wind. It continues one gentle
unvaried course, and its charms can neither be increased or diminished.

MERIEL.

LETTER XXIV. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, May 19 th, 1778.
I HAVE expected morning after morning with hope, and each day as it arrived
brought with it only disappointment. I will decieve myself no longer, nothing
but death, or extreme illness could have kept him from me, though I have been
told that he meant from the first to decieve me, and that my easy fondness has
been a theme for ridcule for him and his gay companions. But I cannot believe
it, Celia, if he is false, where shall we find a man worthy to be esteemed. No,
Rainsforth, there certainly must be some very urgent cause for this absence,
this, I had almost said, cruel silence; but I will not give up the opinion I
have formed of your integrity.

May 20 th.

Celia, I am ill, very ill, my heart has recieved a shock it will never
recover; Rainsforth is married! married to another, and within a fortnight
after the day appointed to unite him to me.

My cousin Hester called on me yesterday to take a walk; we called on a lady of
her acquaintance who has a sister married at Plymouth, for Hester suggested
that through her means we might gain some intelligence concerning Rainsforth.
After the usual ceremonies, when we were seated, Hester enquired when she had
heard from her sister, "I had a letter yesterday," she replied, "Kitty has been
very gay, I assure you, they have had great doings at Plymouth, Miss Kingly,
the great heiress, was married last Monday, and Kitty was at the wedding." "And
pray who is she married to?" said Hester. "A young officer in the navy," she
replied, "whom she has been fond of for some time; I really forget his name,
but there is the letter, you may read the whole account."

I do not know how I supported myself, while I cast my eye over the letter, as
my cousin held it in her hand, but I caught the name of Rainsforth; my head
grew giddy, I turned cold and faint; but by the exertion of my resolution
avoided making myself ridiculous. "Upon my word," cousin, said Hester without
any regard to my feelings, in exposing me to a stranger, "upon my word, this is
very unaccountable." "Why pray," said the lady, "is it the Mr. Rainsforth I
have seen so often with you Miss Mossop?" "The very same, and will you believe
it, he was under a promise of marriage to my cousin here; do you not think it
very scandalous behavior?" "Scandalous indeed: if I was in Miss Howard's place
I would sue him for half his wife's fortune."

"I shall not give either myself or him that trouble, madam, (I replied with as
much composure as I could assume,) I think since he has proved himself of so
fickle a nature, he has done me a favor rather than an injury, as it would
have been much more painful to me to lose the affection of a husband than a
lover. Pride my dear madam added I with a forced smile) keeps up our spirits on
these occasions."

I returned home from this visit with a heavy heart, but still flattered myself
there might be some mistake; but the receipt of the letter I enclose for your
perusal has removed every doubt.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART, A NOVEL. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY MRS. ROWSON, OF THE NEW THEATER, PHILADELPHIA, AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE, FILLE
DE CHAMBER, INQUISITOR, etc. etc.

-- If there is a power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he must delight in virtue.
The soul secured in her existence, smiles,
At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
VOL. II.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY WRIGLEY and BERRIMAN, NO. 149,
CHESNUT-STREET, SOLD BY MESSRS. CAREY, RICE, CAMPBELL, ORMROD YOUNG; AND THE
AUTHOR, CORNER OF SEVENTH AND CHESTNUT STREETS. M.DCC.XCV.

TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART.
LETTER XXV. MR RAINSFORTH SEN. to MISS HOWARD.
Plymouth, May 17 th, 1778. MADAM
LOOKING over some papers which were lately in possession of my son, I found
some letters which I think proper to return to you; and am very sorry if any
thing has passed between you that may occasion you future uneasiness. I am
obliged to you for the very generous sentiments expressed in those letters,
toward my whole family, and beg leave to inform you, that your kind wishes,
respecting my son's happiness, are amply fulfilled, as he was yesterday married
to a very amiable woman, possessing a fortune of twenty thousand pounds.

I am, madam, your humble servant, F. RAINSFORTH.

MERIEL to CELIA, (in continuation.)
WITH this letter, my dear Celia, came a parcel containing all the letters I
had ever wrote a Rainsforth; and believe me, the unfeeling tenor of his
father's letter did not hurt me half so much, as the idea of his cruelty, in
suffering his father first to peruse, and then return them; my pride was
alarmed, my sensibility shocked! a man in whom I placed such implicit
confidence; one whom I thought endowed with every virtue. Celia, I feel a
painful void in my heart; I feel that I shall never again place a confidence in
any man. My cousin Hester has frequently told me, that Rainsforth was
decietful, that he saw my partiality and played upon it, merely for his own
diversion; but I always doubted; nay, to such a height was my enthusiasm
raised, I could not have believed it possible for one who wore so fair a
semblance of virtue, to be so very false, so unaccountably wanton in his
cruelty toward an inoffensive girl, whose whole soul was absorbed in one
affectionate wish for his felicity: why, when I had taught my heart to resign
him without a murmur; why, when the first hard trial was past, and every hope
was extinguished, did he seek to awaken a passion, which, though reason had in
some measure repelled its violence, was still tender, still ardent in my bosom.
Oh! my friend, had he without renewing the correspondence which we had mutually
agreed to drop, given his hand to Miss Kingly, I should not have complained;
no, my Celia, so pure was my love, that I should have exulted in his felicity,
and whilst I thought him worthy of every blessing, have rejoiced to see them
placed within his reach. But alas! he is not worthy, and perhaps this poor
gentle affectionate girl, for such I am told she is, may soon experience a
change in his sentiments, when she has neither the power to leave him, nor
liberty to complain of his conduct.

May 20 th.

I begin to be more composed; I am resolved to despise the whole sex; they may
wear a semblance of virtue, but the reality of it is foreign to their hearts.
Every occurrence of life will be now equally indifferent to me; I have vowed to
devote myself to my mother while she lives, and whenever heaven pleases to call
her away, my incessant prayer shall be soon to follow; I do not wish to go
before her, because, I see her only hope of support must proceed from me; and
unboundedly grateful will be my heart, if by any means whatever I can preserve
her from misery.

May 29 th.

It was certainly a wise dispensation of Providence, that prevented my union
with Rainsforth; had I been separated from my dear mother, where now would she
have found a comforter. My father is in prison Celia; my whole fortune is
expended; but thank heaven, I have still health and strength to work. I live in
a miserable apartment in the Fleet prison, I sit lost as it were to every thing
but misery; but yet, my dear Celia, I can look up to heaven with gratitude; I
am not a wife, I am not a mother, I feel not the strong chords of maternal
affection twining round my heart, and wringing it with unutterable anguish; I
might have been more wretched than I am: and whilst I can say that, let me
express only gratitude toward the great Ruler of the universe, who has not
tried me beyond my strength to support. Can you think, my friend, that in this
miserable situation I have yet one ray of comfort breaks on my benighted soul;
yes, Celia, I have: my dear mother is at length convinced, that my love, my
dutiful attentions, are the result of the feelings of my heart. On me alone she
now rests; to me alone looks for comfort; her eyes once more beam on me with
affection; her heart again is lift up to heaven for my felicity; and who my
dear friend, who that knows the just value of maternal love, would not gladly
resign wealth, nay almost every consideration, to enjoy so inestimable a
blessing.

I cannot at this time give you particulars; indeed, I know not why I should
write to you at all, for sure my letters convey no pleasure to your friendly
bosom, but I cannot give up the greatest pleasure of my life, unless you
expressly desire it. To you I can unfold my thoughts; to you, toll the sorrows
of my heart; and as I write, fond fancy represents you as feeling for my
afflictions: I see the tear of sympathy tremble in your eye; I hear the soft
cheering voice of consolation break from your lips: I am soothed; I am
comforted by the thought: surely, my Celia, will not refuse, this almost only
consolation to her afflicted

MERIEL.

LETTER XXVI. MERIEL to CELIA.
Fleet prison, June 10 th, 1778.
I HAVE now sat down, to give you the particulars of a scene, which, when I
last wrote, I could not command sufficient composure to deleniate. I had been
out one afternoon on particular business; indeed to look after some employment,
whereby I might conduce to the support of the family. On my return I found my
mother weeping over a bit of paper, which she held in her hand. I enquired the
cause. She gave me the paper, and I read on it, "Barwell, Sheriff's officer,
Carey-street." "Your father is arrested, Meriel," said she. "Gracious heaven!"
said I, "then we are all ruined: but what is the sum; at whose suit is he
arrested." "At the suit of that villain Dell," she replied, "for fifty pounds,
which he has lent him; no doubt at the gaming table; he also threatens him with
a prosecution for a criminal correspondence with his wife. Oh heavens!"
continued she, redoubling her tears, "when shall I die and be at peace." It was
in vain to offer consolation. I did not even attempt it, but resolved, if
possible, to see if any thing could be done, either to ward off the impending
blow, or to extricate us from the difficulties attending it. I went immediately
to an attorney, made him acquainted with the case, and requested his advice. He
told me there was no redress, that the money must be paid, and in case of the
prosecution, it was most likely he would be cast with damages. This
intelligence was an additional weight upon my spirits. However, I proceeded to
Careystreet, where I found this thoughtless father surrounded by unfortunate
men of the lowest class, with a bowl of punch before him, and in the very act
of singing a drinking song. When he saw me, he looked abashed. I asked if I
coud speak to him in another room, for my soul shrunk from the society of those
unhappy beings, with whom he seemed so pleased. When we were accommodated with
another apartment, I asked him, how this debt was contracted, and by what means
he meant to discharge it. I cannot repeat to you the answer he made; it was so
replete with contradiction, that I had scarcely patience to hear him out. When
he had finished, I enquired, if that debt was paid, were there no others of the
same sort. "Consider sir," said I, "it will not be long I shall have it in my
power to answer these demands, and when my money is entirely expended, where is
my dear mother to find support." "Ah Meriel," said he, "you are always more
anxious about her than me, you don't care what becomes of your father." "I
should think, sir," said I with some warmth, "that I had given sufficient proof
of my attention to the happiness of both. I am sorry to use any language to a
father, which may be deemed improper; but I must say, had you paid as much
attention to your own happiness as was undoubtedly your duty, many of the
afflictions, if not all which have fallen upon our family, might have been
avoided. I will pay this money sir, and I hope you will not think I take too
great a liberty if I advise you, hereafter to shun such unworthy acquaintance
as Dell, and strive rather to obtain some genteel employment, by which these
kind of scenes may in future be avoided.

"You talk like a very unfeeling girl, Meriel," said he. "Do you imagine then
it is so easy for a man, born and brought up a gentleman, to submit to the
drudgery of servitude: no Miss; if your ideas are so mean, mine are not, I will
starve first, and would rather see you starve than have my family disgraced by
your following any servile, mean employment." Believe me, Celia, when he
uttered these sentiments, I felt so irritated by his foolish pride, that had
not the idea of my suffering mother at that moment obtruded on my mind, I
should have left him to his fate. However, I stifled my rising anger, and
having given him a draught on my banker to discharge the arrest, returned to
console my mother. When I entered, I was surprised to see her grief more
violent than ever. She was wringing her hands and weeping with great
bitterness. After many fruitless enquiries concerning this fresh torrent of
sorrow, I learnt that Mr. Lesage, the banker, with whom I had placed the
trifling remnant of my fortune, was declared a bankrupt. To describe my
feelings is impossible. However I saw my mother wanted comfort, and I exerted
my utmost power to stifle emotions, which if indulged, would only serve to
increase her anguish.

"We must go to prison," said she, "we must all go to prison, and who is to
support us there?" "Providence, my dear mother," said I, "We will place our
hopes on that benign power, who never forsakes those, who, in full confidence
of support, exert their utmost abilities and rely on him only for success.
Come, come, cheer up, thank God, I am healthy and able to work." She gazed on
me for a moment; then throwing her arms round me, she cried, "oh! my child, I
will doubt your virtue no longer; your heart must be pure, or you could not
thus rely on heaven for support; but oh! my dear Meriel, it will wound my heart
severely to see you obliged to labor for subsistence." "Do not think of it,"
said I; "let me see you but tolerably happy and I shall not regret any
hardship, however severe: I will never leave you, my beloved mother; only let
me be once more called the child of your affection, and I shall think myself
completely rewarded for every suffering it may please heaven to inflict." A few
days after this, my father was removed to this miserable place: we sold the
best part of our furniture and clothes to discharge the debts owing among our
trades people. My mother then came to my father: I do not sleep in the prison,
but come here every morning; I perform all their domestic offices, go out for
their provision, etc. but as yet, have not been able to procure any work.
Indeed, I had hope of being employed by an embroiderer, but on being asked to
give security, for the safety of whatever work I might be entrusted with; I
unfortunately happened to mention, being related to Mr. Mossop's family; of
course, the master of the shop applied to my aunt for my character. Celia, this
aunt denied any knowledge of me, said she had no relation who was in
circumstances to want employment of that kind, that she had some knowledge of a
young woman of the name of Howard, she believed, I might be very honest but I
was certainly no relation of here is.

Thus my dear girl, was my laudable design frustrated; for the man naturally
enough observed if I could be guilty of telling a lie; I might be capable of
worse actions. I hope, however, in a short time to procure something to do; for
our little stock of money diminishes very fast.

August 15 th, 1778.

Of all the scenes through which we are doomed to pass, sure none is so truly
painful, as that of being witness to the death of those whom nature has placed
in a near relation to us; whom, spite of all their errors, we cannot wholly
divest our hearts of tenderness for; and to see them approach the awful
confines of eternity in a frame of mind, that renders all offered comfort
ineffectual, to calm their doubts and fears, when the retrospect of their past
lives fills them only with horror; and the idea of futurity brings nothing but
despair. Such a scene I have lately past; my father is no more: he is I hope at
peace; to think otherwise would be an agony too great to bear: poor man, to the
very last he was addicted to the fatal errors that had undone him. Few were the
hours he spent in the apartment with my mother, being chiefly at a place, which
they call the tap, where he could drown his care, as he vainly imagined, and
where he was frequently drawn in to play cards, though sometimes for the last
sixpence he had in his pocket.

One evening, at this place he quarrelled with his antagonist, and high words
ensued; from words they went to blows, and my father recieved a stroke on his
temple, which leveled him with the ground. He fell with the back of his head
against an iron fender which cut him severely and fractured the skull; all
assistance was vain; he languished four days, in all the complicated agonies of
pain of body and distress of mind; though I flatter myself he had some internal
comfort in his last moments, as he seemed more composed for about two hours
before his death. He earnestly requested forgiveness of both my mother and
myself, for the manifold injuries he had done us; but to my great comfort,
mentioned no particulars: he also made a declaration before witnesses that the
man who struck the unfortunate blow, was entirely guiltless of intentional
malice, as he had been the first aggressor himself; and the fall was entirely
accidental. He expressed a wish to see his sister; in compliance with his
earnest desire I went to her, told her of the melancholy accident, and
earnestly requested she would visit my dying father.

"Upon my word Meriel," said she, "I am extremely sorry for this shocking
affair; but you know child my seeing him will be of no use; it will only be
hurting my own feelings, with out being of the least service to your father. I
never can bear scenes of this kind; my sensibility is so exquisite, that, was I
to see my poor brother in this situation, I should not recover it for a month.
Ah! poor man, he was always getting into some mischief or other; he never
prospered in any thing after his marriage with your mother."

"You cannot suppose, madam, that the want of prosperity was to be attributed
to that union."

"Why, I don't know, Meriel, my brother never loved your mother, but was
artfully drawn in." "By whom, madam?" "By your grand mother, Miss, who wished
to get a good settlement for her daughter. Your mother too, pretended such a
violent affection for him, that he could not refuse some little return of
kindness, and they never ceased their arts till they had noosed him fast."

"You talk in riddles, madam, my mother brought my father a genteel fortune."

"It was nothing, Miss, to the fortune he might have expected, if he had not
offended his father; I always said no good would come of the match." "It is
much to be wished, indeed, madam," said I, "that such a union never had taken
place; it would have spared my dear mother many years of severe anguish, and my
unfortunate self would never have seen the light." As I said this my heart was
so oppressed I could not refrain my tears. "Bless me! my dear," said Mrs.
Mossop, in an affected accent of kindness; "I did not mean to vex you, you are
not to be blamed for your parents faults."

"If they have faults, madam," said I, "be assured I wish not to hear of them,
it would be a painful topic at any time, but pardon me, if I say, at this
particular season, it is a cruel one. I come to entreat you to visit a brother,
who is poor and dying in prison. I should think, had he millions of faults, at
this moment they would be all forgotten; that you would remember only his
afflictions, and that he was your brother." I spoke this with some warmth; my
aunt hesitated for an answer; at length she told me she would come the next
morning. "It will be too late, madam," said I, "it is thought he cannot live
the night out." "Dear, dear," she replied, "it is so unfortunate that I have a
large party coming this afternoon, but if they leave me in any tolerable
season" -- I would hear no more, but turning from her with a mixture of
contempt and pity, I returned to the habitation of mourning and death. When I
entered the room, my father enquired eagerly if she would come; I thought it
would be wrong to disturb his last moments, with an account of her unfeeling
conduct, I therefore only told him, she was not able to come that evening, but
would be there early in the morning. "It will be too late then," said he, "I
must write to her." It was in vain we remonstrated; he would be raised in the
bed, with a design to write; but his head would not permit him to trace even a
single letter: he was seized with faintings and when he recovered seemed to
have forgot his design. He spoke but little afterward, was wholly taken up in
prayer: though he frequently cried out in agony, "'it is all in vain, I cannot be
forgiven." A worthy well disposed clergyman prayed besided him, and said a
great deal to compose him, and calm his doubts. It had in some measure the
desired effect: and about four o'clock in the morning, he resigned his soul
into the hand of Him who gave it.

My mother's sorrow is not to be described. All thought of our dreadful,
desolate situation was entirely absorbed in this heavy affliction. I did not
attempt to interrupt her grief, as I thought, if suffered to take its natural
course, time would meliorate a sorrow, which, any attempt at present to soften,
would but increase. In the course of the next day, we expected my aunt to make
the promised visit; but as the day passed without seeing her, in the evening my
mother desired me to go to her again, and inform him of our loss. I went, but
was suffered to wait near an hour, before she appeared; nor did my cousins come
near me, though I heard them laughing and talking in the next room. Ah! said I,
mentally, the afflicted are never admitted cheerfully; they are left to indulge
their own sad thoughts in solitude. Cruel Hester and Susan, had you been in
affliction, would not I have abridged my own pleasures to comfort and console
you. When my aunt entered the room she began; "realy Meriel I have not been
able to visit my brother before; but now I have half an hour to spare, I will
send for a coach, and we will go together." "Your visit will no doubt be
acceptable to my mother, dear madam," said I, "but my father is no longer in a
situation." --

"He is dead then," cried she eagerly.

I bowed my head in silence.

"Well," continued she, "I rather expected it, and I am much obliged to you for
calling, to let me know, as I should have been greatly shocked to have found
him dead, when I had called, as I certainly should, either this evening or
to-morow morning."

"My mother bid me ask your advice concerning the funeral madam, and not only
your advice, but your assistance."

"Assistance, for what child?"

"Could you advance us a little money?"

"Money, Miss Howard! You astonish me; it is impossible you can be in want of
money, when you came to possession of so handsome a fortune within these two
years."

"I am very sorry madam, that you can suppose me capable of suffering my
parents to languish in prison for fifty pounds, if I could have commanded such
a sum."

"Why as to that Meriel, I thought you were acting like a prudent girl, and
meant to take care of yourself; for I know you paid a great deal of money for
your father, and might have continued so doing till you had ruined yourself."

"I should certainly have paid this last debt, madam, had not the failure of
Mr. Lesage put it entirely out of my power."

"Oh I remember hearing, that you lost six hundred pounds by his failure, but
you surely had a larger sum by you than that."

"Indeed aunt, that six hundred pounds was all the dependence I had in the
world."

"Upon my word Meriel, I never was more astonished in my life. How have you
contrived to run through all that money. Your mother and yourself must have been
very extravagant, and when that is the case, nothing will save people from
ruin. I am very sorry child, very sorry; but it is not in my power to help you;
I have a large family, and the education of my daughters is expensive. As to my
poor brother, why, my advice is, that you have him buried as privately, and
with as little expense as possible. You will remember me to your mother; tell
her I am really concerned at her trouble; but it is entirely out my power to
help her, nor indeed, do I think it would be of any use; for was she releived
from these difficulties, she would soon be involved by her imprudence, in
others of the same sort."

When I repeated this conversation to my mother, she said, "it is no more than
I expected, my dear child; but I let you go to make trial of her heart, that
you might be convinced, how little depedence is to be placed on professions of
friendship, made to us in our prosperity; and how little assistance is to be
hoped from relations. We will sell every valuable of our clothes and plate, to
lay your father decently in the ground, and to pay the debt for which I now am
become liable. It will, I am certain, leave us almost destitute; but when we
have our liberty, we can perhaps gain employment of some kind or other, I will
not mind how abject; for I would rather hardly earn, or indeed beg my bread
from strangers, than be subject to the unkindness of haughty, unfeeling
relations."

This resolution was immediately executed, and when all expenses were
discharged, we found ourselves possessed of five guineas, some trifling
household furniture, and the meanest of our clothes. With these we left that
abode of misery, the Fleet prison, and have taken a cheap lodging, on the Surry
side of Black friars bridge. I have endeavored to get some work, but as yet
without effect; and what adds to my uneasiness, is, that my dear mother's
health daily declines. As I have no other amusement, I spend a good deal of
time at my pen. I have wrote several little poems, which I intend to correct
and offer to some bookseller. Perhaps by that means, I may obtain something
toward our subsistence. I feel a transient ray of hope dawn upon my mind. My
mother smiling, tells me, I am too sanguine; but my dear Celia, I always was
inclined to take the brightest side of the prospect, to hope for the best, and
when disappointment arrives, to submit with as much patience as I can. I am
what is generally termed a castle builder; it is a weakness (if it deserves the
appellation) from which I derive amusement at least, and though I know at the
very moment I am indulging those sanguine ideas, that my hopes have no more
foundation, than the bubble blown from the pipe of a playful boy; yet I cannot
help being pleased with the airy fabric of my own creating, and as soon as one
vanishes, (to continue the allusion) I puff out another, and so prevent myself
from becoming a prey to despair. And, believe me Celia, I consider this
disposition, as one of the choicest gifts of heaven. Adieu my friend; may you
be happier than

your MERIEL.

LETTER XXVII. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, December 5 th, 1778.
IT is now some months since I have taken up my pen to address my dear Celia.
Several times lately I have essayed to do it, but unable to bear a retrospect
of my late heavy affliction, have from time to time, deferred the painful
recital, till I begin to fear my dear friend will think I am either numbered
with the dead, or become forgetful of her friendship. I have a long tale to
tell my dear girl, a tale, which I fear, will steal many a tear from your eyes
as you peruse it. In my last I informed you of my mother's ill health, and how
unable we were to procure any proper advice or assistance. From that time her
malady daily increased. I finished my little collection of poems and presented
them to a bookseller; but he told me, I had mistaken my talents, and that the
whole collection was not worth a guinea. Disheartened and dispirited I returned
to my mother, and now gave up my whole time to watching and attending her. Her
disorder increased with such rapidity, that in the course of a few weeks she
was confined to her bed. What a prospect had I now before me, a beloved parent
sinking by slow degrees into the grave; when I had no method of procuring the
comforts, and even the necessaries of life were denied. I had parted with all
our apparel, except a change of linen, and had now past one whole day without
food. My mother made no complaints; but her pale wan countenance, was to me a
thousand times more affecting than unavailing exclamations. Our credit had been
long lost in the neighborhood, and I knew that in a few days we must
inevitably perish for want. In this situation, I took a resolution to go out in
the close of the evening and solicit the charity of the benevolent. I told my
tale of sorrow to many of my own sex. They either heard me not, or disbelieved
my assertions, and after sauntering through the streets near three hours, one
cold wet night in October, I at length collected about sixpence, and with it
having procured some trifling nourishment for my almost famished parent, I
returned, allowing myself only a halfpenny roll. When I carried my little
morsel to her bedside, she anxiously enquired how I had procured it. "Some
charitable disposed person," said I, "gave me the means; take it my mother, eat
and be comforted."

Sinking nature required support; she eat the offered morsel, but seasoned it
with tears of heartfelt anguish.

The next day I determined again to try my new employment, and for that purpose
wandered out toward the park. It was Sunday, the day was fine, I went in and
seating myself on a bench, looked at the gay throng that crowded the mall,
compared their situations with my own, and began to think myself the most
unfortunate of human beings. I knew I had never deviated from the path of
virtue; I had never committed any action deserving such abject misery, and I
saw many women who had forfeited all claim to honor and respect, enjoying all
the luxuries of life. At that moment reason, religion, integrity forsook me;
and I wished myself in the same situation with those victims to vice, if by so
doing, I could procure sustenance for my mother.

You will, perhaps ask, my dear Celia, if we had no friends whatever, to whom
we could apply for relief; alas! my dear girl, you know nothing of the world;
those who have drank deep of the cup of affliction can tell, that poverty and
friendship are utter strangers to each other. While I was indulging these
painful reflections, an elderly gentlewoman, seated herself beside me, and
viewing my person and dress with a scrutinizing eye, began some trifling
discourse, and at length asked me, if I was born in London. From chatting at
first on indifferent subjects, we began to remark the different appearances of
the passing multitude. The old lady's remarks were just and pertinent; her
discourse breathed the true spirit of philanthropy. I imagined I had found a
friend, and without reserve unbosomed myself to her; related my story of past
and present distress; she heard me with attention, and, me thought, I saw a
gleam of compassion pass across her features. I seized the propitious moment,
and in the humblest accent petitioned relief.

"Poor child," said she, "I believe your story to be true; innocence and
simplicity, are indeliably marked upon your countenance; what is in my power I
will do for you, though the means are but small." She then drew forth her purse,
and presented me with half a crown: it is only for those who have been in
similar circumstances to concieve the tide of joy that rushed upon my heart at
the possession of this little piece of silver; I eagerly kissed the hand that
conveyed it to me, and would have spoke, but tears were the only thanks I could
return; they were the sincerest, for they came warm from the heart.

I left my seat with precipitation, and was preparing to return home; but my
benefactress stopped me. "Miss Howard," said she, "I believe I have it my power
to serve you; meet me here again tomorrow." I promised to meet her and
returned to my mother with a heart lightened of half its sorrows. No doubt,
said I, this lady will endeavor to extricate us from our present distress, and
put us in some way of earning future subsistence.

Elated with these hopes, I repaired next day to the appointed place; but after
having waited two hours was obliged to return without seeing my benefactress.
Something has detained her unexpectedly, said I, she will undoubtedly come
tomorrow: but tomorrow passed as yesterday had done, and I was again
disappointed.

The third morning, though I had used the most rigid economy, I found myself
again pennyless. However, spiritless and miserable as I was, I determined once
more to repair to the park. My pace was slow, my looks dejected and my eyes
streaming with tears. I had hardly proceeded half the length of the mall, when
I heard myself called, and turning round perceived my benefactress.

"My good girl," said she, "I almost feared I should not meet you, I have been
obliged to go into the country since I saw you, but I had not forgot you; come
dry your eyes, I have met with a gentleman who will be your friend, if you mind
how you behave yourself. He has sent you half a guinea; and if you will come
this evening and sup at my house, in Soho square, I will introduce you to him."

"Alas! madam," said I, "my appearance at your house will only disgrace you;
nor can I suppose any gentleman will greatly interest himself in behalf of a
poor unfortunate girl, without requiring a return which virtue and religion
will not suffer me to make."

"Don't be foolish, child," said the old lady, "virtue and religion are very
pretty words; but pray tell me, will they keep your mother from starving."

"Oh! madam," I replied, "will it not be worse than death to brand her name
with infamy? Alas! I never could bear the scorn of the world, and the reproofs
of my own conscience, oppressed with guilt and shame. Tempt me not, dear madam,
to forsake the path of rectitude; let me retain my innocence, and come what
may, I shall die in peace."

"This is fine talking, Miss Howard, but let me tell you, it is a very selfish
way of arguing. You acknowledge, that the loss of virtue would make you
unhappy. Are you not already unhappy in a superlative degree; and does that
unhappiness in the least contribute to relieve your own or your mother's wants.
No, does not the sight of your misery rather increase hers? Come, then, my dear
girl, act the heroine, take this load of sorrow upon yourself, and save a
parent, whom you tenderly love, from perishing with famine."

This was a strange way of arguing, Celia, yet it had the desired effect, I
thought it was possible to hide my infamy from my mother, and confine my misery
to my own bosom. When the old woman found my resolution began to waver, she
plied me with sophistical arguments, described in glowing colors the gaiety
and splendour in which many women of loose characters lived, and contrasted it
strongly with my poor miserable apartment, where my sure attendants were
pinching cold and hunger, and my only companion a beloved parent sinking under
the complicated evils of sickness and famine.

"Oh! save me! save me!" cried I eagerly, "from the dreadful thought, teach me
how to snatch her from impending destruction, to administer support to her
wasting frame, and comfort her declining hours. Do with me as you will; save,
protect my dear mother, and let me be the only sacrifice."

Having brought me to this horrible resolution, and recieved my promise of
coming to her house in the evening; she left me, and I repaired home; by the
way procuring a bottle of wine and some other necessaries for my mother. She
had been anxious at my long stay, and when I produced the refreshments, again
enquired how I had purchased them. A lie, (the first I had ever told her) now
suggested itself; I said I had performed a little work for a lady in the
neighborhood, and she had liberally rewarded me; but when I mentioned going
out again in the evening, the pathetic manner in which she entreated me to
guard my honor, as my only treasure, and as I wished to preserve her heart
from breaking, almost staggered my resolution: but having given her some
refreshment, I saw her spirits revive, and that by degrees she sunk into a
sweet refreshing slumber. I determined to sacrifice every other consideration
rather than see her reduced again to the extremity of misery she had so lately
experienced.

Oh! ye rigidly virtuous of my own sex, turn not from me with horror and
contempt, consider my agonizing distress, glance with an eye of compassion over
the dreadful resolution, and let a tear of pity blot the offense from your
memories.

Great and painful were the struggles of my soul, while gazing on my sleeping
parent. I knelt by the bedside, and would have prayed, but, alas! that
consolation was denied me. How could I address a Being of infinite purity, when
I was going to offer myself a sacrifice at the shrine of guilt and pollution. I
thought I should have sunk under the agonies I endured; once I wished for
death, but then the thought of what my poor mother would suffer, immediately
repelled the impious desire; at length, I clasped my hands and raising my eyes
to heaven, cried, "Father of mercy direct me, oh! give me fortitude to bear thy
dispensations as I ought, or pardon the weakness of an afflicted mortal." I
then kissed my sleeping mother, and with a heart almost broken repaired to Soho.

The old woman received me cordially, but reproved my pensive countenance and
swolen eyes; she made me drink some tea, and then taking me up stair^, insisted
on my dressing myself in a brown lutestring nightgown, with a cap and linen
suitable. We then went into an elegant parlour, and in a few moments Mr.
Welldon was announced: he was a man upwards of thirty, of a comely person,
polite address, and insinuating manner; he regarded me with visible attention,
and when he spoke to me, it was with a mixture of respect and polite freedom.
My feelings during supper were beyond description, poignant: I could scarcely
restrain my tears, but the reproving looks of the old woman told me how much
they would offend her: I therefore endeavored to stifle my emotions; but when
the cloth was removed and she arose to quit the room, I involuntarily caught
her hand, and with a look which pleaded strongly for compassion burst into
tears.

"Why, what does the girl cry for?" said she sneeringly, "was it not by your
own desire you came here? come, Mr. Welldon, you must get the better of these
pretty airs, though perhaps, indeed you may think her the more agreeable for
them." Then disengaging her hand from my grasp, she left the room.

"Then I am inevitably lost," cried I, clasping my hands in a wild agony, and
redoubling my tears. "My sweet girl," said Mr. Welldon, "this distress, which
is too acute, to be construed into affectation, greatly suprises me. Was it not
by your own free will that you came here to meet me?"

"It was, it was," said I, "but oh! sir, if you only knew the anguish it has
cost me, to form the horrid design, you would pity me, indeed you would
commiserate my sufferings."

"Dear creature," said he, drawing his chair close to mine, "you know not how
greatly your sorrow interests me; tell me, is there any thing within the
compass of my fortune, can restore peace to your agitated bosom; say how can I
serve you, how render you happy?"

"Oh! there is one way, and only one way," said I, "by which you can promote my
happiness," and I dropped on my knees before him. "Rise, rise, my dear girl,"
said he, "and do not hesitate to point out this only way, by which I can prove
myself your friend."

"This humliating posture best suits me," I replied, "here will I remain till I
move your heart to compassion: indeed I am not that vile creature you may
perhaps think me. I always avoided the inticements of vice till this fatal
night; but the miseries of a beloved parent, sinking to the grave, oppressed by
sickness and poverty drove me to sacrifice my honor, to procure the means of
prolonging her invaluable existence: if you are sincere in your professions of
friendship, relieve my dear mother, and oh! I besceeh you, spare the virtue of
her wretched daughter."

"Rise, then, my afflicted girl," said he, "you shall be convinced of my
sincerity; I will obey the dictates of humanity; we will instantly go to your
mother." He then left me for a few moments, when returning, he led me to a
coach, and taking my direction, ordered the coachman to drive to our poor
habitation. I hesitated at going away in the clothes the old woman had made me
put on, but my deliverer told me he had paid for them.

When we arrived at our lodging, a mixed sensation of pain and pleasure dwelt
upon my mind, and as I ran up stairs my limbs trembled so, they would scarce
support me; Mr. Welldon followed me up: I opened the door of the apartment, and
rushing to the bedside, cried "see my dear mother, the friend which heaven has
sent us." My poor mother raised herself feebly in the bed, looked first at me,
then at Mr. Welldon, then pointing to my altered dress and crying "these are
the wages of infamy, all but this I could have born patiently." She fell back
in a fit.

I thought she was gone forever; frantic with despair, I tore off the dress
which had so much alarmed her, and throwing myself on the bed beside her, vowed
never more to rise, but that my life should expiate my intended offense. Mr.
Welldon had ran away for medical assistance, and entered the room with an
apothecary, just as my mother gave some signs of returning life. Proper
remedies were immediately applied and Mr. Welldon soon convinced my reviving
parent, that I had not entailed infamy on her latter days, or hastened the
period of her existence by guilt or shame.

Our generous benefactor, now supplied me with money, not only to procure every
necessary, but every comfort of life; and engaged the apothecary to attend my
mother every day: but his care was all in vain; her disorder daily gained
ground, and I saw her end rapidly approaching. One day, when Mr. Welldon called
to see us, my mother beckoned him to the bedside. "Sir," said she, "if the
prayers of a poor dying mortal are heard in heaven, you will undoubtedly be
rewarded for your benevolence, toward a helpless widow and orphan. To your
generosity I owe the honor of my child: oh! may she never again be tempted to
doubt the care of a watchful providence; and to avoid a temporary evil, rush
into lasting misery. To your care Mr. Welldon I commit her, poor and
defenseless as she is; I do not fear your integrity; for the man, who in the
gay hour of uncontrouled passion could save an innocent creature from
destruction, will never lay a deliberate plan for her seduction. Meriel, you
must be humble and industrious, and trust heaven for support." Mr. Welldon
promised he would be my guardian and protector from every evil. "I place an
implicit confidence in your word," said my mother, "and shall die in peace."

"Oh! my dear Meriel," continued she, faintly grasping my hand, "may thou be
virtuous and happy, and may the Omnipotent preserve thee through life."

Celia, I feel I am unable to proceed, the moment that severed me from my dear
mother will be always remembered as the most painful of my life. Adieu till I
am more composed.

MERIEL.

LETTER XXVIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
December 25 th, 1778.
I AGAIN sit down to proceed in my melancholy narrative; a month from the time
of my dear mother's death must be passed over in silence; my affliction was
poignant, but time and the efforts of reason by degrees softened it. Mr.
Welldon suffered that time to elapse before he ventu^ed to see me; he had
placed me with a friend of his, who is a milliner, and though he sent every day
to enquire after my health, he avoided visiting me, fearing the censure of the
world might injure my reputation. My grief being in a great measure abated,
Mrs. Lacour took an opportunity of speaking to me concerning my future
prospects in life: "Mr. Welldon," said she, "intends, if you approve the plan,
that you shall remain with me till you have attained a competent knowledge of
the millinery business, to be able to support yourself without being any longer
troublesome to your benefactor. I know, Miss Howard," continued she, "that Mr.
Welldon, does not think you an encumbrance, and that you are in no danger of
any improper attempts from him; as I have heard him say the innate goodness of
your heart has raised you so in his esteem, that he regards you in the light of
a sister; and as such will serve and protect you: but my dear young lady, you
are possessed of strong sensibility and to such a heart as yours dependence
must be a heavy burden. As another motive for your endeavoring to render
yourself independent, I must inform you that Mr. Welldon will in a few weeks be
married, and however innocent your mind, believe me the world will readily cast
illiberal censures on a young woman who lived in a state of dependence on a
married man; and should it reach his lady's ears might be the source of great
uneasiness, if not the cause of an irreparable breach between them."

I was convinced of the propriety of these arguments, and cheerfully
acquiesced, while my heart overflowed with gratitude toward my generous
benefactor, and I breathed a silent prayer to heaven, that his felicity in the
married state might be equal to his deserts.

A few days after this, Mr. Welldon called. I could not refrain my tears at
sight of this worthy man. Past scenes of sorrow rushed upon my mind, which
joined to the recollection of my then forlorn, dependant situation almost
overcame me. He suffered me to ease my full heart, and then gently enquiring
after my health, and how I liked Mrs. Lacour's family, hinted at my remaining
with her, till I had attained a competent knowledge of her business.

"I know, my dear Miss Howard," said he, "that your education and
accomplishments fit you to be placed in a more elevated sphere. But my good
girl must consider that those accomplishments in her present circumstances will
be of no use. Nay, if they are suffered to appear will only excite the envy and
ill nature of those with whom she is at present obliged to associate. I would
by no means have you neglect those brilliant talents, with which nature has
endowed you. It is not to be doubted, but you will find leisure hours when the
pen or the pencil will be a happy relief to your mind, and prevent your
dwelling too intently on past melancholy events. But let those hours of
relaxation be but few, above all things, be careful not to let your companions
discover the superiority you certainly possess over them. Educated, as you have
been, perhaps you may think, that with great propriety you might undertake the
education of children in some family of distinction, or become companion to
some lady. I acknowledge, my fair friend, these are the situations for which
you seem most adapted, but here an insurmountable obstacle arises; you have no
female friend who can recommend you; and the recommendation of a man, in these
cases, in general injures the person they mean to serve. You must, therefore,
apply yourself attentively to your new profession, and place a firm reliance on
Providence to reward your industry with success."

I had never attempted to interrupt Mr. Welldon, during this friendly
harrangue, but finding he now continued silent, I endeavored, as well as my
tears would permit, to convince him of my gratitude, by promising to do every
thing which he had enjoined.

Mrs. Lacour was now desired to come in, when all terms having been previously
agreed on, he paid my apprentice fee, and it was determined I should remain
with her twelve months. Mr. Welldon then told me he had provided me an
apartment to myself, and begged my acceptance of the furniture it contained.
"This day three weeks, Miss Howard," said he, "will make me the happiest of men
in a union with a young lady of great merit, on whom I have deservedly placed
my affections. We shall set off immediately on a visit to the continent to see
some relations, who reside constantly in the south of France, so that it may be
a long time before I see you again. In this little pocketbook you will find a
trifle to answer your immediate expenses, and a direction to a gentleman, in
the city, where in case of any future exigencies, you may apply, and he will
give you both assistance and advice. God bless you, my dear girl; you have my
best wishes, and may rest assured of my unalterable friendship." He then
saluted me with the affection of a brother, and took his leave.

Soon after he was gone, Mrs. Lacour, by way of diverting my mind from the
gloom our parting had cast over it, asked me if I had no curiosity to see the
apartment Mr. Welldon had furnished for me. I followed her up two pair of
stairs, into a neat back room, where was a tent bed, of striped Manchester,
with every necessary apurtenance, a case of drawers, a neat dressing case, and
a small trunk, the key of which Mrs. Lacour gave me, and bidding me with a
smile examine my treasures, went down stairs.

On opening the trunk I found it contained a piece of gray lutestring, two
pieces of dark chintz, each enough for a gown, about ten yards of muslin, and a
piece of fine linen. Removing these, I discovered at the bottom, a neat edition
of the English poets, together with a bible and common prayer book; here also,
I found a roll of drawing paper, which led me to imagine I was supplied with
other materials for this elegant amusement, and on opening the drawers, I found
I had not been deceived in my conjectures; for there I found a box of crayons,
pencils and colors, and a leather writing case, in which was a letter of
truly brotherly advice. On opening a light closet that adjoined my bed
chamber, I discovered another mark of the friendly attention of my benefactor;
for there was a small piano forte, with a collection of music by the best
masters. My little pocketbook contained a bank note for fifty pounds.

Oppressed by a sense of these numerous obligations, my heart almost bursting
with grateful emotions, I sunk on my knees by the bed side, and poured forth my
thanks to the great Disposer of all things, entreated that the choicest of his
blessings might be showered on my benefactor, and prayed his mercy ever to
protect and direct me, nor suffer me again, impiously to doubt his power and
watchful care.

The next morning, I entered on my new employment with alacrity. It is an
employment that keeps the mind continually amused. Mrs. Lacour is an amiable,
cheerful woman, and some of her young people, sensible, well informed girls. I
do not like Mr. Lacour: he appears to me a pert, illiterate coxcomb. But this
does not give me any great uneasiness, as I am not much in his company, except
at meal times. When the business of the day is finished, I retire to my own
apartment, where writing, reading or music, sweetly relaxes and chears my mind:
the time never hangs heavy; I feel a charming serenity pervade my heart, and
Hope, that bright celestial guest, again has taken up her residence in my
bosom. On a Sundy evening, I never fail visiting the dear spot, that contains
all that was earthly of my beloved mother. I cannot describe my sensations when
I approach the place. They are far from painful Celia, for the remembrance of
her piety and virtue is (...) ^alm to my heart; and while my eye i^ fixed on
the grave where she lies, my mental faculties behold her blessed spirit
beatified, and enjoying the fullness of heavenly bliss in that mansion, where,
I (...), I shall one day again embrace her. When I return from these
contemplations, my soul is so attuned to harmony, that I sing the hymns or
anthems suited to the day, with a pleasure undescribable. I have wrote a few
lines, which you will find fully expressive of the frame of my mind. I cannot
help regreting, my dearest friend, the happy days I spent with you in the
convent, though all-chearing Hope bids me look forward; and while I take my
present lot with gratitude, humbly aspire to a blessed hereafter. Enclosed are
the lines I mention; I sing it to that sweet plaintive air, we were both so
fond of. I shall sometimes please myself with the thought, that we may perhaps
after you have received this, both sing it at the same moment. God bless you my
dear Celia.

MERIEL.

TO HOPE.
OH! cease, vain busy fancy cease
To dwell on scenes long past,
When every hour was winged with peace,
With joy too great to last.
But come, sweet Hope, celestial power,
Thy healing comfort bring;
Oh sooth my mind, and let me soar
Upon thine airy wing.
When through the vaulted aisle I roam,
And breath the sigh sincere,
Or over my mother's hallowed tomb
Drop the sad filial tear:
It Is thou can cheer the solemn hour,
Can peace and comfort bring,
(...) my thoughts, and bid them soar,
Upon thine airy wing.
Methinks I hear thee whispering say;
Mortal, thy tears give over,
Thy mother, thou in realms of day,
Shall meet to part no more.
Soothed by thy words, benignant powe
My soul exulting springs,
And towered the sky, with rapture soars
Upon thine airy wings.
LETTER XXIX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, January 10 th, 1779.
THERE is in this family a Mademoiselle Bagatelle, who is Mrs. Lacour's
forewoman; I do not like her, Celia, she dresses in the extremity of the
fashion, takes snuff* rouges high, and is high in the good graces of Monsieur
Lacour. I can perceive they perfectly understand each other, though the prudent
wife either does not, or will not, see the intimacy that subsists between them.

It has often been a subject of wonder to me, how people, whose tempers and
dispositions are the very reverse of each other, could voluntarily put on the
hymeneal yoke together; and yet we daily ^ee instances of sense and folly;
virtue and vice; understanding and ignorance; politeness and vulgarity; youth
and age; beauty and deformity, being linked in the same chain: nay, what is
more surprising that both parties eagerly put it on. How are we to account for
these inconsistencies in human nature, nothing can be more opposite than the
dispositions of Monsleur and Mrs. Lacour, and yet I have been told that it was
a marriage of inclination and on the lady's side, entirely against the
approbation of her friends; hence we must suppose, that either love throws a
mist over the discerning optics of its votaries, or that their is a fate in
marriage, which it is impossible to counteract.

You will, perhaps, wonder, my dear Celia, that among the many long epistles I
have lately wrote to you, the name of Rainsforth has never escaped me: indeed,
I have had afflictions of so much heavier a nature, than merely the loss of a
lover, that some months passed in which I hardly remembered there was such a
person in being: however in my present situation, being more easy in my mind,
thought has frequently recurred to the period when I expected to have been
united to him by indissoluble ties. When I think of him, I am feelingly
convinced that my heart is still attached; I almost doubt the intelligence of
his infidelity, though conveyed to me by the hand of his father: I feel (...)
restless curiosity to be informed of his happiness; I fancy, sometimes that he
might have heard reports to my disadvantage; he might have been informed of my
unfortunate elopement, of my thoughtless correspondence with Pringle: every
circumstance may have been exaggerated; and he may not be so culpable as I at
first thought him. These ideas often crowd my imagination. But he is married,
Celia, and let his virtues be ever so briliant, he can be nothing to me.

I have heard by mere accident that my brother is in a fair way of making his
fortune in India; I have wrote to him several times, but recieved no answer;
not even a line has arrived from him, since the bill, which I mentioned in a
former letter, was paid. Mr. Mossop's family are I find removed into the
country, and as to any of those who called themselves my friends in the day of
prosperity, if I meet them now they stare me confidently in the face, but do
not in the least recollect me. Mrs. Lacour, tells me, that when fortune removes
friends to any considerable distance from each other, the party who is the
favorite of the fickle goddess almost immediately becomes near-sighted, and is
afflicted with a short memory.

January 19 th.
I was yesterday sent to wait on a lady with some caps, etc. in St. James's
square. When having waited about half an hour in a cold empty parlour, I
thought I heard a voice that was familiar to my ears, but could not recollect
whose it was. I was striving to call it to my memory in vain, when the door
opened, and who should I behold but Miss Pringle, and another young lady. "Come
into this room young woman," said she, "here is a fire, and we will look over
your trumpery." I went in my heart sinking as I moved; for I knew enough of
this once affectionate friend to suppose she would not readily acknowledge an
acquaintance with a milliner's apprentice. I saw, the moment she cast her eyes
on me, she recollected me; but as I did not wish to show an inclination to
renew our acquaintance, I cast down my eyes and remained silent, thinking that
if she did not choose to take notice of me, she might settle it within herself
that I did not know her. But the lady's curiosity was more predominent than her
pride. She looked at me several times and at length cried "if I did not think
it almost impossible I should say your name was Howard." "My name is Howard,
ma'am," said I coldly. "Why, sure as I am alive, it is Meriel Howard." "The
very same, Miss Pringle." "La! my dear girl, why how came you in this
situation, such a fortune as you had left you." "We are all subject to
vicissitudes of fortune," said I smiling, "but I am extremely happy in my
present situation."

"Happy!" said she, lifting up her eyes in surprise. "I am astonished to hear
you say so, for my part I should be the most miserable creature on earth, was I
reduced to carry a band-box." "Happiness and misery, Miss," said I, "are in
general the result of our own ideas: if I am content in my humble station, I am
in my own mind as happy, nay, perhaps happier than the woman, who riding in a
chariot and pair, envies one whose superior fortune can command four or six
horses."

She did not seem to comprehend me, but turning to the other lady, said, "well
I vow sister it is very astonishing; but this young woman, only four years ago,
had a fortune of four thousand pounds, her father lived in the neighborhood of
our country house. My brother was very fond of her once, and I believe she did
not altogether dislike him, did you Meriel? I fancy your little heart never
regained its liberty."

"I rather suppose, Miss Pringle, that it never was a captive. If at one time I
was foolish enough to fancy myself in love with your brother, it was before I
had the power of distinguishing a real from an ideal passion, or before I was a
competent judge of what would be most conducive to my own happiness."

"Aye," said she, "you can talk of it with a great deal of composure now, but
you certainly was very fond of him once or you would not have resolved to run
away with him; nay, can you deny that you were out of your senses about him,
when you heard he was married."

This cruel reflection on my unfortunate malady, which was occasioned by the
severest affliction that ever child (...), was more than my spirits could
support, I turned my face from her to to hide the tear* that trickled fast from
my eyes; but could not command my voice to give her an answer, when she
continued: "Well, but where are Mr. and Mrs. Howard, and master Richard?" "My
brother is in India -- I have no parents."

"Poor, dear girl," said the other young lady, now speaking for the first time,
"that is a dreadful thing. I know what it is to have no parents." She took my
hand, and I saw her mild eyes glisten with compassion.

I wished to put an end to this painful conversation, and therefore desired to
know if they would keep any of the caps. "Oh, yes, I shall have several, but
stop Meriel, I must let my mother know you are here. Dear, how she will be
surprised; and you shall go down to Baker, she will pay you, and do have a
glass of wine before you go, and a bit of bride cake: you don't know I am
married."

"I wish you much happiness madam," said I, coldly; "but I cannot stay to take
any refreshment: I have been here much longer than I ought to have staid." You
must know, my dear Celia, that my pride was hurt at the idea of standing first
to be catechized by the mother, and then be dismissed to the housekeeper for
wine and cake; and this treatment from a girl, who once called herself my
friend, and thought herself honored by the title. However, I could not escape;
the mother was called, and the bell rang for Mrs. Baker. I answered Mrs.
Pringle's questions in as short a manner as possible; but obstinately refused
going down with the housekeeper. "Ah! poor girl," said Mrs. Pringle, in an
affected whisper to her daughter; "let the wine be brought up, my dear; you see
she cannot as yet submit to the alteration in her situation."

"You are mistaken madam," said I, "I do not feel the least embarassment from
the reflection that I owe my support to industry: it is what many, more worthy
than myself are obliged to do, it is by no means hu^^liating. True dignity is
seated (...) the soul, nor can (...) situation make me forget the respect eve^
due to myself. I cannot but reflect ladies, that I am the same Miss Howard,
whom some few years ago, you were so extremely ^ond of, and eagerly striving
which could show her the most respect. Though I am now bereaved of that fortune,
which I percieve was the magnet which attracted your attentions. I can make
proper distinctions; as a trades person, I can easily submit to be turned over
to your housekeeper for payment, but remembering I have once been your
companion, am still your equal, I cannot submit to be placed on a level with
your servants."

They could not answer. Shame and astonishment tied their tongues. I curtsied
slightly and followed Mrs. Baker out of the room. While she was paying me, the
loquacious housekeeper informed me that her master had been married about
three weeks; that he never saw Miss Pringle till within a month of their union;
that he danced with her at a ball, and was struck with her pleasing person, and
insinuating manner; "but I can see," continued she, "it will not be a very
happy union; and Miss Sally, poor girl, will be more unhappy than ever. It was
a sad thing, sir John left her dependant on her brother." "What then," said I,
"your master is a baronet?" "No," said she, "his father was a knight, but the
title died with him. He was a wealthy citizen, and was knignted for carrying an
address to the king on some particular occasion." I had now received my money,
and not wishing to pry into the secrets of a family, with whom I desired not to
form any connection, I wished Mrs. Baker a good morning, and left the house. In
the hall I met Miss Sally. "You will have a long walk Miss Howard," said she;
"had I any command here, you should not carry that heavy box."

"It is not heavy, Miss," said I.

"But it is cumbersome," she replied, "and you are not accustomed to such
employment." She then opened the door herself, and smiling, with a sweet look
of benevolence, wished me a good morning. I pitied the dear girl, for sure I
am, if she is dependant on her brother, her new sister will not contribute to
make her life very comfortable.

As I walked home, I could not avoid reflecting on this rencounter with Miss
Pringle; nor did my heart entirely approve my own conduct: there was too much
pride in the manner in which I spoke to her: indeed, since I have been poor,
Celia, I have discovered that I am very proud, much more so than is becoming; I
will endeavor to correct this error, and in future adapt my sentiments to the
station in which it has pleased Providence to place me.

I have met with many civilities from some of Mrs. Lacour's customers;
especially a Mrs. Moreton, who is a woman of very genteel fortune, at least, if
I am to conjecture from the manner in which she lives: she is very fond of
poetry, and has advised me to endeavor to raise a subscription for the
publication of those poems I formerly mentioned to you. Mrs. Lacour does not
disapprove the plan, and I am by this indulging woman, allowed more time to
pursue my favorite study, than I should have met with in any other place. I
have obtained several very respectable names to my subscription; and have some
cards of proposals printed which I keep in the shop to present to the ladies
who constantly frequent it. I cannot say, Celia, but it would be much more
pleasing to me, could I obtain a living by the exertion of any of my natural
talents, than by following the straight forward path of the plodding woman of
business; besides I was never designed for a milliner, I cannot flatter, I
cannot tell a woman whom age, and other natural defects, have rendered
extremely plain, that a full dress cap with artificial flowers small
handkerchief, and all the gay trappings that belong to the smiling season of
eighteen, will become her face and figure: and yet this is a very necessary
ingredient in the composition of a milliner. I wish to my heart some other plan
could be struck out, where I should not be obliged to say and attest things so
directly contrary to my own opinion. I am not so happy in this family as I at
first thought I should be, Mr. Lacour pays me too much attention lately; I hate
the forward concieted fellow, though were it only to mortify Mademoiselle I could
take a pleasure in listening to his nonsense; but when I reflect that by so
doing I may wound the peace of a deserving woman, who treats me with
tenderness, and favors me with her esteem, I feel such a mixture of horror end
detestation rise in my heart, that I frequently answer his passionate sallies
with an acrimony, that makes him bite his lips with vexation. I shall be glad
when my time is expired, though I have as yet thought of no elligible plan to
pursue in future. Adieu, my friend, believe in every change of fortune I am

yours affectionately. MERIEL.

LETTER XXX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, July 15 th, 1780.
AGAIN, my beloved Celia, am I cast upon the world without a friend to guide
me; scarcely yet have I seen twenty years, and what vicissitudes of fortune
have I experienced. In my last I mentioned my design of publishing some poems
by subscription; but in that design I am disappointed, as well as in every
other from which I have ever hoped to extract either pleasure or comfort.

About a month since I recieved the following letter, from the gentleman to
whom Mr. Welldon gave me a direction; I transcribe it for your perusal, that
you may see how unfortunate I am in having the most innocent actions of my life
wrested in such a manner as to be made to appear to my disadvantage.

TO MISS HOWARD.
Friday-street, May 3 d. MISS HOWARD,
WHEN your friend, Mr. Welldon, left England he did not propose staying above
six weeks or two months at most; but unfortunately for him he has been detained
on the continent by a continued series of ill health, and he is now at
Aix-la-Chappelle in a very dangerous state. When last I saw him he gave me a
very particular account of your first acquaintance with him, an account which I
must confess raised you both in my opinion, as it proved the goodness of your
hearts: he also informed me in what manner he had placed you with Mrs. Lacour,
and desired I would frequently call and enquire how you went on, and whether
you were satisfied with the treatment you recieved. Family uneasiness, and
various vexations have prevented my fulfilling my promise, till last Thursday,
when I called at Mrs. Lacour's, and the result of that visit leads me to
trouble you with this letter; for as I must naturally feel interested in the
welfare of every one dear to Mr. Welldon, I think it my duty to give you a
little advice, and to let you know in what light you are considered by the
major part of the family where you reside. At the time I made my visit you were
out, waiting on some ladies: Mrs. Lacour spoke of you in the tenderest manner,
but said you were by no means calculated for the business Mr. Welldon had
placed you in; her sensibility is very great sir, said she, and her notions so
very refined and delicate, she is totally unable to bear the rude and often
insulting manners of many of our customers: besides, sir, she loves study too
well ever to make any great proficient at her needle. Mrs. Lacour being called
away, a pert, forward French woman undertook to finish your character: she
threw out the most malignant aspersions on your conduct in general, said you
had made yourself the laughing stock of the whole family, that many of the
ladies who frequented the shop, distinguished you by the appellation of little
scribbler: that you were thoughtless, extravagant, proud, vain, and indolent:
and that you had by your artful conduct alienated the affection of monsieur
Lacour from his wife, and in all these assertions she wss joined by her
companions, who seemed to consider you only as a fit object of ridicule.

Though I could not avoid seeing the motive that instigated these women was envy,
yet the reviewers call it sad trash, and my lady I must think you have not
conducted yourself altogether in the prudent manner I should have expected from
the character Mr. Welldon gave of you. Consider Miss Howard, industry is the
only hope you can have of future support: let me conjure you therefore, as a
friend, to throw aside the pen, and apply to your needle, and let your
inventive fancy be exerted to decorate the persons of your fair country women.
Believe me, the hill of Parnassus is too high for you to climb, unless you had
the hand of independance to help you up; the finest turned poem will be
entirely overlooked by the world when ushered into it by an obscure author;
while a raphsody of nonsense will be universally read and applauded when the
author is publicly known to be favored with the smiles of fortune. We will
suppose, my dear, that you had finished a pleasing elegant poem, essay, novel,
or what not; and that some bookseller should for a trifling consideration
engage to introduce it to public notice; a new publication no sooner makes it
appearance than the people of fashion enquire, who the author is. "Have you
read the new poem my lady?" says sir Timothy Trifle. "No not I, is it good for
any thing?" "'Pon honor I don't know, Pedigree told me it was wrote by a
little milliner, who lived at Lacour's,"

"Prithee, dear sir Timothy, no more, I am quite sick already; what can a
milliner's girl know of litirature?" Thus my dear, you will find people of
fashion will not give your book a perusal: and though there are some few who may
read it with pleasure, and give it the encomiums its merit deserves, they will
be ashamed to avow an opinion contrary to that of their superiors; while the
generality of the world satisfied with the sentence already passed, will not be
at the trouble of reading and judging for themselves: the consequence will be
you will not sell enough to pay the expense of printing and paper, and you will
have the mortification to see your poems used as waste paper, to wrap up
parcels, etc.

I flatter myself, your natural good sense will lead you to consider this
letter in the friendly light it was intended, that you will do your utmost to
eradicate from the minds of your companions every idea they may have formed to
your disadvantage, that you will drop all thought of shining in the literary
world, and apply yourself cheerfully to that employment by which you may hope
to pass through life with comfort and respectability.

I am, your sincere wellwisher, H. FRIENDLY.


The reception of this letter made me very uneasy, especially the part which
mentioned the illness of my kind hearted benefactor: I was grieved also to find
what a bubble I had been to Mademoiselle and all the apprentices, as they had
all pretended to be greatly pleased with my writings, and had often said it was
a thousand pities, so bright a genius shonld be buried in oblivion: however it
opened my eyes to their deceit and flattery; and I determined to be more upon
my guard in future. I felt extremely grateful to Mr. Friendly for the trouble
he had taken in writing to me, answered his letter immediately, promised to
profit by his advice, and reqnested to be again favored with a few lines
whenever he should hear from Mr. Welldon.

From this time I applied myself with great assiduity to my employment; though I
could not help noticing a visible alteration in Mrs. Lacour's behavior: she
because cold and distant, frequently spoke to me in a tone of displeasure, and
seemed carefully to avoid my conversation, except what was absolutely necessary
in the business. The apprentices treated me with disrespect, and Mademoiselle
aimed at me the most pointed sarcasms. Things were in this situation, when one
day as I was sitting pensive in a little back parlour, where we usually
breakfasted, I was surprised by the sudden entrance of Monsieur Lacour, who
began in the usual strain to profess his admiration, and audaciously solicited
return of his illicit passion.

"Your insolence sir," said I, "is insufferable, I can no longer submit to it,
and if ever again you shock my ears with such infamous solicitations I will
inform your much injured wife of your intimacy with Mademoiselle." I then would
have left the room but he threw himself between me and the door, and seizing my
hand, impudently swore, my threat proceeded only from jealousy. "But come my
sweet creature," said he "do not let that make you uneasy, I will promise never
to speak to Bagatelle again." He then fell on his knees with a look of
ludicrous grimace, which at another time would only have made me laugh: but at
that time I felt far different sensations. Unable to free myself from his
grasp, and hurt at the mean opinion he entertained of me, all my fortitude
forsook me, and I burst into tears. At that moment the door opened, and in
rushed Mrs. Lacour, Mademoiselle and Mr. Friendly.

"Oh Meriel!" cried Mrs. Lacour; "I could not have believed" -- She would have
fallen to the ground, had I not sprang forward to catch her as she fainted.

"You see sir," said Mademoiselle to Mr. Friendly, as we were supporting Mrs.
Lacour to a chair. "You see sir, I told you only the truth." Monsieur, in the
general confusion walked unobserved away. My distress was very great to see
Mrs. Lacour in this situation. I feared it might be of dangerous consequence,
as she was far advanced in her pregnancy. I supported her in my arms, chafed
her temples with Hungary water, and on the first return of life, begged her not
to think me so guilty as I appeared. She shook her head, pushed me from her,
and leaning on Mademoiselle's arm, went out of the room.

I then addressed Mr. Friendly as a stranger; for I did not at that time
personally know him; and entreated he would endeavor to heal this breach
between Mrs. Lacour and myself: "indeed sir," said I, "she is the only friend I
have; I would sooner die than injure her." I then related briefly every thing
that had past, and fully explained the cause of the tears he saw me shed.

"Appearances are undoubtedly against you Miss Howard," said he, "but I am
willing to believe you innocent. I am extremely sorry there is any dissension
between you and Mrs. Lacour, she being as you have just remarked, your only
friend. I yesterday received a letter from Mrs. Welldon, informing me that her
husband died about a fortnight since. She mentions you as a person of whom Mr.
Welldon spoke in his last moments, and desires me to give you fifty pounds, to
buy mourning; at the same time she bids me inform you it is the last you will
recieve from her."

I was so overcome, indeed I may say stupefied with grief, I was totally unable
to answer. He saw and I believe pitied my distress* and thus continued. "I have
added to this little present fifty pounds more; and would advise you to leave
this family immediately, and in some genteel neigbourhood open a little shop,
endeavor to gain employment; be prudent and industrious, and I have no doubt
of your success; but prithee, good my girl, burn your pens and paper, and
believe me, a woman makes as awkward a figure engaged in literary pursuits, as
a counselor would do seated at a tambour frame or busied in assorting colors
for embroidery." I promised to remember his friendly advice, he paid me the
money and took his leave.

I was now anxious to see Mrs. Lacour but all attempts to that purpose were
fruitless. I wrote a letter protesting my innocence and received a verbal
answer by one of the aprentices that the thing was too plain to admit of any
doubt, that she wished me well but had no desire ever to see me again. I
retired to my apartment with a heart overcharged with sorrow. At any other
time, the death of my benevolent friend Mr. Welldon would have been in itself a
sufficient affliction: but now I had the additional one of knowing I had tho,
unintionally, injured the health of a woman, I sincerely esteemed, incurred the
censures of the world, and cast an indeliable blemish on my reputation, which
it had ever been my study to preserve unsullied. In these melancholy
reflections I past the day; in the evening the servant brought me up a candle
and some supper: but I was too much agitated to eat, and went early to bed,
though I was fully convinced that to sleep would be impossible.

About twelve o'clock I heard a great bustle below, and fearing for Mrs. Lacour
I jumped out of bed and opening my chamber door to listen, plainly heard one of
the young women say, "she cannot live, the doctor says it is impossible."
Terrified beyond measure I put on a few clothes and ran hastily down stairs,
determined at all events to see this dear sufferer, and by convincing her of my
innocence restore her mind to peace. The danger she was in had thrown the
family into such confusion, that I found no opposition made to my entering the
appartment. The curtains were close drawn round the bed, and there was little
light in the room, so that she did not perceive me when I entered, I found the
agitation of her mind had thrown her into a premature labor, and that the
surgeon imagined her life to be in iminent danger. Every other thought was now
absorbed in my anxiety for her. I beckoned her sister who was setting by the
bedside. She came to me, I told her the distress of my mind and begged her to
believe me not guilty. "Dear Meriel," said she, "I never thought you so, nor
would my poor sister have ever entertained an idea to your prejudice, had it
not been for the insinuations of Bagatelle, who has now plainly discovered the
motive which led her so maliciously to asperse your character: however no one
can now have a doubt of your innocence. Mademoiselle went out about eight this
evening, which greatly surprised us, as my sister was so ill. As the evening
advanced, her abscence became more astonishing, and about an hour since a
person called who had seen Bagatelle and the ungrateful Lacour get into a
chaise at an inn door and drive off for Dover."

Though my heart bled for Mrs. Lacour, I could not but rejoice that this
proceeding of theirs was a convicing proof of my innocence. I inquired, if this
unfortunate woman had been informed of their perfidy, and being answered in the
affirmative, and told that the intelligence had precipitated her illness, I
asked, if I might be permited to speak to her. When she was informed that I was
in the room, she called me to her with a faint voice, and taking hold of my
hand, said, "Meriel, forgive me, I have injured you; but I was myself
decieved." She could not say more, her pains became excruciating, and after
continuing many hours in a state of exquisite torture, she resigned her breath,
having given birth to a female infant who survived her mother but a few moments.

Lacour's flight, and his wife's death was soon spread abroad; and it was
discovered that he had not only collected all the debts, previous to his
departure, but had also stripped the house of every thing valuable, so that
when the creditors brought in their accounts, there was not sufficient property
to pay five shillings in the pound. Every thing was immediately seized, and the
hapless Mrs. Lacour would have been obliged to the parish for a decent funeral,
had not her sister, though but in indifferent circumstances and myself borne the
expense between us. When I had paid every necessary respect to the memory of
this unfortunate woman, I began to think of my own affairs. You may remember my
mentioning a Mrs. Moreton, from whom I had recieved many civilities. She lived
at a small village a few miles out of town. To her I applied for advice, in my
present embarrassing situation. She received me with politeness, told me she
would exert herself to the utmost to serve me and faid she thought I might make
my business answer very well in Kensington, where she had many friends to whom
she could recommend me. To a heart formed for all the endearing and social ties
of life, how every little kindness is received with gratitude, and how does it
feel the attentions even of common civility. I feel myself growing attached to
this Mrs. Moreton, her manner is the most preposessing, her form ellegant and
and she posesses the polite accomplishments in an imminent degree. She is the
wife of an officer now in India, by whom she has two lovely children, her
mansion is a little terrestial paradise. Every thing about it is neat, compact,
and charming.

I have not as yet met with an apartment to suit me, though I have seen several,
however it is determined I shall not have a shop but carry on my business as a
chamber milliner.

My heart almost sinks at the idea of a young, unprotected creature like
myself, venturing upon such a plan, but what can I do, convinced as I am of the
impossibilty of ever doing any thing in the literary way, I shall never more
renew my attempts.

I must remember the last words of my dear mother, "be humble, patient and
industrious, and rely on heaven for support." Let me have your prayers, my
beloved Celia. But I need not ask them, I am sure my sweet benevolent friend
looks round the whole universe with an eye of heavenly complacency, and wishes
every bosom as tranquil as her own; and that your happiness may never be
diminished, is the fervant prayer of

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXI. MERIEL to CELIA.
Kensington, August 23 d, 1780.
I AM now settled in a very neat apartment, within about a half a mile of Mrs.
Moreton's house; the people with whom I lodge appear obliging and friendly, and
from the specimen I have already had, I think I shall obtain a very genteel
living, as I have much more work than I can perform myself, and am obliged to
employ several young women. My Sundays I always spend with Mrs. Moreton,
accompanying her to church in the morning, she dines so late, it is impossible
to go in the afternoon. She has introduced me to the family of a Mr. Belger, a
man of great genius, and independent fortune: Mrs. Belger is the most
exquisitely beautiful woman I ever beheld; but she has no accomplishments, nor
can I think she has been even decently educated; indeed, I have heard it
whispered that she is not his wife; however, she goes by his name, does the
honors of his table, and has by him a sweet little girl, the very image of her
beautiful mother: this child has more firmly knit the bonds that holds her
faithful to its father; but though every look, word and action, speaks the
ardency and purity of her attachment: he treats her with a co^^ respect, which
I am sure must cut her to the soul: he is civil, polite, but distant. In this
family I spend many agreeable hours; I think Mr. Belger the most sensible man I
ever conversed with, indeed, the more I converse with him the more I am
convinced of my own ignorance; he kindly endeavors to instruct me, directs my
taste in the choice of authors, corrects my judgment, and takes great pleasure
in improving me in both music and drawing. To confess the truth, I have but
little time to spare for these persuits; but I sometimes steal a few hours from
rest to perform my necessary employments, that I may the next day have a little
time to attend to Mr. Belger's instructions. We cannot (...) agree about
religious matters, but I dispute with him, nor have I any doubt of making a
convert of him; for at present, my dear Celia, this agreeable man either is or
pretends to be an infidel; I rather think it is the latter, for he said the
other evening he loved to hear my sentiments delivered with such charming
enthusiasm, though they were in direct opposition to his own. I have had some
doubt about the propriety of continuing my intimacy in this family, as Mrs.
Belger is supposed to be only his mistress; but her whole conduct is such as
may call a blush upon the cheek of many an insolent woman, who looking with
merciless disdain on her poor fallen sisters, smiles contemptously and thanks
heaven she is virtuous. Mrs. Belger is a tender, exemplary mother, a kind
mistress to her servants, a good christian, and a meek, obedient, faithful, I
had almost said wife; but the mystic words have not passed that can render her
character respectable in every eye: you will therefore say, my dear Celia, she
is an improper companion for a girl whose reputation has once been doubted, and
cannot be regained by associating with a woman, whose character is suspicious:
True, my dear girl, but I feel myself so attached to the family so grateful for
the attentions shown me, and am so conscious of my own solitary friendless
situation, that my heart deprived of every affection, every fond hope on which
it once rested, naturally clings to those whose kindness sooths its anxieties
to rest.

September 16 th.
I have been so frightened, my dear Celia, that I believe it will be sometime
before I recover myself; and I cannot but consider it a great mercy that I am
alive and able to relate the cause of my terror. In the apartment adjoining the
room where I sleep, the maid of the house sleeps with two of the younger
children, for they have a large family. About four o'clock this morning, I was
awoke by a sense of suffocation, and starting up, perceived my chamber to be
full of smoke, I jumped out of bed and looking round to see that there was no
appearance of fire in the room, ventured to open one of the windows a little
way to disperse it. I then opened the door, which led to the childrens room,
here the smoke was more thick, and I found the smell of fire grow stronger; but
what were my sensations, on going into their apartment to see a basket of
clothes which stood on a chair by the bedside all on fire, and the curtains of
the bed which were fortunately of woolen just beginning to burn. I had not an
instant for consideration, Providence directed me; for I am conscious that
reason was for a few moments entirely suspended, I ran back to my own bed;
dragged of a blanket and immediately threw it over the burning basket, at the
same time pouring on it a large pan of water, which stood in the room, and had
been placed there for the purpose of washing the children. I then awoke the
servant, and took the dear little innocents out of the bed; they had been so
nearly suffocated it was with difficulty I awoke them, and when brought into
the air blood gushed from their noses: when I had a little recovered them and
laid them in my bed, I returned to the other chamber, sent the maid down for
more water, and having entirely extinguished every appearance of fire, began to
have the use of reflection: my own almost miraculous escape from so horrible a
death, the safety of the children, nay, the preservation of the lives and
property of the whole family, impressed my mind with such awful gratitude
toward the Power, who had in such unexpected danger inspired and directed me,
that I threw myself on my knees and burst into tears of unfeigned thankfulness.
Had I not discovered it at the time I did, we must all have inevitably
perished; for the rest of the family lay in apartments built distinctly from
this part of the house: the apartments I occupied were over the shop, and this
room really belonged to me, but as I had no use for it I gave it up to the
servant and children. The master, mistress, three more children and two
apprentices, slept on the ground floor behind the shop, so that the whole front
of the house might have been in flames, before they would have discovered it. I
asked the girl how she imagined the accident had happened; she said she often
was obliged to sit up very late for her master, that she had been up that
night, till near two o'clock, and being obliged to work very hard in the day
time, she was very ^leepy and weary; that she imagines she must have left the
candle burning on the floor, and that it had caught some of the linen that hung
from the basket. You may easily suppose I was not inclined to go to bed again,
I therefore dressed myself, and waited the rising of the family. When I heard
Mrs. Newtram up, I took the two young children in my hand and went down. "You
are up early, Miss Howard," said she, "I hope the children have not been making
a noise to disturb you." "I was up much earlier than you can imagine," I
replied, "but believe me these little dears have been very quiet and good, but
I was sadly alarmed this morning at four o'clock."

"Alarmed, my dear ma'am, at what?" "At an accident which had like to prove
fatal to us all." "Good God!" said she, "what can have been the matter?" "Come,
come, my good Mrs. Newtram," said I, seeing her turn pale, "there is no
occasion for terror now, the danger is past, you see your children are safe,
but we have been all on fire up stairs to night." "Merciful heaven!" said she,
"that careless Betty." "Do not blame the girl Mrs. Newtram, fatigued as she is
in the day time, she cannot be supposed capable of sitting up till two or three
o'clock in the morning, especially when we recollect she in general rises at
six, to perform her daily avocations; and I will just beg leave to mention that
it is my earnest wish she may be forgiven: she has suffered enough already from
her fright, do not, therefore, reproach her, and I will be answerable such an
accident never happens again in any place where she is." I then took Mrs.
Newtram up stairs, and showed her the things that had been on fire. When she
saw the imminent danger to which her children had been exposed, she caught them
in her arms and with all the enthusiasm of maternal affection, blessed heaven for
their preservation. "Oh! Miss Howard," said she, "how can we ever be grateful
enough for your quick recollection in such an alarming situation; we are bound
to consider you as our guardian angel."

I stopped the good woman in the midst of her acknowledgments, to renew my
entreties for Betty's pardon, and that she might be continued in her place. "I
can deny you nothing," said she; "but I am afraid Mr. Newtram will be
inveterate against her." "That will be cruel indeed," said I, "for he was
himself undoubtedly the prior cause of the accident, by keeping such very late
hours." She then went down stairs, and I went to breakfast; which before I had
half finished was interrupted by the entrance of Mr. Newtram. He repeated every
acknowledgment before made by his wife, sealed Betty's pardon, and declared he
wished for nothing more, than for some opportunity to convince me of his
gratitude, and that he would almost lay down his life to serve me. Thus you
see, my dear Celia, this accident will in the end terminate for my good, as it
seems to have secured the affection and friendship of those, in whose house I
reside; and in case of future trouble I make no doubt, but I shall find in
these worthy people, a kindness nearly maternal. Farewell my friend; yours
ever.

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Kensington, December 5 th, 1780.
MR. BELGER has frequently private concerts at his house. I always am one of
the party. Sometimes I perform on the piano forte; sometimes sing, and always
meet with such applause, as almost makes me vain; indeed the praises of Mr.
Belger only, are sufficient for that purpose. He is the only man I could ever
think perfectly agreeable, since the conduct of Rainsforth gave me so very
despicable an opinion of the whole sex. But of one thing I am convinced; it is
dangerous to enter into arguments with persons who have an improper opinion of
religious matters. I have had frequent conversations with Mr. Belger on this
topic, and instead of being able to convince him of his errors. (You will
tremble whem I tell you) I have only imbibed his principles, and find doubt
arising in my mind concerning the most sacred parts of the holy writings. Oh!
my dear Celia, pray for your weak friend, that she may not be lost by listening
to this insinuating man. I have indeed made frequent resolutions to avoid his
company, and as frequently broke them. I take my heart severely to task. Surely
Celia, after it has suffered so much from the perfidy of the sex, it cannot be
so weak, nay so wicked, as to feel an attachment for a man who is another's
right. Do not fear for me, my beloved friend; if I cannot command my feelings I
can my actions. Should I at some future period discover that Rainsforth is not
the capricious character, he at present appears, I will never have the
mortification to reflect, I have rendered myself unworthy of his esteem: if
otherwise, it shall never be in the power of any man to boast, that he has
triumphed over the virtue of Meriel Howard. No Celia, I may be unfortunate, but
I never will be guilty.

Business does not answer so well as I expected. Many, I believe, employed me
at first from motives of curiosity, and that being gratified, they return to
those they formerly dealt with; and I have now scarcely enough to employ
myself, and one young woman, whom Mrs. Moreton has recommended to me. However,
I keep up my spirits as well as I can, and hope for better times. My letters
are few, you say lately. Indeed I have nothing either new or interesting to
write about. When I have, you shall hear from your

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, February 9 th, 1781.
WHAT a world this is, my friend, and of what a medly of strange inconsistent
characters is it composed. Were it not impious, I could wish I had never
entered it. Some few years since, I believed every heart glowed with humanity,
friendship and sincerity toward each other. Yes, Celia, at the time I left the
convent these were my ideas of the world. Nay it is but very lately I began to
perceive how erroneous my opinion was; but believe me, the more we know of
mankind the less we find to admire or esteem. The heart grows hardened by
repeated disappointments, and from having an unbounded confidence in our
fellow creatures, we begin to suspect every one of hypocrisy.

My dear friend, I am still the sport of capricious fortune. Deceived, betrayed
by those I most loved and trusted, I have no comfort left but my dependence on
heaven, (which thank God, I have regained) and the conscious integrity of my
own heart.

Some little time after my last letter, Mrs. Moreton called on me one morning,
in her way to town, and asked if I would take a ride with her. She was in Mr.
Belger's carriage. I had nothing to prevent me and immediately complied. We
proceeded to town, and stopped at a silk mercer's. Mrs. Moreton ordered some
silks to be put up, but when she ^ame to pay for them, discovered she had left
her purse behind her. I had money sufficient about me, and therefore offered to
pay the amount of the bill. "Do so, my dear," said she, "it will be all the
same. I can pay you again when we get home." It came to upwards of ten pounds,
as she purchased a piece of silk for a lady whom she expected out of the
country. When we returned the expected lady was arrived. She approved the silk,
and after dinner took a walk to my apartments, where she ordered some very
elegant linen to be made: the lace she chose it to be trimed with, was two
guineas per yard. You can get this done by Saturday afternoon, said Mrs.
Moreton, for we are obliged to pay a visit to very particular people, and this
lady would wish to have it to wear. As soon as they were gone, I wrote to a
laceman in town, to send me more of the lace; for the handkerchief, apron, and
ruffles were all to be full trimed. As I had dealt with him before, he did not
hesitate. The muslin I had by me; and on Saturday afternoon, according to their
desire, I took the whole suit home, which, when finished, came to near fifty
pounds. They were much pleased with it, and desired I would bring my bill on
Monday morning, about twelve o'clock. I had a small gold watch by my side,
which was given me by Mr. Welldon. It was of no great value, but for the sake
of the doner, it was highly prized by me. "Meriel, my love," said Mrs. Moreton,
"I have sent my watch to be cleaned; I shall be at a loss to know how time
goes: do lend me yours for this evening."

"I set great store by it, madam," said I, "it was the gift of a deceased
friend; but I think you will be careful of it." "As I would of my own," she
replied, as she took it. "Stay, madam," said I, "there is a little trinket to
it which I have vowed never to part with." (It was a small locket which
contained a lock of my dear mother's hair). She suffered me to take it off, and
Mr. Belger's coach coming to the door to attend the ladies, they set me down at
my own lodging, and proceeded to town.

The next day, being Sunday, I dined at Mr. Belger's, where I was surprised to
hear that the ladies had sent home the carriage, without returning themselves,
and that Mrs. Moreton's children were in town with her. However I felt no
uneasiness or suspicion, and on Monday morning repaired to Mrs. Moreton's with
my bill: but to my utter astonishment found the house entirely shut up, and was
informed by a neighbor, that it was a ready furnished house, which she had
occupied near a twelvemonth, and that she had discharged her servant on
Saturday morning; that they had every reason to suppose she did not intend to
come back again, for she had not paid the house rent, and was besides in debt
to every body in the neighborhood, who would trust her; and that on going into
the house, which the landlord had done early this morning, they found nothing
in it that had ever belonged to her; but missed a considerable quantity of
linen, which had been lent her when she took the house.

I was now fatally convinced that my confidence in Mrs. Moreton had been ill
placed; the linen I had made, the money I had lent, had, altogether, greatly
contributed to reduce my finances, and I began to see the difficulties, in
which this ungenerous conduct would involve me. At first, it struck me, that
Mr. Belger had been accessory to her departure; but in this I was deceived, for
on calling there, I found they were as greatly surprised as I had been, and
that her specious appearance had so far imposed on him, that he had lent her
twenty guineas only a few days before. Overwhelmed with this new affliction, I
returned to my lodging; but judge if you possibly can, of my increased anguish,
when, on entering my bedchamber, I saw my bureau had been forced open, all my
cash gone, and with it a quantity of edging to a large amount. Almost ready to
sink with the terror that seized my mind, I rang the bell violently, and nobody
immediately answering, I ran down to Mrs. Newtram's apartments and enquired
after Kitty. "Bless me, Miss Howard," said Mrs. Newtram, "did you not discharge
her before you went out this morning." "No, indeed I had not the most distant
thought of such a thing."

"Well, that is strange now; for you had not been out above five minutes, before
she came down crying, and begged one of the apprentices to go for a coach, said
you had discharged her at a moment's warning, but she would go directly home to
her mother. When the coach came, we helped her in with her boxes, and she drove
away, ordering the man to stop at the White Horse Cellar, Piccadilly."

"I Am undone," said I, "what will become of me;" and sunk almost fainting, into
a chair. Mrs. Newtram got me some hartshorn and water, after which I began to
shed tears, which in some measure relieved me. "Dear Miss," cried Mrs. Newtram,
"what can have happened: have you lost any of your friends?" "Oh!" said I, "I
have no friends; I am the most unfortunate creature breathing, nor do I know
how to extricate myself from the difficulties that surround me."

I then gave her an account of Mrs. Moreton's departure, of the money, etc. I
had trusted her with, and concluded with the discovery I had just made of
Kitty's dishonesty.

"Why to be sure Miss Howard," said she, "it is a sad loss; but you should have
been upon your guard against Mrs. Moreton; you certainly knew she was a woman
of dubious character; and to tell you the truth, Mr. Newtram and I have often
said it was a great pity, so sweet a young lady should be so intimate, with a
woman of that kind: then there is Mrs. Belger, why all the world knows she is
no better than she should be; and you cannot think what ill natured things have
been said in the neighborhood, about your being so much with them."

"As to Mrs. Moreton," said I, "believe me, I had not the least idea, but that
she was a woman of respectable character; and though I have heard some things,
not quite so much to Mrs. Belger's advantage, I never saw a woman in my life
whose whole conduct demanded more respect and esteem." "Upon my word Miss,"
said she, "I am surprised to hear you talk so, when you know (drawing up her
head) Mr. Belger is not her husband; but that I have a very good opinion of
you, I should think you was as bad as she."

"I think, Mrs. Newtram," said I, "as you seem to know Mrs. Moreton's character
so well it would have been but friendly to have given me a little warning."

"Why, la! Miss, you know it was no business of mine, and you told me yourself
you knew her before you came to settle here: but, how do you mean to do? I
suppose you have some friends to whom you can apply; if you have any letter, or
any thing to send to town one of our young men shall take it."

"I tell you again Mrs. Newtram, I have not a friend in the world; I am a poor
solitary being, unconnected with the world, or any one in it; and were I this
moment to leave it, not one tear of affection or regret would be shed upon my
grave."

"Dear now that is very odd, most people have some friend or other, but I
suppose you have offended all yours." "They are dead," said I, "and unless you
favor me with your advice and assistance, I know not to whom else to apply."
"To be sure, I Will give you the best advice in my power, but had you not better
apply to Mr. Belger?"

"Oh no, I would wish to hide my distress from him in particular." "You are in
debt? I suppose," asked Mrs. Newtram, in a quick accent.

"Yes, I owe above forty guineas." "Well, and there is a quarter's rent of the
lodging due, that is eight more, then there is the laundress and the baker."
"True," said I, in an humble tone, "but I suppose my furniture will sell for as
much as will pay them." "And is that all your dependence? then I shall take
care that we loose nothing: here, Newtram," continued she, opening a door that
looked into the shop, "here, step here:" when he came in, she told him my
situation and concluded, "then you know, as that is the case, we had better
take care of ourselves, and be the first to take the furniture."

"That Is true dame," said he, "so do you see, Miss, we'll send for a man to
'praise the goods tomorrow."

Astonishment almost suspended my faculties: "just heaven!" said I, "is this
friendship?"

"Friendship," said she, tartly, "I have a large family Miss, and all my
friendship must be exerted for my children: if I was inclined to give you the
eight guineas you owe me I cannot do it in justice to these little innocents."

Celia, she pointed to the two children I had saved from the fire: I fixed my
eyes on the unoffending infants, a fresh flood of tears burst from them, I
folded my hands upon my bosom and remained silent.

It was now one o'clock and the servant brought in their dinner; they sat down
to table, but did not ask me to partake, I should not have noticed the
impropriety of my remaining in their apartment, had I not been roused from my
stupefaction by the youngest girl, who getting from her seat brought her plate
of victuals and laid it in my lap, and taking up a bit put it toward my mouth
crying, "there Missy eat some dinnee." I kissed the dear child, and apologizing
for my intrusion went up to my apartment; where I vented my full heart, in an
unrestrained flood of tears.

Toward evening Betty came into my room; she said her mistress was gone out,
and she had stolen up unknown to her master to see if she could do any thing
for me. "You have had no dinner," said the kind girl, "pray let me get you some
tea." She then made up the sire, and presently provided this repast, which
however disinclined, I forced myself to take, to ease poor Betty's anxiety.
When she had removed the tea things and lighted a candle, she went down stairs
again, and I sat pensive and solitary, retracing the past events of my life.
Alas! said I, how very hard is my fate. Possessed as I am of a heart molded to
compassion, glowing with universal affection toward my fellow creatures, I am
constantly thrown among people, whose every feeling is a^^^^bed in self. Yet
sure humanity is the child of nature; it is a heavenly spark of intellectual
fire, implanted in our souls by the hand divine. Every heart is endowed with it
more or less; but an intercourse with the world contributes to blunt those keen
sensations, till by degrees they are entirely deadened, and we can look on a
scene of misery without the least emotion, if it interferes not with our own
interest or happiness. Yet I cannot think that I shall ever arrive at that
happy state of torpidity, for sure, while I can feel my own sorrows, I shall
never be insensible to the woes of others; for never yet did I see a person in
affliction, but I made their case my own, and my heart would instantly overflow
with pity. But alas! no heart melts with pity for me. Even Mrs. Newtram seems
to have forgot that she has daughters, or she would surely compassionate my
sufferings, by reflecting that those darlings of her heart may perhaps one day
be in the same situation. I was still pursuing this melancholy train of
thought, when I was startled by a gentle tap at the door. I arose and opened
it, but was surprised to see Mr. Belger enter the room. "Dear Miss Howard,"
said he, "forgive this liberty. I have been informed of your distress by your
officious landlady, whom I have left chattering to to Mrs. Belger, while I
slipped away to offer any assistance in my power to my charming little friend."
I bowed my head, but could not answer. I motioned toward a chair. He seated
himself and continued: "My dear Meriel, I have long feared what is now
realized; I knew from the first moment I saw you, that you were never designed
for the station, in which you have lately moved. The elegance of your manner,
the delicacy of your sentiments convince me you are far superior to those women
with whom it has been your misfortune to be obliged to associate." "Indeed, Mr.
Belger," said I, "I am conscious of that superioty in nothing but misery. I
look round me with a desponding eye, and think the world does not contain so
friendless, so wretched a creature as myself."

"From my soul do I pity you," said he, taking my hand, "and wish it was in my
power effectually to serve you without offering any thing that might alarm your
sensibility; but that is impossible. I know of but one method, by which you can
be extricated from your present difficulties." "Alas, sir," I replied, "I have
not the least hope of being extricated. All my furniture will be seized
tomorrow, and I shall be turned from this habitation without knowing how to
provide another."

"Not so, beloved girl," said he. "You cannot think I will suffer it. Long have
(...) adored your merits. You must have seen my ardent affection, which has so
often burst through the thin veil, prudence obliged me to throw over it; and if
vanity has not misled me, I flatter myself I am not altogether indifferent to
you; if so, my dear creature, what remains, but that we this night bid adieu to
all these vexations? Let us defy the malignant censures of the world, and happy
in each other's affections, rise superior to the narrow bounds imposed by
priestcraft and superstition; dare to think and act for ourselves, and seek
that felicity on the continent, which a concurrence of untoward circumstances
prevents our enjoying in England."

Amazement had taken entire possession of me during this speech; I was almost
dedeprived of the power of utterance. At length I exclaimed "good God! how have
I deserved this insult? Ungenerous man, have you forgot Mrs. Belger."

"Dear Meriel," said he, "do not raise imaginary obstacles. You as well as all
the rest of the world know I am not married to that woman."

"But you are bound to her, sir, by every tie of honor and gratitude."

"Miss Howard," said he, gravely, "can you lay your hand upon your heart, and
say you do not regard me with a sentiment more lively than friendship."

"If I know that heart, Mr. Belger, it will never love whom it cannot esteem.
And whatever may be its feeling I have learnt to conquer." I could not finish
what I intended to say, my tears flowed so fast they almost choked me.

"Dearest, gentlest girl," said he, "I see the tenderness you vainly strive to
hide, then come let us fly to France and insure at once both your own happiness
and mine."

"What will become of your Emma," said I, "Can you resolve to forsake your
child?"

"Thank you, my sweet girl, for the remembrance, she shall be the companion of
our flight."

"And so drive her poor mother to distraction. No, Mr. Belger, never shall it
be said of Meriel Howard, that she had by her perfidy placed a dagger in the
heart of an innocent woman; nor shall you forget this confiding, affectionate
woman. Has she not sacrificed every consideration to you, friends, reputation,
all that can render life desirable. If she is not your wife, she ought to have
been so long since. And though you were dearer to me than the vital tide that
nourishes my heart, that heart should break rather than injure her. In the
midst of poverty and distress, if I can preserve my integrity unshaken, I shall
still have one comfort, of which no earthly power can deprive me." Leave me Mr.
Belger, I wish to be alone.

"Unkind girl to treat me thus, when it was my intention to extricate you from
these impending difficulties and placed you in affluence." "You would have
degraded me to infamy, I thank your generosity."

"By heavens! Miss Howard I will marry you." "No, Mr. Belger, that would be
only using the sacred ceremony as a cloak to perfidy and deceit. Leave me, sir,
my resolution is fixed, and not the cruelest tortures poverty and its attendant
evils can inflict shall tempt me to alter it." I then broke from him, and going
into an inner apartment fastened the door, and waited till I was certain he had
left the house.

Though I now found myself plunged in the most miserable situation, I felt a
secret satisfaction in reflecting I had acted with propriety in regard to Mr.
Belger, as reason plainly pointed out how little hope there could be of
felicity with a man, who could, guided merely by the caprice of passion,
forsake a woman so faithful, and so tender as Mrs. Belger. Religion also told
me, how little I should deserve, should I be so selfish as to fix the basis of
my own prosperity, on the misery of a fellow creature, "Almighty Father," said
I, "assist me with thy grace that I may be enabled to perform my duty in every
state of life, and allot me what trials thy infinite wisdom shall think
proper." I breathed this short prayer as I retired to bed, a sweet serenity
came over my mind, and I enjoyed a profound sleep till near eight the next
morning. I will now conclude this long letter; be assured you shall not long
wait for the sequel of my melancholy tale. Yours ever

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXIV. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 2 d, 1781.
I JUDGE of my dear Celia's impatience, by what I should feel where she in the
situation in which I was, when I concluded my last: I will not trifle with you,
but proceed in my narrative. The next morning I arose and went down stairs to
Mr. Newtram, told him I was ready to admit the persons he had mentioned into
the apartment to value the furniture, and hoped there would be more than
sufficient to pay all I owed: I was continuing to speak to him, when turning my
head I saw the laceman enter the shop. He pretended not to know my situation,
though I am certain he had been sent for by Newtram, and told me a long story, to
which I paid but little attention, about having a large sum to make up, etc. I
desired him to wait a little while, and I made no doubt but I should have
sufficient to discharge his bill. Alas! my Celia, I did not at that time think
of the vast difference between selling and buying. I knew the little furniture
I possessed, together with what Mr. Welldon had given me, had cost more than
sixty pounds and were at present nearly as good as new. But when the man had
looked them over, and taken an inventory, he offered me only thirty five
guineas for the whole, in which was included my piano forte. I urged how much
more they had cost me, and how little they had been used. He answered that was
nothing to him; he could afford to give no more; there were some things would
be of no use to him; they would lay a dead stock upon his hands, and if I did
not choose to take that, it was all very well, he had rather leave them than
have them.

What could I do? I found I must either sell them or go to prison, and though I
knew not by what means to support life, liberty had still some charms for me. I
took the money, and turning toward my creditors, for by this time they were all
assembled, laid the money on the table, and desired Mr. Newtram to pay them all
as far as it would go; but they were not to be satisfied with this. "You have
good clothes, Miss Howard," said Newtram, "you cannot expect poor people will
set down quietly with their loss, and suffer you to go off with a trunk full of
finery." "Alas! sir," said I, "the clothes you mention are so few and composed
of such indifferent materials, I did not think they would be of any value but
to the owner. There are some few pices of edging, sir," continued I, turning to
the laceman, "which I must beg of you to take again." My trunks were now
brought down stairs. Mrs. Newtram chose out the best of my gowns, linen, etc.
which were set down at less than half their value: the edgings were produced,
when to my utter astonishment, the laceman declared he would not take them
without an allowance of one third of what I had paid him for them only a few
months before.

At length all demands were discharged, my furniture taken away, and myself
left solitary in the empty rooms: I went down stairs and delivered up the keys.
I had done nothing but weep all day, and had taken no kind of nourishment since
my breakfast, and it was now four o'clock in the afternoon. Mrs. Newtram did
not ask me to sit down; but when I left the parlour I felt myself so sick and
faint that I was obliged to sit down on the foot of the stairs, where my
feelings became so poignant that I thought I should have been suffocated. Poor
Betty came to me, and endeavored to comfort me, but her own sobs were so
audible as to prevent my understanding what she said: In a few moments Mrs.
Newtram came out of the parlour. "Dear me, Miss Howard," said she, "you will
make yourself quite ill with fretting, and then, what is to become of you;
come, come, cheer up, all will be well again, by and by; one of our young men
will call you a coach, you don't consider how soon it is dark this time of the
year." "I don't want a coach," said I, "there is nothing very heavy to carry; I
will tie up a few things in a handkerchief and leave the rest till I have some
settled place of abode, when I will send for them." "But it is a wet evening,
child," said she, "and a long walk to town." "No matter, I will not have a
coach." "Perhaps, Miss Howard, you will be affronted, but if you cannot pay for
one, accept these five shillings."

Celia, this vile ostentation, this show of generosity, after she had stripped
me of almost every thing, awakened my resentment. "No, Mrs. Newtram," said I,
"if I am obliged to borrow money, I have a few more clothes left, on which I
imagine I can raise it; but at present I have a few shillings, which is
sufficient for this evening, tomorrow I will send for my clothes." She flung
into the parlour, muttering something about ingratitude, pride and poverty. It
was a cold rainy evening, the latter end of October, when with a small bundle
in my hand, and a load of grief at my heart, I set forward on foot from
Kensington; I had not proceeded far before I heard a quick step behind me, and
presently was accosted by Mr. Belger.

"Where are you going my dear creature, this cold, wet night?" "I am going to
town, sir, and am in haste." "Where shall you lodge in town?" "Indeed, I do not
know." "My dear Miss Howard, you are I fear more distressed than you are
willing to confess, believe me I am your friend, confide in me, I will not
suffer you to want any assistance in my power to give; but we cannot
conveniently consult what is best to be done, thus in the open street; step
into this house, (we were just opposite an house of entertainment,) I have
ordered my carriage here to take me up, and when we have had a cup of tea we
will proceed to town together."

"No, sir," said I, "it is to no purpose to solicit me, I am determined to go
on to town immediately." "Than let me call a coach, my dear girl, you must not
be thus exposed to the inclemency of the weather."

"Mr. Belger, if you wish me to believe you my friend, leave me, nor thus
increase my almost insupportable load of anguish, by making offers which I
neither can nor will accept." "Then let me have the pleasure of supplying you
with cash till it is in your power to repay me." This too I obstinately
refused, and the rain just then increasing, he ceased his solicitations after
saying I should always find a friend in him, he left me to pursue my
uncomfortable walk. It was near seven o'clock, when I arrived in town, with
only a few shillings in my pocket no friend to apply to and entirely at a loss
how to dispose of myself that night, as the people in London are fearful of
taking strangers into their houses, without a proper recommendation; not having
sufficient resolution to apply to any house for a lodging I kept walking on
till I came to the strand, where, just as I was passing a large haberdasher's
shop, a carriage overturned, the horses took fright, and I ran with many others
into the shop, for safety; I had not been there above five minutes, before I
heard a female voice exclaim, good God! can it be? yes, I am certain it is Miss
Howard; the lady had now come close up to me, and on raising my eyes, I beheld
Amelia Sidney a young lady whom I had once or twice seen at my aunts.

Shall I confess, that shame at being seen in so draggled a condition was the
first sensation I felt, however, Amelia soon made me forget that, when kindly
taking my hand in the soft voice of affection, she said, "my dear Miss Howard,
where have you hid yourself all this time;" then observing my wet cloak and
bonnet, she continued: "You have been walking in the rain my love, I have a
coach waiting, give me leave to set you down wherever you wish to go." The
soothing voice of tenderness as soon wrings tears from the afflicted heart, as
does the churlish voice of chiding, but then the one drops gently, while the
softest sensations pervade the soul, the other is the source of such real
anguish, that memory will retain the pain they occasion for years afterward.

I could not answer the kind miss Sidney, but followed her in silence to the
coach, when we were seated she again renewed her question, "where will you be
set down?" The anguish of my heart now burst out, and I cried, I have no home:
all places are alike to me, "then you shall go home with me," said Amelia. "Oh
Miss Sidney," said I, "do not think by thus accpting your kind offer of
stepping into the coach I mean to throw myself on your benevolence, my only
motive was to have an opportunity of enquiring whether you could recommend me
to any place, where I might lodge for a little time, till I could consider how
to dispose of myself in future. Favor me with your advice, dear lady, for
indeed I have no friends in the world, who interests themselves the least in my
welfare." She pressed my hand and after softly saying, "be comfored, my dear,"
remained silent, till the coach stopped, she then assisted me to alight, and
leading me up stairs left me a few moments in the drawing room; but soon
returned with her mother. Mrs. Sidney received me with the cheerful smile of an
old friend, and Amelia brought a change of clothes which she insisted on my
putting on. Supper soon came in. The manner which Mrs. Sidney and her daughter
observed toward me, was delicate and attentive in the extreme. Not a word
escaped them that had the least appearance of curiosity; they seemed to treat me
as though I had been paying an expected visit, and to consider my company as an
obligation; when the cloth was removed, I told my amiable hostess, I thought
it but right she should know by what means I became reduced to so distressed a
condition, but Amelia stopped me. "Dear Miss Howard," said she, "if it is in
our power to serve you, do not hesitate to point out the way, and you will not
find us backward in performing it; but I insist that you do not enter into
explanations which may be painful to you. You have no doubt been unfortunate,
as such and knowing the excellence of your heart, you have a claim upon my
friendship, I am ready to prove myself your sincere well wisher, but I have no
right to enter into a minute investigation of your past conduct." "But, my dear
lady," said I, "it is absolutely necessary, you should be acquainted with many
past incidents of my life, that you may better concieve my present situation
and be enabled to favor me with your advice, for my future conduct. "Well, my
dear," said Mrs. Sidney, "whatever you think proper," "I thank heaven madam,"
said I, "though I shall shall acquaint you with many errors, some of which I
tremble but to think on, (for at that moment, Celia, I remembered my impious
despondency, and the divine interposition of providence which delivered me at
the very moment, when to avoid temporal misery I was rushing into guilt.) Yet I
have done nothing to make me ashamed, and though my reputation has been sullied.
"We have all our errors, Miss Howard," said Amelia, "and we all hope to have
those errors forgiven, then should we not be always ready to forgive the errors
of our fellow creatures. Come my dear girl let me persuade you to drop the
subject, whatever have been your errors I am sure you now renounce them, and
whatever are your misfortunes we will strive to aleviate, if we cannot entirely
remove them." "You are very good, Miss Sidney, but give me leave to proceed, I
will not detain you long." I then in as few words as possible comprised the
whole of my sufferings, not even endeavoring to veil my errors, from the time
of my father's imprisonment, till the present day; she listened with attention,
and taking my hand said, "Conviction sits on your countenance, I will not doubt
your relation, my dear Meriel, because it has been delivered with such
ingenious frankness that to hear is to believe; but you have been strangely
misrepresented, by those whose duty it was to defend rather than asperse your
character." She then informed me that the Mossops had propogated the most
malignant censures against me, and from at first pointing me out as an object
of ridicule to entertain their friends, at length represented me as fit only
for their contempt. In short, folly, ignorance, hypocrisy, and profligacy, had
been set forward, as the most striking traits in my character, and at the very
moment when Amelia met me, she supposed me sunk into infamy and shame. "But,"
said she, "I saw you was unhappy, and I know it is our duty not to remember the
faults, when an opportunity offers, wherein we may be of service to a person in
distress, I am now more than ever convinced of the propriety of such a mode of
conduct, for had I not acted thus, I should never have known how much Miss
Howard had been injured, and how little her unworthy friends deserved such a
relative, but I beg," continued she, "you will consider yourself at home.
Believe me, you are as welcome as a sister, and whenever you hear of a
situation which you think will suit you, my mother and I will give you every
necessary recommendation, but do not be in a hurry to leave us, we shall not
soon be tired of your company."

She then showed me to a neat bedchamber adjoining her own, and wishing me a
good nights repose, left me. And who is this benevolent girl? methinks I hear
you say. She is, my dear Celia, the daughter of a man, who by industry in a
respectable line of business, brought up a numerous family in a reputable
manner. He lived to see his sons well settled in the world, and had saved
enough to leave at his death, Mrs. Sidney and this, his only daughter a
comfortable independence. Amelia had a genteel, but yet useful education, she
was equally qualified to shine in public or private life, she preferred the
latter. Her mother's happiness constituted her own, she read to her, worked
with her, considered her peace as the main spring for all her actions, and
loved her with a tender respect bordering on devotion. Yet with a pleasing
graceful person, a lively disposition, and a large share of good sense, has
this amiable girl reached her twety-fifth year, without one offer of marriage,
she has had many lovers, but she declares they all deserted their colors, when
they understood, she would have no fortune till the death of her mother. "So
you see, my dear," said she, one day smiling "I am destined to wear the willow
as long as I live." More shame for the male world if she is, Celia, for I think
I could venture to pronounce him a happy man, who should be so fortunate as to
obtain such a wife.

I have been in this kind family, now near a month, but have not as yet heard
of any thing, that I think will suit, though I am determined to take almost any
situation rather than remain a burden upon the benevolence of Amelia and her
mother; who, though they have sufficient for all the comforts and some of the
elegancies of life, I am sure, cannot afford to have me constantly with them. I
sent for the rest of my clothes the day after I left Kensington, but received
no message from thence, nor have I heard a syllable of Mr. Belger, I hope you
will grant me the credit of not wishing it. I even gave the person who went for
my things a strict charge, not to mention in what part of the town I resided.

March 3 d.

A lady called this evening at Mrs. Sidney's, who said she had heard of a place
which she thought would suit me: it is to be companion to an elderly lady in
the country, to read to her, walk with her help entertain her company and
attend a little to the domestic concerns of the family. The salary, I find, is
but small, that shall be no objection, I never was extravagant in dress, and I
think I shall hardly begin now. I am to go tomorrow morning at ten o'clock to
speak to a lady, who is a distant relation of Mrs. Rooksby, and who has been
desired by her to look out for the kind of person she wants. I wish I may be so
lucky as to succeed in this application, as I trust I could render myself
agreeable to the old lady, and I would likewise exert myself to be useful. The
mail goes tomorrow, before I shall have time to write again, but my Celia, may
depend on my seizing the first opportunity, to let her know my success. Adieu,
my beloved friend, though I can never love you less, you must be henceforth
content, to share with the generous truly benevolent Amelia the affections of
your

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXV. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 12 th, 1781.
CELIA, my beloved Celia, when is my heart to be at rest, when shall I say,
"peace dwells in my bosom, its anxieties are hushed, doubt, fear, and
incertitude, are no more." Alas! I fear Meriel will never feel that heavenly
satisfaction, 'till shuddering on the verge of eternity, she sixes her hope on
things immortal, immutable and unchangeable. But forgive me my friend, when I
took up my pen, I meant not to complain, indeed I did not, I am fully sensible
if my blessings were measured only according to my demerits, I should be poor
indeed, but our heavenly father, portions out our comforts according to the
measure of his love. Alas! if our deserts were only considered, who would dare
abide the decision; friendship is his choicest best gi^t, and have I not found
that pure and un-alloyed in the breasts of Celia and Amleia. As to love; It is
an empty sound,
The haughty fair one's jest
On earth unseen or only found
To warm the turtles nest.


Oh yes there is love on earth; sincere, tender, affectionate, faithful, ardent
hearts, but they were not formed for me, Celia; and I must learn submission
without repining, you wonder what all this means, I cannot tell you just now;
when I am more composed I will resume my pen. How strange does it appear that I
should be an object of malice or envy to others, who never harbored a wish to
the prejudice, or envied the good fortune of any one.

The morning after I sent off my last, my dear Celia, I dressed myself neat but
very plain, and at ten o'clock found myself at the door of Mr. Kingly, in
Golden square, the servant, who opened it, told me his lady was not come down:
he begged I would wait in a parlour, where there was a fire, and brought me a
newspaper to amuse me. In about twenty minutes, he returned and desired me to
walk up stairs. I followed him into a back drawing room, where an elegant woman
sat preparing to make tea, and a nurse was in the room with a very young child.
The lady arose and received me with every mark of politeness; but I was
scarcely seated before a voice struck my ears, which vibrated to my throbbing
heart, I felt my face glow, but had not a moment for thought, before the door
opened, and Rainsforth entered the room holding a boy about twelve months old
in his arms. Surprise threw me entirely off my guard, I gave a sudden shriek
and fainted.

What passed during my indisposition I cannot tell, but when I recovered, I
found the lady sitting beside me on the sopha, applying volatiles to my nose
and temples, while a maid servant stood by with water, but neither Rainsforth
or the children were in the room. "Are you subject to these ill turns, my dear
(...)?" said the lady. "No madam," said I, "but sudden surprise will sometimes
serve me thus." "Do you know Mr. Kingly? Was it his presence that caused such
violent emotions?" "Only that you call him Kingly, madam, I should say the
gentleman who came in just now was a Mr. Rainsforth, of Plymouth." "Is your
name Howard?" said the lady visibly agitated. I answered in the affirmative.
"Then," said she, "I can account for the exclamation with which he left the
room. You are right in your conjectures Miss Howard, Rainsforth and Kingly are
one and the same person. He took my name on our union, of which I suppose you
were unacquainted. "I was indeed, a stranger to it, madam, or I should not have
presumed to have intruded here; pardon the involuntary confusion I have
occasioned, and permit me to retire." "You are not as yet sufficiently
recovered," said she, "to venture out. Pray, stop, and compose yourself, and if
it will not occasion a return of your disorder, we will send for Mr. Kingly to
take his breakfast." I was beginning to apologize for the disagreeable
interruption I had given, but she stopped me. "I shall not listen to a syllable
of excuse. I am sure it was unintentional, but I will not forgive it on any
other terms than its never being mentioned in future."

Kingly, as I must henceforth call him, was now summoned to breakfast, I
endeavored to command my countenance; but I fear to little effect; I attempted
to rise, when he entered the room, but my limbs refused their office. He bowed
and took his seat in silence, a cup of tea was handed him: his hand trembled so
he could not raise it to his mouth. I did not dare lift my eyes, least I should
encounter his, I felt my face alterna^ely red and pale; and it was with
difficulty I could restrain my tears. We were all silent for near five minutes.
Mrs. Kingly seemed the least embarrassed of the three, and at length ventured
to say, "my dear Kingly you forget your politeness to day, pray help Miss
Howard to some muffin." "I believe," said he, "it is by some other name we must
address this lady now." Surprise at what he uttered tempted me to raise my eyes
with a kind of inquisitive look." "My name is still Howard," said I, "nor have
the least intention of altering it." "Were you not on the point of being
married about two years since?" I was more astonished than ever at this
question. I knew not what to answer: to have mentioned any thing of my intended
union with Kingly before his wife, would perhaps have only served to make her
unhappy. At length I answered, I was, it is true, near being married about that
time, but I had every reason to suppose you, as well as the rest of my
acquaintance, knew the cause of the match being broke off. I have never had a
thought since of altering my condition. "It is very strange," said he, and the
conversation dropped. I then began to recollect the reason which had brought me
to the house of a man whom I wished, of all others, most to avoid, and turning
to Mrs. Kingly made the necessary enquiries concerning the place I wanted to
engage for. Having received answers greatly to my satisfaction, I arose to take
my leave, referring her to Mrs. Sidney for my character. "I dare say there will
be no necessity to make those enquiries," said she, "but if you will mention
any day when you will favor me with your company to dinner, I will introduce
you to my aunt, who is fortunately now in town."

I told her if she would favor me so far, as to give me a line to Mrs.
Rooksby, I would wait on that lady at any time she would please to appoint, but
must beg leave to decline the proposed honor of dining with her, as I feared
it would not be possible to disengage myself from the kind friends with whom I
at present resided, till an absolute settlement obliged me to leave them.
Indeed, my dear Celia, I felt there would be a great impropriety in
endeavoring to cultivate an intimacy with Mrs. Kingly, for should she not have
been acquainted with the connection that formerly subsisted between her husband
and myself, and should by any means hereafter hear of it, she might naturally
suppose I cultivated her acquaintance, that I might the more easily enjoy her
husband's society; and if, as I suspect, she already knows how near we were
being united by the tenderest ties, she would certainly approve a conduct,
which would show how much her happiness was preferred to my own gratification.
I will confess I wished for nothing more than a conversation with Kingly, for I
plainly perceived some mystery couched beneath the few sentences that passed,
while we were at breakfast: But this wish I was sensible would be both improper
and imprudent to seek to gratify. Mrs. Kingly having therefore named a day,
when she thought it would be convenient for her aunt to see me, and mentioned
an hour when she would call and take me to her, I took my leave. I slightly
regarded Kingly's countenance, as I wished him good morning, and discovered in
it strong traits (...) and impatience.

When (...) to Mrs. Sidney's, Amelia discovere^ by my looks the agitation of my
mind. I thought it would be wrong to have any concealments from such worthy
friends, I therefore briefly related all that concerned Rainsforth, and my
unfortunate rencounter with him that morning. "Upon my word, Meriel," said she,
"every word you utter excites fresh wonder. I remember hearing of the affair
you mention, but it was always spoken of in such a ludicrous strain, that I
have myself frequently joined in the laugh against you, considering you as a
poor, fond girl, who fancied every man who but spoke a civil word was in love
with you, and returned this imaginary passion with all the enthusiastic ardor
of romantic affection." I made Miss Sidney no answer, but going to my trunk,
returned with all the letters which had passed between Rainsforth and myself.
"This proof of your fortitude and magnanimity," said she, when she had perused
them, "was only wanting to complete my esteem for your character; for, it is
from these letters only, that I have learnt in what manner you disposed of your
fortune. Generous, noble spirited girl, it is only for such hearts as yours to
be tried in the ordeal of affliction; but surely heaven has some future reward
in store, that will amply compensate the sufferings you are ordained to endure."

"Oh! my dear Amelia," said I, "have I not already an ample compensation in
your friendship and affection. Praises from your lips are balm to my wounded
heart: may I never forfeit your esteem." "That I am sure you never will. I only
blush to think how long I remained a stranger to your merits; but the real
diamond is always enveloped in a crust, through which it is only on near
inspection, we can discover its intrinsic value." "Ah! flatterer," said I,
smiling, while the tear of grateful affection stole from my eye. Oh! Celia,
when I forget the friendship of Amelia Sidney, the benefits received from her
hands, the misery from which she snatched me, may I be forgot by that
Providence to whom we can only look for support. Bless her, all-bounteous
heaven; make her felicity as boundless as the benevolence of her heart; let her
comforts be many, and her afflictions few: and when this transitory scene is
past, soft and gentle be her passage to the grave. May she Peaceful sleep out
the sabbath of the tomb,
And wake to raptures in a life to come.
POPE.

And may you, my dear Celia, share the same envied fate. For me, I was born to
bustle on a sea of trouble; and so as the buffetting waves do not deprive me of
the support held out by the heavenly cherub Hope, I have still a comfort
remaining, that will bear me up under all my troubles, and lead me to a harbor
of eternal rest. Adieu, my friend, I will continue my narrative in a few days.

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXVI. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 14 th, 1781.
KNOWING, my dear Celia's impatience to be informed of what followed my
interview in Golden-Square, I shall proceed without any preface.

After the conversation I mentioned in my last, it struck Amelia that Kingly
would undoubtedly endeavor to see me, as his mind must be in the same state of
painful uncertainty in regard to my conduct, as I was, when I reflected on his.
I told her I would by no means wish to see him, and requested the servant might
be permitted to deny me in case any gentleman should call. Our measures were
but just settled when a knock at the door announced a visitor, and by listening
at the top of the staircase, I plainly heard Kingly's voice. He seemed much
disappointed at not finding me at home, and left word he would call at twelve
o'clock the next day: accordingly I wrote the following note to be delivered
when he came.

TO MR. KINGLY.
MISS HOWARD's compliments to Mr. Kingly; requests as a particular favor, he
will not give himself the trouble to call any more, as Mr. Kingly cannot be
ignorant, that there are many forcible reasons existing, which renders it
totally improper for Miss H. to recieve his visits. She desires no explanation
of past incidents; sincerely wishes Mr. K. every felicity; but is certain any
intercourse between them, will not tend to promote it. It is that reason only,
which urges Miss H. to avoid an intimacy with the very amiable Mrs. Kingly,
whose happiness, she devoutly prays may be permanent, and of long duration.


When he came, this note was delivered to him by the servant. He asked for pen
and ink, and left the following.

TO MISS HOWARD.
I AM convinced I have been decieved; an explanation is absolutely necessary to
my repose. I find you are the same charming, delicate girl, I once adored; nay,
which even at this moment I find dearer to my heart, than aught the world
contains beside. Then, think not, I will sit tamely down, while you suppose me
an unfeeling, capricious monster. There is one way, by which I can clear
myself; there is one, who can plead my cause, and you not refuse to listen. I
respect that sense of propriety, which urges you to refuse a personal
interview; but I must be restored to your esteem, or be wretched for ever. Your
friend,

F. KINGLY.


The next morning Mrs. Kingly called as she had appointed, and took me with her
in the chariot to Mrs. Rooksby. This old lady is extremely pleasing in her
manner. Her person, though advanced in years, retains many traces of grace and
elegance. She expressed her approbation of me, in the politest terms, and said,
she should consider herself extremely fortunate in the acquisition of such a
companion. Her terms were much more liberal than I had been led to expect; and
as we were soon agreed, she requested me to appoint an early day for my removal
to her house. "Business of a very particular nature," said she, "required my
presence in London, which I have not visited before for upwards of twenty
years, nor shall I now remain in it long; but while I do stay, I shall wish to
enter into a few of its amusements, and I am certain I shall receive double
satisfaction from them all, when I am favored with your company." It was then
determined, that day week should be the time of my removal, and we took our
leave. When I was again in the carriage with Mrs. Kingly, she said, "it gives
me great pleasure to find my aunt is likely to make so agreeable an addition to
her family; nor have I the least doubt, but you will be satisfied with your
situation, as she is a woman of an easy, cheerful disposition. And now my dear
Miss Howard, as we have settled this important business, you must give me leave
to execute a commission, I yesterday undertook. I have a letter for you,"
continued she, smiling. "You may perhaps guess from whom. Come, no drawing
back, I can assure you there will not be the least impropriety in your
recieving it, and I flatter myself I have interest sufficient to obtain an
answer." She then put the letter into my hand. You may judge my confusion. It
was impossible to speak, for I was utterly at a loss what to say. I believe, I
never looked more like a fool. Mrs. Kingly saw my embarrassment, and kindly,
did not seem to expect me to speak, but began a conversation on things quite
foreign to the subject. When we arrived at Mrs. Sidney's door, she refused to
alight; but wishing me a good day, said, she should expect to hear from me soon.

I ran up stairs to Amelia, and putting the letter into her hand, cried, open
it, read it for me, for indeed I have not resolution to read it myself.
Enclosed my dear Celia, is a copy of the letter; also of one from Mrs. Kingly,
in which it was enclosed; when you have perused them, I am sure you will lament
with your poor friend, that such merit as Rainsforth's, (for still I love that
name,) should be severed from her, by the malice of those, who could really
reap no advantage from her disappointment. Whatever were the motives, that
instigated the Mossops to practice such an imposition on us both, they are
undoubtedly disappointed; for from the time of Rainsforth's marriage with Miss
Kingly he carefully avoided all intercourse with the family; the reasons for
which you will find in his letter. I think when you have read, you will admire
Mrs. Kingly as much as you pity your

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXVII. MRS. KINGLY to MISS HOWARD.
March 9 th, 1781.
I FEEL, my dear Miss Howard, that I am under an indispensible necessity of
writing to you, to request you will attend to the explanation so ardently
desired by Mr. Kingly; and from which your rigid sense of propriety, urges you
to recede: but in what manner shall I address you, dear, amiable young lady,
when I am sensible I have, though unknowingly, stepped between you and happiness.
Often have I heard your name, often listened to your commendations, from lips
which never spoke, but they conveyed pleasure to my heart.

My father's family lived in terms of the greatest intimacy with that of Mr.
Rainsforth's; Frederic and myself were nearly of the same age, were frequently
together, we learnt to dance at the same school, and at our annual ball I was
always selected for his partner. Our infantine attachment was noticed by both
our parents, and Frederic was often smilingly called my little husband. As we
increased in years, this attachment grew weaker on the part of Frederic, but in
my bosom it gathered new strength; the many good qualities so conspicuous in
the boy, became dignified virtues in the bosom of the man. I always wept when
duty called him from his native place, and rejoiced unfeignedly at his return.
When my uncle made me his heiress, my parents began to show some disapprobation
of my visible partiality; and when I repeatedly refused the most splendid
offers, treated my passion with a rigor, which served only to make its
impression on my heart more indeliable. Just before old Mr. Rainsforth met with
the misfortune, which was, I understand, the first cause of your separation
from his son. I lost both my parents within a very short period of each other,
and became my own mistress: I know not how to proceed, I am at a loss for
words, in which I can acknowledge a weakness, which I fear you will condemn;
but anxious to restore peace to the bosom of Rainsforth and prosperity to his
family; and perfectly unacquainted with his engagements to the amiable Miss
Howard, I so far overstepped the bounds prescribed our sex, as to write to him
making a tender of myself and fortune: instead of writing an answer to this
letter, he came himself, thanked me in the tenderest manner for what he termed
my generous designs in his favor; but declared his heart was under a prior
engagement. He then expiated largely on the virtues of Miss Howard, and
declared, though for the present, fortune had placed insuperable barriers to
obstruct your union, he should ever hold himself as bound to you, and while you
remained single, consider himself not at liberty to marry any other woman. He
requested that though unable to accept the offered honor of my hand, he might
not be deprived of my friendship, and declared he should always think on me
with gratitude and affection.

From this time I sedulously endeavored to conquer a passion, which I found
preyed upon my peace of mind, and when I heard of the fortune left his family
flattered myself I had succeeded: I sincerely rejoiced in the prospect of his
felicity in an union with you, which he told me would now soon be completed:
but one morning he came to me in visible agitation, and taking my hand, cried,
"dear Margaret, I am disappointed in my tenderest hopes, Meriel Howard is
married." I tried to persuade him he had been misinformed; but he said there
was no room for doubt, as it had been confirmed by your own hand. He now
visited me every day, and I will confess to you, I exerted myself to divert his
melancholy; I in some measure succeeded; and one day as we were chatting
together on indifferent subjects, he suddenly caught my hand and cried, "if my
lovely friend would accept the offer of a heart that was once devoted to
another, happiness might yet be my portion; but I dare not indulge so sweet a
hope." I will not repeat to you, Miss Howard, the many conversations we had on
this subject; suffice it to say we were soon united. From that happy moment,
his tenderness, his assiduity, has every day increased: I saw his heart still
beat true to its first attachment; but I also saw his struggles to suppress its
emotions. He never indulged himself in talking of you, carefully avoiding every
place where he might chance to hear your name mentioned. The violent agitation,
which you was thrown into by his entering the room the other morning, and an
exclamation which broke from him, as he caught you, when you were falling to
the ground, made me readily conceive who it was I had the honor to entertain.
I felt for you both, more than I can express: I had long been acquainted with
your virtues, though a stranger to your person, and I wished earnestly for
power to alleviate sufferings, of which I considered myself the cause.

I easily understood your generous motive for declining visiting at my house. I
esteem, I venerate you for it, though I am certain no ill consequence could ensue
from an intimacy between two hearts so chaste, so much under the guidance of
religion and honor, as yours and Mr. Kingly's. The day after I first had the
pleasure of seeing you, I perceived Mr. Kingly to be melancholy and absent. I
pressed to know the cause. He was at first embarrassed; at length he heartily
told me he wished much for a conversation with you, to clear up some mysteries
which at present tormented him beyond measure; that he had called on you twice,
but you absolutely refused to see him. He then showed me your note, and asked,
if he were to write a few lines, whether I would prevail with you to read them,
and grant him an answer. I readily promised him to comply with this request,
and I hope, my dear Miss Howard, you will by an answer, restore peace to his
bosom; for I am well convinced, he will never be happy while he imagines you
think him unworthy your regard. I am, dear young lady, with every sentiment of
esteem, and every kind wish for your happiness,

Your friend in sincerity, M. KINGLY.

LETTER XXXVIII. MR. KINGLY to MISS HOWARD.
March 9 th, 1781.
THAT you are still unmarried, my dear Meriel, is to me the cause of great
astonishment; that you are depressed in your circumstances, and obliged to seek
by servitude the necessary means to support life, gives the accutest pangs to a
heart, that ever wished and would have rejoiced in your happiness. I fear we
have both been deceived; but why that deceit has been practiced against us, I
am at a loss to think. I know you never were a favorite with the Mossop's.
They envied virtues they had not spirit to imitate; but why they should thus
labor to render two unoffending beings so completely miserable, is altogether
unaccountable. I have, my dear friend, (the blush of shame crimsons my cheek
while I write it) but I have doubted your virtues. I have thought you false,
capricious, light and undeserving: and much I fear, you have been taught to
think me the vilest of my sex. But let me hasten to exculpate myself from so
black a charge. Let me trace back to the time that even at this moment my soul
shudders to think upon. Let me lead your ideas back to the letter See Vol.
(...) 152.
I wrote informing you of the happy change in my father's fortune. I was
hastily preparing to come to London, from which place unavoidable business had
detained me much longer than my impatience could well brook; when one morning I
met young Mossop, who at that time belonged to a ship lying at Plymouth. After
the usual salutations, he asked me if I had that morning any letters from
London. I replied, I had been from home all the morning. You will, no doubt, on
your return, find letters, said he; for I have just heard from Hester, who
mentions having seen her cousin, and that she was employed in writing to you.
My heart sunk, my dear Meriel, at this intelligence; for, as in my letter I had
mentioned the time I should leave Plymouth, I did not expect an answer, and
naturally thought, it must have been something particular had occasioned your
writing. I left Mossop and instantly returned home; where I found a letter, the
contents of which had nearly fired my brain. It is indeliably imprinted on my
memory; it can never be forgotten. These were the words:

SIR,
THE receipt of your last favor, occasioned a mixture of both pain and
pleasure in my bosom. I was extremely happy to hear of your increase of
fortune; but pained to find you still retained your partiality for me. Absence,
my good sir, and a variety of incidents, has entirely obliterated from my
heart, every trace, of what I once called love. But I find I was deceived, in
supposing myself actuated by that passion. I shall ever remember Mr. Rainsforth
with the most grateful esteem; but my heart, and all its tenderest affections,
are devoted to another object; to whom, tomorrow morning I mean to plight my
faith, in the most solemn manner. I imagined a knowledge of this event, would
prevent your intended journey to the metropolis. I should be greatly obliged,
if you would seal up all my letters and give them to my cousin Mossop, who will
send them to town in a parcel to his sister. At the same time, please to inform
me whether you would wish yours to be returned, or whether I have your
permission to consign them to eternal oblivion.

I sincerely wish you may meet with a woman, more calculated to make you happy,
than was the woman, who now, for the last time, signs herself,

MERIEL HOWARD.


I cannot give you the least idea of the poignancy o my feelings, or the
madness of my actions, at this cruel, insulting letter. I was absolutely
frantic: my father endeavored to sooth me. He had always expressed a dislike
at my proposed union with you, though for what reason I never could learn. He
told me I ought to rejoice at having discovered your light, changeable
disposition, before it was in your power to injure my honor. I listened to him
with reverence; I knew he never yet had expressed a wish, which did not
ultimately tend to my good: I endeavor to calm my transports, and strove to
persuade myself I should soon hate you. I wrote you a long letter, wherein I
gave vent to the anguish of my heart. I then sealed up all the dear pledges of
your affection, and which till that moment had been preserved as the choicest
treasures I possessed, and went to seek Mossop.

"You did not tell me," said I, "your cousin Meriel was married." "Dear
Rainsforth," said he, "I had not courage to inform you of her perfidy, as I
knew you loved the unworthy girl." "She has desired," said I, "to have her
letters returned; here they are: you are to send them to your sister. Oh!
Mossop, I could not have believed Meriel Howard" -- "I am sorry," said he,
interrupting me, "I had not before warned you of her disposition. She always
was of a sickle temper, I could have told you of many instances of her levity
of heart, which she so effectually hides under an affectation of sentiment and
reserve; but you were so bigoted to her, you would not have believed my
assertions." He then told me, you were once attached to a married man, one
Pringle, whom he was intimate with in London; that you ^loped from your
father's house, and it was to be feared you had reason to repent your rashness.
"Consummate hypoerite," said I. "But from this moment I erase her from my
heart; I will never suffer myself to mention her name; I will be happy, spite
of her cruel arts to undermine my peace."

From that time I carefully avoided, even the society of Mossop, least I should
hear your name, and be tempted to break my resolves; and in a very short time I
yielded to the entreaties of my friends, and gave my hand to the lovely,
amiable woman, whom you have seen, and whom I am sure you love; for her soul is
congenial with your own. Meriel, I will not pretend to say I had forgot you;
but the engaging qualities of my wife, the innocent beauties of my children had
in a great measure, filled that void in my heart, which the loss of you had
occasioned. Indeed, I had began to fancy myself happy, when your presence and
sudden illness, the other morning, awakened my long stifled tenderness,
convinced me I had been deceived, and that we both were destined to be
miserable.

My wife, the best, the kindest of her sex, see's my sufferings, and generously
(...) them. Ah! my dear friend, how are those sufferings augmented, when I
reflect that the anguish which oppresses me, is conveyed to her gentle bosom,
and she pines in secret at the want of that ardent affection, which would
constitute the whole happiness of her life.

She has promised me, to deliver this to your hands; matchless tenderness! let
her soft pleadings prevail my dear Miss Howard; write to me, if it is but one
line, to say you do not quite despise me. Tell me also, whether you wrote that
cruel letter; and if you did, what were your reasons for it. But, ah! it is
impossible, you are the same charming, amiable woman, I once adored beyond
life, and whose image only the pang that disolves every tie of nature, can
erase from my heart.

Oh! Margret, thou much esteemed woman, pardon these involuntary wanderings of
my pen, I would die rather than injure you: this once forgive my wayward heart,
and henceforth my every hour of life shall be devoted to thee. Meriel, dear
lost Meriel, if you wish to save me from distraction, write one line of comfort
to the wretched

^. KINGLY.

MERIEL to CELIA, (in continuation.)
CAN you concieve, my dear Celia, the poignancy of my feelings when I had read
this horrid detail of the imposition that had been practiced, thus to ruin the
peace of Kingly and myself. Hester Mossop was the person, my suspicions rested
on, yet why she should endeavor to undermine my happiness, when it would by no
means conduce either to her interest or felicity remains still an inexplicable
riddle. I cannot tell you how often I read the dear letter which undecieved me,
in regard to Kingly's conduct; how often I pressed it to my heart, and bathed
it in my tears: amiable youth, charming engaging woman, cried I, as I
alternately read the letters of Frederic and his Margaret; may your happiness
be as complete as you are deserving: never will Meriel abuse the confidence you
have placed in her. My resolution in what manner to conduct myself was soon
formed. I determined to answer Kingly's letter, and to commit it unsealed to
the care of his amiable wife; I laid my projected plan before the friendly
Amelia, and finding it met her approbation, immediately sat down to put it in
execution; the following is a copy of my letter to Kingly.

MISS HOWARD to MR. KINGLY.
SIR,
HAD not the letter I have just perused been written in your hand, and
delivered to me by Mrs. Kingly, I should be tempted to think some whining
school boy had tried the extent of his genius in its composition. In the name
of common sense, my good friend, to what do these piteous complaints tend, or
from whence do they proceed? are you not the husband of a woman, every way
calculated to make the connubial state a state of bliss? have you not two
lovely children, the pledges of her tenderest affections; and has not
Providence bountifully showered its favors on you? have you not health, ease
and plenty? and yet simple mortal, that you are, do you complain and sigh,
because you were not permitted to unite your fate with one, who, if you knew
her half so well as I do, you would find entirely destitute of many of those
amiable qualities which so eminently distinguish Mrs. Kingly. For shame Kingly,
for shame, you almost tempt me to laugh; your present conduct is like that of a
spoilt child, who having in his possession every valuable elegant toy his
indulgent parents can procure him, by chance discovers an insignificant trifle,
which at some past period had amused his fancy; but being now out of his reach,
he raves, blubbers and roars, throws from him with wild impetuosity, those
already in his possession, and with the right, wayward spirit of contradiction
refuses to be pacified. You are mistaken in supposing young Mossop decieved you
in regard to my character; nature formed me thoughtless, volatile and
capricious: It is true, while you remained with me, I restrained my natural
levity; but no sooner were you absent than I relapsed into my former folly, and
innumerable are the giddy inconsistent actions I have committed; among which,
no doubt you will reckon my writing such an unaccountable letter, merely to try
the strength of your passion; to be sure, I did not think you would have
resented it so highly; but when I found that my folly was the means of
promoting your interest, I heartily rejoiced in your felicity, nor once wished
to recall the transaction.

You are in another error in supposing me unhappy. I am one of those
thoughtless, inconsiderate beings, who seldom lay any thing long to heart. My
fortune is gone, it is true; but, it was disposed of in such a way, as I can
never repent. My health and spirits are still unimpaired; then consider, my
good friend, how little I have to regret, how much to be thankful for. It has
struck me, since our interview in Golden-Square, that you might, perhaps,
imagine my illness was occasioned by your sudden appearance. Do not encourage
that idea; it is a false one. I am sometimes subject to those kind of fits; and
they generally seize me without a moment's warning.

I flatter myself you will now be satisfied. Be assured, there is nothing can
give me greater pleasure, than to see you and the (...) woman to whom your fate
is united, enjoy uninterrupted solicity; for volatile an giddy as I am, I have
yet a heart that exults in the prosperity of every surrounding object. Believe
me, Kingly, true felicity is placed within your reach, take the proffered
blessing, and enjoy it with gratitude, nor let your own discontented fancies
dash with gall the cup which Providence presents, overflowing with joy and
peace. From the tenor of your letter, I should think you a hero of romance,
lamenting in pathetic strains the disappointment of his (...) love. Pr'ythee,
my good friend, shake off the boy, assume the man of sense, and learn to
estimate true happiness, not by the inconsistent wishes of your wayward heart,
but by its own intrinsic value. Adieu, and believe me your sincere well wisher.

MERIEL HOWARD.


I will not pretend to tell you, what pain it cost me, my dear Celia, to write
a letter so foreign to my feelings: to be obliged, as it were, to accuse myself
of folly and inconsistency; that would render me contemptible in the eyes of
the only man, to whom I wished to appear amiable. But there was no other way to
restore his peace, there was no other way to preserve the happiness of a woman,
who not only loved him with the most enthusiastic passion, but had placed an
unbounded confidence in me, and shown a friendship for me, which I should have
ceased to deserve, could I once have been so mean as to envy her the possession
of the man, who constituted the whole of her earthly felicity.

But though I wished Kingly to remain in his error, I could not bear to be
thought meanly of by this dear woman; I therefore took an opportunity, when I
thought it most likely he would not be at home, and waited on Mrs. Kingly. I
gave her the letter, but at the same time told her, though I wished her husband
to think my assertions true, I hoped she would kindly believe I was not indeed
the very inconsistent character I had represented myself, I then presented to
her a paper, briefly containing every circumstance which had passed between
Kingly and myself, and enclosing the letter I had received, as I imagined, from
his father. She read them with attention, and then declared it was not old Mr.
Rainsforth's writing; said she knew his hand perfectly well, and also, that he
was a man incapable of writing so inhuman a letter. "That there has been a
strange deception practiced, is very evident, my dear madam," said I, "but I
make no doubt you will join me in thinking, it will be much better to conceal
it from Mr. Kingly, as he would undoubtedly think as an officer and as a man of
honor, he was under a necessity of resenting the ungenerous conduct of Mr.
Mossop." "Dear, considerate girl," said she, taking my hand, "how do you
contrive to rise every moment higher in my esteem. It appears a degree of
cruelty to suffer Mr. Kingly to retain such an erroneous opinion of your
conduct." "But I must insist, my dear madam," said I, "on your keeping my
secret. Remember it was on the promise of inviolable silence alone that I
entrusted you." "But," cried she, tenderly, "I fear you are unhappy." "Indeed,
I am not," I replied. "Sin^e those occurrences I have just related to you, I
have had so many trials, so many heavy afflictions, that I had seldom thought
on Mr. Rainsforth within these last two years, except it was to rejoice, that
by not being united to me, he had escaped a large share of sorrow, as he would
unavoidably have taken a part in all my afflictions." "Ah! deceiver," said she,
smiling, "you cannot persuade me, that the heart once tenderly attached to such
a man as Kingly, can so easily regain its tranquillity. "But you do not reflect,
my dear madam, that I thought him a false hearted swain, and strove with a
laudable pride to banish him from my remembrance." "True," she replied, "but
you are now undeceived." "Well, but believe me, it was too late to awaken the
long stifled passion. My heart is just in the situation it was before I saw
him. Nay, I really think it is easier; for I am now convinced that he is not
altogether unworthy the happiness that awaits him." I then purposely changed
the conversation, enquired when she had seen her aunt, and how long that lady
thought of remaining in town. "I long to go into the country," said I, "for
there never was a woman so passionately fond of still (...) I am; I dote on a
gloomy grotto; and a moonlight night, with a nightingale under my window, and a
streamlet just near enough for its murmurs to be agreeable, fills me with
delight." "You are of a melancholy turn then," said she.

"By no means," I replied, "I am the chearfulest creature breathing when free
from noise and bustle; but if you wish to see me completely stupid, usher me
into a crowded drawing room, my faculties immediately take their flight, and I
appear what I am in reality, a mere cipher to fill up the number of the
company."

"I wish," said she, "our house in Devonshire was near my aunt's, I should, I
am very certain, pass many a happy hour in your society."

"You are at a great distance from her then?" "So far, that we seldom meet
above once in a year." This information pleased me, you may be sure, my dear
Celia, for I wish not to be often in company with Kingly. However, I did not
express my satisfaction, and Mrs. Kingly continued. "Even when I do visit Mrs.
Rooksby, I take an opportunity when Mr. Kingly is from home: for he has such an
in^^cible aversion to her son, that he will never, if he can possibly avoid it,
spend an hour in his company." "Does Mr. Rooksby live with his mother?" said I.

"Not in general, but in the summer season he frequently makes her a visit of
some months continuance, especially if his finances run short. Clement,"
continued she, "is not a bad hearted lad, but he is thoughtless and
extravagant; and what offends Mr. Kingly so highly is, he has an intrigue with
a woman supposed to be married. Her influence over him is astonishing, and her
extravagance knows no bounds; the connection, I believe, has been of long
duration; but he has not publicly avowed it till within these two months.
Business for his mother took him to the continent, and when he returned she
accompanied him." "It is a great pity," said I. But at that moment hearing
Kingly's voice in the hall, I arose to take my leave; and as he entered the
room I left it.

Tomorrow, my dear Celia, I take leave of the amiable, friendly Amelia, and
her worthy mother, and enter into Mrs. Rooksby's family. I am happy to find her
son is not much at home, as I have met with so many vexations from the
unmeaning assiduities of the men, that I wish to avoid as much as possible all
intercourse with the sex: for except Kingly, I can hardly believe there is a
good one in the world. There was another, Celia, but he is now no more. Dear
shade of the benevolent, disinterested Welldon, if from thy blissful abode thou
could, now look down, and behold the heart thy virtue snatched from ruin,
thou would see it overflowing with such grateful remembrance, such veneration
and affection, as nothing but the hand of death can extinguish. Adieu! my dear
Celia, I will write again when I can tell you how I like my situation.

MERIEL.

LETTER XXXIX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, April 20 th, 1781.
I HAVE now been in this family nearly a month, and feel myself as happy as you
can imagine, by contrasting my present with my late friendless and desolate
condition. Mrs. Rooksby has seen a good deal of company since I have been with
her, and goes frequently into public. I find, my dear Celia, that sensibility
is not always an object of ridicule; for Mrs. Rooksby and Mrs. Kingly can shed
tears at a tragedy without endeavoring to conceal, or blush for their
weakness. I have received several very genteel presents from the last mentioned
lady, and whenever her aunt spends a day with her in Golden-Square, I take that
opportunity to visit Miss Sidney, and so avoid a meeting which I am sensible
cannot be very desirable to any of the parties.

I have not as yet seen Mr. Rooksby, but this evening his mother has a rout
previous to her leaving town, and she informs me he will certainly be their.
The good old lady pathetically laments her sons unfortunate attachment, says,
she is certain, from good information, that he is the dupe of an artful
designing woman. "She has caught him in her deep laid snare," said she, "and he
holds himself bound to her by gratitude and honor; for I am convinced real
affection had little or no share in first forming the connection. He first
became acquainted with her at Oxford, where she passed for the wife of an old
counselor. Her form, I am told, is very lovely, and it could not be supposed
that a lad of nineteen, should repulse, or fly the advances of a beautiful
accomplished woman. When he came to town she left her husband and two lovely
children, and followed him, when a lodging was taking for her a few miles from
London. When he went to the continent she met him at Dover, and insisted on
going with him, and during their journey, the infatuated boy consented to her
returning and living publicly with him in a house he has taken for the purpose."

"He has been acquainted with her some years, then," said I. "It is above three
years," she replied, "since he first saw her."

It is really a sad thing, my dear Celia, that an abandoned woman should prey
upon the fortune and destroy the peace of this young man: yet if the tears and
entreaties of a fond mother cannot break the fatal charm that holds him, sure
every other effort will be ineffectual. But now my friend, I must throw aside
my pen, and be fine lady enough to declare it is for the purpose of dressing, I
begin to wish we were in the country, I am already sick of parade, show and
farce; for really a fashionable life is nothing better. How tiresome to be
plagued with the civil howdye's of fifty women, who are immensely happy to hear
you are well, and would say, with the same sang-froid, they were immensely
sorry if they were told you were dead. Oh what a miserable figure I should make
in the beau monde.

21 st.

Really this Mr. Rooksby is a very tolerable being, and if I did not begin to
fear he may be the cause of future vexation to me I should like to pass an hour
or two in his company, now and then well enough. This morning at breakfast Mrs.
Rooksby said "how happy my dear Miss Howard, should I be, if your charms and
engaging qualities were to draw Clement from his unhappy engagement; I have
indulged the most pleasing hopes from some expressions of admiration and
surprise, which broke from him on being introduced to you last night." "They
were merely words of course, madam," said I, smiling, "when he knew I was
honored with your approbation, he could not be so wanting in politeness as to
express any dislike." "But what will you say my dear," she replied, "when I
tell you he has absolutely engaged himself to dine with me to day, a favor he
has not vouchsafed above twice since I came to town." "We will hope, madam, he
is returning to a proper sense of his duty."

"Ah! Meriel, I wish he may entertain a proper sense of your merit; how happy
should I be in such a daughter; how certain would he be of happiness, if
blessed with such a wife." "Dear madam, you over power me; you over rate my
merits, and indeed I feel it is impossible I should ever love any man
sufficient to become his wife." "Come," said she, "be candid, you cannot forget
Kingly." "Indeed, madam, if I know my own heart, it never yet harbored an
improper wish; I esteem both Mr. and Mrs. Kingly, but I should be extremely
sorry to see any misfortune dissolve their union, but let us drop the subject,
I wish to remain single; let me only enjoy your friendship my dear madam, and I
shall be the happiest creature on earth."

At dinner time Mr. Rooksby arrived. I endeavored to be unembarrassed in my
manner, but after what had passed in the morning it was impossible. He was
attentively polite; but I saw his dear mother watch every look, and smile
approbation, whenever any thing escaped him that could be construed into
tenderness. She pressed me to play and sing: some little drawings too, which
she has honored by hanging in the drawing room, were submitted to his
inspection. "They are vastly well executed," said he. "Clara draws very
prettily." "I hope," said his mother, "you do not make comparisons." "Assuredly
I do," he replied hastily, "but every comparison must only convince me of Miss
Howard's evident superiority, not only in every virtue, but in every
accomplishment." I hope, my dear Celia, this young man will not take it into
his head to fancy himself in love with me. I never can like him; besides, I am
determined never to marry. Adieu, my dear friend, I wish I was in the convent
with you; but it was not my fate to pass a serene, unruffled life, and I must
be as patient as I can till my hour of rest arrives. Ever yours,

MERIEL.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART, A NOVEL. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY MRS. ROWSON, OF THE NEW THEATER, PHILADELPHIA, AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE, FILLE
DE CHAMBER, INQUISITOR, etc. etc.

-- If there is a power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he must delight in virtue.
The soul secured in her existence, smiles,
At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
VOL. III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY MOUNTFORD, BIOREN and CO. NO.75,
DOCK-STREET, SOLD BY MESSRS. CAREY, RICE, CAMPBELL, ORMROD, YOUNG, AND THE
AUTHOR, CORNER OF SEVENTH AND CHESNUT-STREETS. M.DCC.XCV.

TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART.
LETTER XL. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, May 17 th, 1781.
THIS is a charming romantic place, my dear Celia. There is room for solitude
and deep reflection. Oak-hall is situated in a very retired part of the
country, and has been the family mansion of the Rooksby's from time immemorial.
The house is antique, and inspires one's mind with the true spirit of the days
of chivalry. You cannot think, how often I amuse myself with surveying its
antique battlements, the massy gates, and deep moat, that surround it; and
while I gaze with a kind of reverential awe, I fancy, I am perhaps retracing
the steps of many a gallant knight and beauteous dame who formerly have been
inhabitants of this ancient dwelling. I am a great admirer of every thing, that
wears the face of antiquity not that I would, were I possessed of ever so large
a fortune, lay out my money in purchasing a heap of trumpery, that are really
of no intrinsic value, only as the fancy of the virtuoso stamps them with the
appellation of excellence, because they were made some hundred years before we
were born. I cannot deny, that I like to examine any little piece of antiquity,
which tends to show us the progress of the arts or manufactures, and when I
enjoy the benefit of any thing useful or convenient I feel a kind of veneration
for the genius, who first invented it, let it be ever so mean or trifling.

May, 20 th.

Mr. Rooksby arrived yesterday and has this morning, not to my surprise, but to
my infinite regret, made me an offer of his hand and fortune. It is not, my
dear Celia, that I am stoic enough to pretend, I have an aversion to being
raised from a state of dependence to be mistress of seven thousand pounds a
year: but I feel, I shall never regard Mr. Rooksby with the affection, which,
in my opinion, is absolutely necessary, to make the married state comfortable,
though Mrs. Rooksby tells me, that in this I am mistaken, as she was perfectly
happy while her husband lived; and yet she declares she acceded to the union
merely in compliance with the desires of her parents. It may be so, Celia, but
I am certain I should never be happy with a man, whom I regard with
indifference. But I will give you an account of a conversation, I had this
morning with this invader of my peace (I must call him so, for had it not been
for him I should have felt myself quite happy in my present situation.) We had
just finished breakfast, when a servant informed Mrs. Rooksby a poor woman
desired to speak with her. The good old lady is benevolent and humane to all
her poor neighbors, and the honest industrious when oppressed by misfortune
are always sure of meeting a friend in her.

I had not been alone with Mr. Rooksby before, since my residence in the family
and to tell you the truth, I would gladly have walked ten miles to have avoided
it now. But there was no flying; politeness obliged me to sit still; besides I
thought it would look so like being (...) of the man, so childish to run away
as soon as his mother left the room -- that I sat very composedly and took up
my work, which opportunely was in the room. -- We were silent near ten minutes,
when at length he spoke.

"May I venture to enquire how Miss Howard likes the situation of my mother's
house?"

"I think it extremely pleasant, sir. It suits the turn of my mind; I am fond
of solitude and should be quite happy were I certain of never wandering from
this delightful spot, to the gay regions of fashion, folly, and what is in
general termed pleasure."

"How blind are you to your own merits, my dear Miss, if you wish thus to hide
in obscurity, beauty and virtue, that would do honor to a court."

"You make me smile, Mr. Rooksby, how would your gay companions ridicule you
could they hear you thus lavishly complimenting an humble dependant of your
mother's."

"And let them laugh, my dear Miss. Howard, for did they know as I do the true
value of your worth, they would like me, adore it."

"This, my dear Celia, was not to be answered: so I was obliged to be content
with remaining silent and looking like an idiot." While he continued, "I am
fully sensible of my own unworthiness of presuming to become a candidate for
Miss Howard's favor. I know how full of error my short career of life has
been; but I trust your benevolent spirit will pardon my past follies; and could
I presume to hope you would condescend to accept my hand and fortune, I am
certain by a constant contemplation of the goodness it would strive to
immitate, my heart would soon be an offering worthy of your acceptance."

Dear Celia, how extremely embarrassing was my situation? I felt my face glow.
I dared not look up: at length I summoned sufficient courage to speak.

"I hardly (...) sir, in what manner to reply. If the offer you have just made
be seriously meant."

"If it be serious, Miss Howard, can you suppose I would trifle on so important
a subject, with any woman, much more with one so truly amiable as yourself.
Believe me, my charming girl, there is no event could render me so happy, or
convey such unmixed felicity to the bosom of my mother, as to see you become a
part of a family which may derive honor from, but can confer none by the
alliance."

"Your polite and generous proposal, sir, demands a candid answer. I feel
myself infinitely obliged by the regard with which you are pleased to honor
me; at the same time I am under the necessity of declining your offer. I hope
you will believe I am not ungrateful for the esteem and friendship I have
fortunately met with in your mother's family, and permit me to add, I shall
always regard her as an affectionate parent and you as a brother: but as to any
nearer tie, it never can take place between us."

"Never, Miss Howard. Do not say never -- Time and constant assiduity will I
hope influence your heart in my favor: for without that sweet (...) must be
miserable."

"Indeed, Mr. Rooksby I cannot flatter you. It is at present my fixed
determination, never to alter my condition: but were that not the case" --

"Your choice would not fall on me. I am satisfied -- Some more happy man."

"Pardon me, you are in an error. I am indifferent to all the sex."

"Then why not allow me to strive to awaken the sensibility of your heart.
Believe me your happiness should be the whole study of my life."

"Mr. Rooksby, I will be explicit. Were I ever so partial to your virtues, I
could not overlook one glaring error in your conduct, an error which not only
tarnishes your own reputation, but preys upon your mother's peace of mind."

"You mean my connection with Clara."

"I do."

"Will you permit me, Miss Howard, to enter into a little detail of my conduct
through the whole of this unhappy connection. Unhappy! I must always call it,
not only from the reasons you have just alleged, but because I foresee my want
of fortitude has involved an amiable woman in infamy and ruin; for had I
repulsed the first overtures of the unhappy Clara's passion, affronted pride
would have assisted in combating her attachment, and she might at this moment
have been happy in the esteem and love of her husband and family. I have often
wished to explain this affair to my mother and engage her friendship in behalf
of Clara, but whenever I attempt to speak, she brands the poor girl with the
epithets of artful, vile, enticing siren. Alas, Miss Howard, the unfortunate
Clara's greatest error is, a too tender attachment to me."

Ah man! man! said I mentally, how easily does thy vanity, dupe thy reason, --
Mr. Rooksby continued --

"It may appear old, that I should wish to enter upon this subject to you, but
I am certain you will judge with candor and represent Clara to my mother in
such a light as may lead her to befriend a woman, who has sacrificed fame,
happiness, and honor to me. You will ask, perhaps, why I do not marry her, as
her husband is lately dead, I would answer, that she is not a woman calculated
to make me happy. Her temper is impetuous, and though her form is lovely and
she has received a polished education, she possesses not that true feminine
softness and delicacy which in my opinion alone can render a woman really
amiable. My acquaintance with her commenced about four years since, while I was
completing my studies at Oxford. At that time her husband Mr. Millar was a
counselor residing at that city. He invited me frequently to his house. I saw
Mrs. Millar, and admired her as a lovely accomplished woman; nay more, I pitied
her, for I saw she was not happy. Her sister, Miss Ramsay, who resided in the
house wi^h her, to^^ me, their father had been a lieutenant in (...) navy: but
age and infirmities obliging him to retire upon his half pay, they found their
circumstances greatly straitened. At this time, Mr. Millar paid their father a
visit. He was struck with the beauty and innocence of Clara, and though at that
time near fifty years old, he had the vanity to think he could render himself
agreeable to a girl of seventeen."

"Perhaps," said I, "it was a benevolent wish to lighten the expenses of his
friend and place the young lady in a state of independence which urged him to
make the offer of his hand."

It might be so, she replied, but whatever his motives might be, gratitude and
filial love incited Clara to accept the offer, and sacrifice herself to the man
she disliked; to secure ease and affluence to her father and sister: but he
lived not long to enjoy the fruits of her kindness. A slow decline carried him
off about a year after his daughter's marriage. At this time I was introduced
into Mr. Millar's family. Clara was just become a mother; her husband seemed to
idolize her; she could not breathe a wish which was not instantly gratified.
Yet she was far from happy, and I often saw her turn aside to conceal tears,
which seemed to flow from an oppressed heart. One afternoon, Mr. Millar was
from home, her sister sitting at the other end of the room reading. Clara rose
from her seat on pretense of reaching something from the chimney piece, and
stooping, picked up a paper which she presented to me, saying, you drop your
letters about very carelessly. I took the paper and perceived it was a sealed
letter. I will not shock your delicacy, Miss Howard, by repeating the contents
of this letter. I can perceive by your countenance, that you think it a
sufficient error for a married woman to entertain an inclination for any other
man than her husband without daring to avow her passion. I am sensible, Clara
acted with imprudence; but who can answer for the emotions of a heart, under
the influence of its first tender attachment? And however culpable, she might
be, I think myself more so. I should have never more entered Mr. Millar's
house, when I found how detrimental my presence was, both to his honor and
happiness. I should have avoided the society of the fair seducer, and confined
myself more than ever to my studies. I am conscious this should have been my
conduct; but, alas! it was quite the reverse. I sought every opportunity of
being in her company. I encouraged her growing tenderness. Private enterviews
ensued, and honor, gratitude, and friendship were all forgotten. Though our
intercourse continued, during the whole time I remained at Oxford, Mr. Millar
never suspected his injuries. The sister was in our confidence, and she always
contrived our meetings in such a manner, that they appeared the effect of
chance. Just before I left Oxford, Clara was confined with her second child.
This prevented my taking a personal leave. I wrote, informing her of the
necessity of my removal, assured her of my grateful affection and that I would
take frequent opportunities of visiting her in future. This I said, merely to
quiet her anxiety; for reason had began to operate; the mist of passion was
dissipated and I was determined to put an end to a connection, at once so
dishonorable and unjust. I chose to take the opportunity of her confinement
for my departure, as I knew how ill I could support taking a personal leave,
where tears, faintings, and hysterics would effectually unbend my best
resolutions. I therefore entrusted my letter to the sister, without informing
her of the contents, and set forward immediately for London. I had not been in
town above a fortnight, when one morning, as I sat at breakfast, I heard a
chaise stop at the door, and in a moment Clara rushed into the parlour where I
was sitting.

Good God," said I, "Mrs. Millar what has brought you to town." -- "What," she
replied, "what but your cruel desertion of me. Unkind, ungenerous Rooksby, did
you think I would live separated from you." -- "My dear Clara,," said I,
"consider how your reputation will suffer when this rash step is known" -- "
What is reputation to me," cried she, "if I am deprived of your love I lose all
that can make life valuable." -- "Where are your children, Clara," -- "I left
them too, for your sake, Rooksby; and is this cold, unkind reception all the
return I am likely to meet." -- "You call me cold, and unkind; but believe me,
you wrong me, I feel all, nay much more than I ought for you, but I am very
sorry to find you have so little regard for yourself as thus to incur the
censure of the world by following a man who has it not in his power to offer
you an honorable protection." -- " You throw me from you, then. You will not
receive me" (cried she, starting up, and wildly clasping her hands,) Oh Rooksby
this is more than I can bear -- I am bursting -- My heart is swollen so large;
it choaks me. -- " Be calm, I beseech you, my dear Clara, I do not refuse to
receive you; no, my poor girl, I feel myself bound to protect you; for I know
it was I first drew you from your duty; but I am sensible, how little
recompense it is in my power to make for the many comforts and blessings I have
robbed you of." "Oh Rooksby," said she, "let me enjoy your society, and be
blessed with your love, and I shall not regret any sacrifice I have made."

What could I do, Miss Howard, continued Mr. Rooksby. -- There was but one way.
I offered to take her a house a little way out of town and visit her
occasionally. She acceded to the proposal and changed her name. Soon after her
sister came to town, and with her brought the two children, whom she said Mr.
Millar had in his resentment turned out of doors. -- I now considered myself as
bound to provide for these unfortunate children; but I had no idea of making
myself a resident in the same house with their mother. But when I went over to
France this last autumn, she followed me, and with such earnestness declared
she would sooner die than be separated from me for one week, that I was unable
to refuse the request she made to accompany me abroad. While we were on the
continent we heard from her sister, that Mr. Millar was dead. -- From that
time, Clara earnestly pressed me to marry her; but I told her not to form any
such vain expectation, as that was an event, which never could take place;
however I promised always to be her friend, and in consideration of her then
evident pregnancy, consented that on our return to England, I would take a
house in London and reside with her. -- Alas! my dear young lady, I knew not
what inconveniences I was bringing upon myself: -- Her expenses far outran the
annual sum I had allotted her; she is never happy but when I am with her, and
even when I devote almost my whole time to her, she is peevish, dissatisfied
and constantly complaining of my altered carriage toward her. Alas, I know I
am changed; but I am also certain I never failed in tender solicitude, and
attention to her welfare. I never did love her. Vanity, gratitude, and the wild
impulses of youth have been mistaken for that passion. I am now convinced of my
error. My heart now vibrates with a true and ardent affection. I will never
suffer Clara to know want; but the future happiness or misery of my life must
depend entirely upon Miss Howard.

I had listened attentively, during this recital. I found much to blame in
Clara. Indeed, they had both been guilty of errors of such magnitude, that in
my opinion they deserved the appellation of crimes: but it was not for me to
condemn. I knew from fatal experience, how imprudent were the dictates of a
youthful heart. And though I felt a secret horror at the recital of Rooksby's
cruel perfidy, to his kind, unsuspecting friend Mr. Millar, yet he appeared
innocent in comparison with Clara. Her husband loved her almost to adoration;
he had raised her from poverty to affluence; he had cheared the last hours of
her father, and offered an assylum to her orphan sister. He was the father of
her children, Celia. Yet could she ungratefully betray the honor he had
confided to her care; forsake this kind, indulgent husband, desert her innocent
children, in that helpless state, when they require all a mother's fond
solicitude and anxious maternal care. -- And for this inhuman conduct she
pleads love. Celia! real love never yet incited its votaries to base or
dishonorable actions. I am certain, I never could like Clara. She appears to
me an artful designing woman, and from Rooksby's account, I think, interest has
been the main spring of her actions. Indeed, that alone urged her to follow
him; for had she regarded him with real affection, she would have (...) from
the idea of becoming a burden to him: and do not, my dear Celia, think I am
turning rigidly censorious, if I say, I suspect she was not really the wife of
Mr. Millar; though that takes but little from her guilt, as she certainly had
received many tokens of affection from him, and had been received and respected
as his wife by all the families who lived in their neighborhood. All these
reflections had passed rapidly through my mind, while Mr. Rooksby was speaking.
When he paused, I found myself necessitated to answer.

"You say, sir, your heart is very deceitful: it has once betrayed you into
actions and connections you now heartily repent. May it not do so again. Trust
not to its impulse: call in the aid of reason and reflection, and you will find
your present inclination will prove as great a delusion as the former."

"Impossible!" he replied, vehemently, "impossible, I can never alter my
opinion in regard to Miss Howard."

"And believe me, sir," said I, gravely, "it is equally impossible I can ever
alter mine in regard to you."

I then attempted to leave the room; but he caught my hand. "Stay, my dear
girl, only one moment; let me entreat you, only to recall that cruel word
never. Give me but the most distant ray of hope and I will endeavor to be
satisfied." -- " Well, Sir," said I smiling, "if you remain of the same opinion
you are now, forty years hence, I will talk with you further on the subject."
He released my hand and turned from me in sullen silence. I embraced the
opportunity, and immediately quitted the apartment. But here was a fresh scene
of persecution to encounter. Mrs. Rooksby met me, as I went across the hall,
and taking hold of my arm, we walked into the garden. "I see, my dear Meriel,"
said she, "you are not pleased; poor Clement has little to hope: but come tell
me, have you given him a positive refusal?" -- My dear Madam, you already know
my sentiments on that subject, I have no inclination for matrimony, I wish to
remain single; for I am certain I should never have patience sufficient to
submit to all the whims and caprices of those lords of the creation. "I am
afraid Meriel, you deceive yourself, and that under the idea of a
disinclination for marriage, you nourish a hopeless and destructive passion. I
know my dear girl how nobly you have conducted yourself in regard to Mr.
Kingly. My niece has informed me of the whole: but my good girl, while you are
thus studiously promoting the happiness of others, why neglect your own, why
sacrifice the bloom and spring of life to a passion, which however well placed,
is now no longer innocent."

"Oh! Madam," I replied, "do not suspect me of cherishing so improper a desire;
can I not be suffered to pass quietly through the remainder of my life, without
forming any other connection than friendship? Why must I be obliged to
undertake duties I am so very unable to perform? Or why do you wish a heart
long since dead to pleasure, from whom every tender tie is now severed, to have
its sensibility again awakened, to have new affections; to make it again fond
of life, only perhaps to experience again the acute pangs of losing the beloved
objects that had called those affections forth?" -- " My dear Meriel, you must
not argue thus; we are all born to encounter trouble." -- " Alas! Madam, my
share has already been almost beyond my weak power to support; for from the day
in which I left the Convent till the present, I have not experienced one so
happy that I could wish it to return, yet heaven knows I do not complain; but I
wish not to engage in new scenes."

"You must consider, Miss Howard, it is not for us to mark out the path we wish
to tread, and cry I will not deviate from it. We are not sent into the world to
pass through it in indolence. Remember my love that life which is not in some
measure serviceable to our fellow creatures, is not acceptable to our Creator.
You in particular are sent into the world, endowed with abilities to shine in
the respective characters of Wife, Mother, and the mistress of a family, and
will you be the unprofitable servant and hide those talents entrusted to your
care, for the comfort of your friends and the benefit of mankind in general" --

"But Clara, madam, I hope you will allow that is an obstacle?" -- " It is only
so in your opinion: To me it is the great motive of my earnest wish to see
Clement united to you -- Clara shall be amply provided for" --

"And her child?" -- " We will take it home, should it be born alive, and I
will see it shall be properly educated and a handsome provision made for its
future support. Now my dear Meriel, I think all your objections are removed."
"You must, dear madam, give me time for consideration, before I can determine
on so important a subject."

"You shall not be hurried, my love, only let me have your leave to bid Clement
hope."

"Oh! do not I beseech you, raise fallacious hopes. It may not be in my power
to realize them." -- " Well then," said she, "I will remain silent, till I have
your leave to speak." She then turned into another walk and I returned to the
house. -- " And, now my dear Celia, how would you advise me to act. I fear,
turn which way I will, I am still in an error. Ah! my sweet friend, I cannot
teach this stubborn heart indifference toward Kingly, and sure I am, whilst I
remain single, my partiality will be ever the same. Should I marry, other ties
and the important duties of my station will call my mind from this dangerous
object: But then to give my hand and vow obedience to a man, whom my heart
refuses to love, is certainly an error; and what is worse, the irrevocable
words, once past, there will be no flying from my fate, however repugnant it
may be to my feelings. I will write to my dear Amelia on the subject; alio to
to Mrs. Kingly. Their opinions shall decide my fate. Yet, my dear Celia,
believe me, my soul shrinks from an union with Rooksby. I know not why, but
whenever I think of it, a cold chill runs through my veins, and my heart sinks
within me: but I am grown strangely fanciful of late. I am greatly altered
since we-parted. Methinks, I am but the shadow of my former self, the serenity
of temper I once boasted to enjoy is entirely lost, and I am like a froward
child. Adieu, I am changed in every thing but friendship to you.

MERIEL.

LETTER XLI. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, June 14 th, 1781.
I HAVE wrote to my friends and received their answers. Amelia wishes me to
accept Mr. Rooksby's offer. She says it is the only way to restore tranquillity
to my heart. Mrs. Kingly desires me to study my own happiness, but at the same
time, I think she would rejoice in my union with her cousin. But I will give
you both their letters, and you will better conceive how their minds are
inclined.

LETTER XLII. MRS. KINGLY to MISS HOWARD.
Plymouth, June 4 th, 1781.
YOU tell me, my dear Miss Howard, that my cousin has, to your surprise,
declared a passion for you: it is your diffidence alone occasions that
surprise, as I foresaw it was a circumstance that would certainly follow your
residing in the family: but, though my lovely friend, I should greatly rejoice
to rank you in the number of my relations, I would by no means desire that
gratification, if it is to be purchased at the expense of your peace of mind.
-- Clement has, it is true, an independent fortune; but his mind is not formed
for the approbation of one so delicate as yours. I should be pleased to see you
raised to a station you was formed to adorn; but I cannot avoid the remembrance
of your gentleness of spirit which seeks not in grandeur for content. Oh! my
dear Meriel, I know there never was but one man worthy of your affection, and I
have stepped between you and happiness.

I informed Mr. Kingly, as you desired, of my cousin's offer. "Her mind," said
he, "must be strangely altered, if she can find the least congenial particle in
his; but she is altogether an inexplicable riddle." Vexed to hear him speak so
slightingly, I was almost tempted to betray my trust and tell him how vilely
you had slandered yourself, but shall I confess the truth, self-love prevailed.
I could not bear to think he might perhaps be angry at my long concealment; and
much as I esteem and venerate my dear Miss Howard, I could not consent he
should love even her, better than me. I will not give my opinion concerning
your future conduct; though you condescend to ask it. Of this I am satisfied,
whatever your own good sense shall resolve upon, that will undoubtedly be
right. Accept my best wishes for your happiness and prosperity, and belive you
have not a sincerer friend than

M. KINGLY.

LETTER XLIII. MISS SIDNEY to MISS HOWARD.
London, June 3 d, 1781.
AND so my little sentimental Meriel is really and seriously deliberating,
whether she shall accept a man with seven thousand a year, shine forth in all
the magnificence of bridal finery, or remaining a chaste vestal, breathing pure
vows to the consecrated flame of her first love, continue in a state of
dependence to the end of her life. I charge you, Miss Howard, deliberate no
longer. Make haste and send us some wedding favors, and next winter, let me
have the pleasure of pointing out your elegant equipage, as it passes my
window, to some of my inquisitive acquaintance, and saying, "that is my friend
Mrs. Rooksby's carriage. Then how shall I exult to receive a curtesy from a
side box when you are as fine as hands can make you, and poor humble me as
plain as possible, sit almost opposite you in the pit. In the pit you say,
bless me Amelia, I should blush to death to be thought to know any one in the
pit. Pardon me, dear Meriel, I know your good little heart so well, I am
certain the friend you esteemed would always be recognized while she continued
deserving of your notice, though poverty and distress were strongly marked by
her appearance. And now to be serious concerning your letter, Mr. Rooksby
appears to me a weak young man; but there seems great goodness of heart in him
and I think it would be a charitable action to snatch him from ruin. -- for
inevetable ruin must follow his connection with Clara. I am informed her style
of living is the most extravagant immaginable, and such splendid preparations
are making for her accouchment, that you would think her a duchess of the
first rank. And now I am speaking of charitable actions, let me represent to my
friend the many aching hearts it will be in her power to relieve when she is
mistress of such an ample fortune, as Mr. Rooksby offers to her acceptance. And
again, my love, consider what a relief it will be to the generous Mrs. Kingly
to see you so well settled. Even Kingly himself will be happier when you are
married, for trust me while you remain single he will nourish the idea that
your partiality for him is the occasion of your preferring a state of celibacy.
-- That you will be happier in yourself, I am well convinced. New scenes will
open to your imagination, past sorrows will be forgotten and the afflictions of
the daughter shall be amply repaid by the felicity of the mother. Ah! my dear
Meriel, you must marry, if it be only to experience the superlative happiness
of having a daughter, whose soul shall be the exact model of your own. Methinks
too, my friend, you will feel your bosom dilate with pleasure, when you can
call Mrs. Rooksby by the endearing name of mother. A heart like yours, so
formed for all the endearing ties of life when deprived of its natural
relation, seeks some one on whom to rest its affection. Accept then my dear
girl, the offered good that awaits you, let your heart expand to receive all
those delightful sensations which result from a felicitous matrimonial union,
and while you are alternately addressed by the endearing titles of mother and
daughter; while the man whom you shall bless with your hand, reveres, admires,
adores you, the disappointments of your youth shall be no more remembered,
except it is with a kind of smiling wonder at their ever having made you
uneasy. My mother bids me tell you she wishes you may be as truly happy as you
deserve, and you will then be superlatively so -- and so says your

AMELIA SIDNEY.

MERIEL to CELIA. IN CONTINUATION.
WHEN I had read these letters, my mind still wavering and irresolute, I
repaired to Mrs. Rooksby's dressing room. I found her weeping. "Meriel," said
she, as I entered, "you are come in good time to comfort me. Clement has just
been with me. He leaves us tomorrow."

"Tomorrow, Madam, that is much sooner than he at first intended."

"Yes, Meriel, and he leaves us with an intention that almost deprives me of
reason."

"You surprise me, what intention can he have formed, that gives you so much
anxiety."

"He is determined to marry Clara immediately on his arrival in London, that
his child may be legetimated."

"Marry Clara," said I, with an emotion of astonishment.

"It is even so my dear; he just now told me he found it was in vain to hope
any thing from you, and being deprived of the hope of your affection he knew
love could have no part in any other union, he was determined that the claims
of honor should be attended to, and his innocent child have not future cause
to curse the author of its being, since that being would, if he did not marry
Clara, inherit infamy as its birthright."

"I cannot think," I replied, "that honor by any means obliges him to marry
that woman. She certainly forfeited all claim to an honorable protector, when
she fled from Mr. Millar. I wish she was well provided for, and far from Mr.
Rooksby, for I am cartain that inevitable misery and ruin must ensue from a
continuation of his present connection with her. What then would bethe
consequence of an indissoluble union? I tremble to think of it."

"You will see him, Miss Howard, before he leaves Oak-hall. Let me beg of you,
my dear girl, to exert all your eloquence, to persuade him from so fatal a
step. Give some hope, even if it should be but fallacious, and I make no doubt,
but we shall retain him with us a little time longer, and who knows what time
may do."

"I cannot deceive any person, my dear madam. If I am tempted to hold out hope
to draw your son from this destructive resolution, be assured, I shall one day
mean to realize them." -- " Blessings on you my sweet Meriel, you will then
relent; I shall have the happiness of seeing my son preserved from ruin, and
obtain a daughter who must be admired and esteemed by all, who are so happy as
to know her."

"I did not absolutely say so, madam. I will see Mr. Rooksby previous to his
intended departure. I will use every argument in my power to prevail with him
to give up his design in regard to Clara; if I find every other argument
ineffectual, I will promise some future day to give him my hand. But let me
request my dear friendly Mrs. Rooksby to attribute this resolution to its
proper cause. I will not deceive your son with professions of affection which I
do not feel. I have received many favors from you and your amiable niece Mrs.
Kingly, and I think it will be to your mutual satisfaction, to see me married.
I am sensible, it is a duty also which I owe myself, as, whilst I continue
single, I shall always be suspected of nourishing an improper affection for Mr.
Kingly, and as it is my earnest wish to preserve my own reputation unsullied
and to promote as much as possible the happiness of others, I will unite myself
to Mr. Rooksby, but alas, I have nothing to offer in return for his generous
affection but esteem and friendship."

"Enough my love," cried Mrs. Rooksby embracing me, "I have no doubt of
Clement's happiness, when blessed with the esteem of so amiable a companion."

At dinner we all met as usual. Mr. Rooksby was in his traveling dress. "Are
you for riding this afternoon, sir," said I -- " I think of setting forward for
London, Miss Howard, I have an affair of infinite consequence to transact
there, and I fear delays may be dangerous." -- " You must not leave us
tonight, however, Clement," said his mother smiling. -- " I did not understand
you intended leaving Oak-hall till tomorrow," said I. -- " I would willingly
stay here forever," he replied, "but I am sensible my presence is detrimental
to the tranquillity of one whose happiness I would promote at the hazard of my
life." -- This was a compliment, my dear Celia, which I could not take entirely
to myself, as he might have meant Clara's happiness was disturbed by his
remaining at Oak-hall, I therefore remained silent, and little more was said,
till the cloth was removed. I then arose to leave the room with Mrs. Rooksby,
who generally retires to her dressing room after dinner, and as is often the
case with elderly people, indulges herself with a nap. As I arose Mr. Rooksby
took my hand. "Permit me, Miss Howard, before I take my leave to request the
honor of a few minutes conversation." I curtefied assent and reassumed my
seat; he continued.

"It is with infinite regret, my dear young lady, that I leave this place, as
by so doing I relinquish every hope, which I had fondly cherished of obtaining
an interest in your bosom. I see my presence is painful to you, it encroaches
on that tranquillity you would otherwise enjoy, in a place so agreeable to your
disposition. I hope you will believe, your happiness is an object of far
greater moment to me than my own. I go from hence with a fixed resolution to
repair the injuries I have done Clara; but to convince you how near your
interest is and ever will be to my heart, I must beg you will consider yourself
from this moment independent. In this (presenting me a small box) you will find
a writing, which conveys to you and yours for ever an estate worth two hundred
pounds a year, situated in Glamorganshire. I will not be either interrupted or
contradicted (seeing I was about to speak.) You must accept this as from a
brother, who though his own future days will have scarce a dawn of pleasure to
enliven them, will always have the comfort of reflecting the most amiable woman
in the world will be no more reduced to situations at once so unworthy her
merits, and painful to her feelings."

Overcome by this generous conduct I was unable to speak. Tears involuntarily
burst from my eyes and seeing him about to leave the room, almost unknowing
what I did, I caught his hand to detain him. --

"Do not distress me, my dear Miss Howard, said he, those tears are too
precious to be shed on such a trivial occasion."

"Trivial," said I, "Oh! Mr. Rooksby, I cannot accept this noble donation. It
oppresses me beyond measure. I have no way of discharging the vast debt of
gratitude."

"My sweet girl," said he, kissing my hand. "Remember me ever with a friendly
affection and I shall think myself a thousand times repaid."

"I cannot take it, sir, indeed I cannot. But let me prefer one request to you.
Do not leave us this afternoon, remain a few days longer to oblige me." --

No, my dear Meriel, I see the generous drift of your design. You pity me, you
wish to make me happy and to oblige my mother would sacrifice your own
felicity; but, my dear friend, if I have nothing to hope from affection, I will
not be indebted to gratitude or compassion.

"But, dear Mr. Rooksby, consider how you will distress your mother by thus
precipitately giving your hand to Mrs. Millar; You must pardon me, sir, but
indeed I do not think her altogether worthy such an honor."

"Such a severe expression from miss Howard is something extraordinary; but
women (added he smiling) are not always the most candid judges of each other.
You my dear Miss behold in Clara only a frail woman, who forgetful of the rigid
dictates of honor and virtue sacrificed reputation, friends, every valuable
consideration to an unhappy passion. I behold her as a lovely unfortunate
creature, who has made those sacrifices for me. I also consider that, perhaps,
had it been her fate to be united to the man of her heart, she would at this
moment have been a respectable member of society; and if I reflect, that I only
am the cause, that she is not so, can I do otherwise than repair as much, as is
in my power, the injuries her reputation has suffered on my account."

"I think, Mr. Rooksby, you argue perfectly right, nor should I have entered on
this subject, had it not been at the earnest request of your mother. She
shudders at the idea of your introducing into the family a woman of light fame.
She has been informed that Mrs. Millar is a very faulty woman in more respects
than one. She wishes to have her amply provided for, but cannot endure to think
she must be the wife of her darling son."

"I saw, Miss Howard, from the first that it was at my mother's desire you so
cheerfully assented to this conversation. She knew the generosity of your
disposition. She naturally supposed you would exert yourself to prevail with me
to relinquish my design. She foresaw the generous concessions you would make in
my favor: but she knows not the heart of her son, if she imagines affection
like his could be satisfied with any thing less than affection in return."

"I am sorry, I shall be able to give no better account of my undertaking; but,
however, Mr. Rooksby, permit me to decline, this obligation (returning the
writings). I am perfectly satisfied with my situation in your mother's family,
and must insist on your receiving this again."

He refused to take it. I laid it on the table and hastily left the room.

So you see, my dear Celia, while I was consulting my friends whether I should
accept or reject this man, he has hastily formed the resolution of leaving me
to wear the willow and bestowing himself on another. Seriously my friend I feel
myself greatly obliged by the delicate manner in which he declined accepting a
hand when he was certain the heart would not immediately follow, and were it
not that I fear he will be extremely unhappy in an union with Clara, I should
rejoice in being released from his importunities. Mrs. Rooksby is in great
affliction. I try all I can to comfort her; but I really believe she will feel
as much, when she sees her son mount his horse to leave the Hall, as she would
were she attending him to the silent receptacle of his ancestors. When this
dreaded wedding is over she will, I make no doubt, feel easier, and the birth
of her grandchild will naturally awaken some degree of affection toward its
mother.

You will, perhaps, my dear Celia, blame, me for so obstinately refusing Mr.
Rooksby's generous present; but my dear girl I am the worst in the world to
receive an obligation. It oppresses me; it sinks me to the earth, especially
when I have no power to return it. While I have my health, I have no doubt of
always finding a situation, where I may render myself in some measure useful,
in return for my subsistence, and should sickness, age or any infirmity, to
which mortality is subject, overtake me, whilst I remain in what is generally
termed an unprotected state, I have still the same beneficent Providence to
rely on, who never yet suffered me to sink under affliction.

Adieu my friend, MERIEL.

LETTER XLII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, August 12 th, 1781.
WE have had fine bustling and confusion I assure you, my dear Celia, since I
wrote you last; and if you knew all, you would say, we are likely to have much
more, -- but not to go on with my intelligence too fast.

The morning after I concluded my last, Mr. Rooksby set off for London. His
mother would not take leave of him at his departure, and I was obliged to
consent that a correspondence should be commenced between us; for she had
absolutely declared all intercourse with her must cease, from the moment he
married Clara. Accordingly on the fourth day after his departure I received a
letter, informing me he had arrived too late for his purpose: for Clara had
been in bed two days, and little master was as fine a boy as ever was seen, and
in perfect health. Mrs. Rooksby greatly rejoiced, that any thing had happened
to postpone the wedding, and flattered herself the connection would by some
means or other be broke off. It was near six weeks before we had any farther
tidings of him, though I had answered his letter immediately. It was at the
close of evening; Mrs. Rooksby was reclined on a sopha; for the weather was
extremely hot, and I was playing on the harpsichord which I accompanied with my
voice. The evening was remarkably still, the moon with silver crescent faintly
illumined ^he sky, increasing the beauty of the night by her presence, without
eclipsing by too much radience the lesser glories of the stars. I had just
begun that charming song from Milton's Penseroso.

"Sweet bird that shun^st the noise of ^^lly," When we were interrupted by the
sound of horses coming up the avenue, and in a few minutes Mr. Rooksby rushed
into the room, pale and to all appearance worn out with fatigue. He spoke not
at entering, but throwing himself into his mother's arms, burst into tears.

"Clement," said she, "my dear Clement what is the matter. Good God! you weep,
your hands are hot. You are very ill." -- "Oh! mother," he replied, "forgive
me. I know it is unlike a man, but the shock I have received." -- " Is Clara
dead then," said she. -- " Clara, did you say, Oh the siren, name her not, I
cannot trust myself to speak of her, she is -- but come we will not talk about
her."

"You come upon us rather unexpected," said I, advancing toward him.

"I came," said he, "as fast as a repeated change of horses would bring me, for
I knew there was no other place, where I could find comfort. You, my dear Miss
Howard will comfort me, and you will prevail with my mother, to receive under
her protecting roof some poor little orphans who will arrive tomorrow to claim
her care."

"You are sensible, Clement, that every child of affliction is welcome to me. I
will protect and serve them to the utmost of my power. How much greater then
will be their claim on my humanity, when they come recommended by you."

"And when one of them is my child," cried he vehemently, -- " my dear mother,
that woman, whom I had intended to make my wife -- but no matter, she is gone.
She has forsaken her poor little innocents; but I will not suffer them to know
want."

"You are not married then?" -- "No" -- "Thank heaven, my dear Clement, thank
heaven, your honor will not suffer by this cruel desertion, and let the vile
mother go, we will protect the unoffending children."

After supper, Mr. Rooksby was more composed. He told us, that on his arrival
in London he hastened to Clara and found her as he had informed us, the mother
of a fine boy and likely to do well. He told her with what intention he had
hurried to town, and said, if she desired it, a special license should be
procured and the ceremony performed in her own chamber. This she fortunately
refused alleging, that, as her disgrace had been public, she desired the
reparation might be public also. To this he assented and preparations were
making for the public performance of the ceremony. He had presented her with a
magnificent set of jewels, and with money to the amount of three thousand
pounds. A day was appointed for the union: the articles, settlements, etc. were
all ready for signing: When the evening preceding the appointed morning he
called at her house and was informed she was gone to a private ball some few
miles out of town. He thought it somewhat strange, but knowing the volatility
of her disposition and how extremely fond of every thing that wore the
semblance of pleasure, it did not so much surprise him. The next morning he
repaired to her at the time appointed, a new equipage, servants in new liveries
with white and silver favors arrived at the door. The guests began to appear
when enquiries were made for the bride. -- Mr. Rooksby went up to hasten her.
She was not in her dressing room. He called for her woman: she was not to be
found. At length a groom ventured, trembling into the presence of the
disappointed, enraged bridegroom and delivered him a sealed (...) He broke the
seal with precipitation: it contained these words:

TO MR. ROOKSBY.
You thought to have deceived me, but you are mistaken. I have been informed of
all your late dishonorable conduct. Would your mother's humble companion have
accepted your hand, it would never have been offered to me: but though you have
been a dupe to me I will not become one to you. I know, you will, at the
reception of this, rave and curse your evil genius which has induced you to
make yourself the laughing stock of your acquaintance. I am far beyond the
reach of your revenge, and enjoy in idea, the ridiculous figure you will, at
the moment you are reading this appear, surrounded by your friends decked in
the trappings of nuptial finery and deserted by the intended bride. I have left
the brats. -- They would have been troublesome on the long journey I mean to
take; you may either provide for them or send them to the workhouse; either
way will be equally agreeable to me. I have accepted the protection of a noble
lover, and mean to make with him the tour of Europe. You must now offer
yourself again to Miss Howard, and I wish she may serve you as I have done.

CLARA.


It is easy to conceive the passion this infamous scrawl created in the bosom
of Rooksby. He was in the first paroxysins of rage for putting an immediate
period to his existence. Shame, vexation, and disappointment drove him to the
verge of distraction. At length he recollected the child of whom he is
extremely fond. He called for it, declared that the mother's guilt should never
be revenged on her innocent offspring, and in caressing the little cherub, in
some measure composed the perturbation of his spirits. The company dispersed,
he sent away his chariot, and returned to his lodging in a hackney-coach, where
he undressed and ordering post horses, set forward immediately for Oak-hall,
leaving his own man to follow with the nurse and children. The eldest, who is a
girl, I am told is at school in a village near Oxford, where Mr. Rooksky has
every reason to be satisfied with the care taken of her education and morals.
He means, he says, that she shall have a useful education, and will settle on
her a thousand pounds, the interest of which is to be appropriated to her
support. The two boys, he will bring up together and by a liberal education fit
them for one of the genteel professions, the choice of which shall remain with
themselves. To them also he will give a thousand pounds each; but they are both
to be called by the name of Millar. This is certainly a noble spirited young
man. It is a pity he has not more firmness of temper; but he is as weak as an
infant and as easily persuaded by persons who rightly understand his
disposition. Awaken his gratitude or make a claim upon his honor, and you may
lead him as you please. This is far from the kind of temper that I like. Were I
ever so much attached to Mr. Rooksby, I should be afraid of professing it,
least it should be supposed I meant to take an undue advantage of his easy
nature, and I should, if married to such a man, avoid showing a thousand little
kindnesses, least I should seem to demand more than similar attentions from
him. There is another trait in his character, which I have lately discovered.
He is vain and rather addicted to jealousy; and I can perceive there is no part
of Clara's conduct hurts him more severely, than finding her so totally
indifferent -- and when he imagined her strongly attached to himself, to know
her capable of eloping with another.

And yet, my dear Celia, this very man with all his errors, they have some how
or other among them drawn me into a sort of promise to marry. Mrs. Kingly wrote
and my dear Amelia wrote too. -- Mrs. Rooksby pleaded, and Clement himself,
looked such eloquent things, that what with the grateful remembrance of his
generosity, toward me, which I forgot to tell you his mother insisted on my
accepting, and a sort of pity for his late disappointment, I experienced a kind
of sentiment which I know not how to distinguish. It is more lively than
esteem, and yet I am sure it is not love. However, be it what it may, the die
is cast, and I believe Rooksby will be the man with whom I am destined to pass
my life. The settlements, etc. prepared for Clara, his mother declares shall
remain for me, as blanks had been left for the names. I do not agree to this
point; as I think the settlement by far too large. I think it very necessary a
proper provision should be made in case of a large family, but as I have no
fortune, it would be unjust as well as ungerous to accept a settlement of seven
hundred a year. This I am resolved to over rule. -- Three hundred will be more
than sufficient. On this condition alone, will I give him my hand, for it shall
never be said the poor Meriel Howard aggrandized herself at the expense of the
Rooksby family. For here are ill natured people in all families and no doubt
many of Mr. Rooksby's relations will think themselves degraded by this alliance.

In about a month from this time, my dear friend, my fate will be decided.
Contrary to my inclination, the old lady will have a public wedding, and all
the family to the third and fourth generation are to be invited. The old
mansion is put into such a commotion: here is such fitting up and pulling down,
with such wise and busy faces, popping about from one apartment to another,
while I, who am the cause of all the confusion, am as calm and composed as
possible. At least, my countenance and demeanor say so; but I have many serious
thoughts, and many a tear and many a sigh is given to the memory of the time
when I looked forward to the nuptial hour with different sensations; but that
must be forgotten. My dear Celia, pray for for your

MERIEL.

LETTER XLIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, Sept. 20 th, 1781.
IT is past, my friend -- and I am now the wife of Mr. Rooksby. It is just a
week, since at the altar, I pledged my faith to love and honor him to the
latest period of his existence. Well Celia, I will keep this vow most
religiously; at least I will esteem him and love no other, and whilst his
conduct is such as demands honor, I will honor him. Should he ever fail in
any of the grand moral duties, I will bear it with meekness, pity him and
endeavor to reclaim him. I will be a faithful wife in every sense of the word.

The day on which I gave him my hand, was indeed to me a tremendous one. --
Kingly was present, nay he even gave me to his cousin. I trembled when he took
my hand, a faint sickish sensation come over me: but I rallied my spirits and
went through the ceremony tolerably well. My dear Amelia, whom you might
suppose would be present on this important occasion, kept up my spirits during
the rest of the day. Mrs. Kingly looked happy, but it was a kind of
satisfaction tempered with fear. -- "I hope" said she," pressing my hand, "I
hope the era of your felicity may be dated from this propitious day." -- "Most
certainly it will," cried Amelia, "for who ever heard of misery in a coach and
six." -- "Oh!" replied Mrs. Kingly, with great energy, "there is much greater
misery in them than those who lack the goods of fortune will readily imagine,
aye, my dear Miss Sidney, and the worst kind of misery too, such as wealth
cannot relieve or grandeur alleviate."

"Well," said Amelia, laughing, "I declare we have chosen a brilliant topic for
a wedding day, but pray let us change it. I was always more inclined to become
a disciple of the laughing, rather than the weeping philosopher."

When it drew near dinner time and I found I must descend into the drawing
room, I trembled from the idea of being presented to about half a hundred
strangers, who would compliment, and criticize at a most unmerciful rate; the
one to my face, the other behind my back, and believe me I would sooner listen
to the latter than (...) former: for compliments have in general little or no
meaning and of course are mere insipid trifles. Now in listening to the
criticisms of our friendly neighbors, who perhaps did not intend we should
over hear them, we discover our faults, and may learn how to amend them; but
the misfortune is, few will take the trouble to point out our errors to us,
while every one is ready to flatter our self love, by commending us for
qualifications to which we have little or no pretensions, and, if they think,
we believe their assertions, the moment we quit them they will laugh at our
credulity. Well! my dear Celia, I never could bring myself to make compliments,
or fine speeches to people, whom I did not think deserved them. But to return
to my subject --

I got through the day tolerably well, and now our guests begin to think of
returning to their respective homes. It is proposed, that we stay at Oak-hall
till the latter end of November. Mrs. Rooksby has prevailed on Mrs. Sidney to
remain with her, during the winter, while Amelia accompanies me to town. I am
vastly pleased with the arrangement, as the society of that dear girl will be a
great comfort to me. I find Rooksby has given orders for a house to be fitted
up in a style of the utmost elegance, as he intends we shall always pass the
winters in town and the summers with his mother at the Hall. He talks of much
grandeur and gaity. I am sorry for it, I think his taste very expensive; but it
is not my place to speak. I am determined to regulate my own expenses, by the
strict rule of economy, void of parsimony. Even was the wealth my own, I have
no right to squander it away in unnecessary trifles, and as it is not, I must
be still more careful. My allowance for pocket money, cards, etc. is extremely
liberal, and I hope always to order it in such a manner as to have a sufficient
sum by me, to assist depressed merit, or rescue suffering innocence from
oppression. I hope, my dear Celia, elevated as my present situation is, I shall
never forget the useful lessons taught me in the school of adversity; and
surely, whilst the remembrance of my own sufferings are retained, my heart will
never be rendered callous to the sufferings of others. Oh! My beloved friend,
dearly indeed should I purchase the smiles of fortune, if I am to lose my
humanity. Benificent Ruler of the Universe, teach me to value the blessings
bountifully showered upon me, by constantly remembering my own deserts; and
whenever I meet an afflicted fellow creature, let my heart show its gratitude
to Thee, by dropping the tear of sympathy, and granting the tribute of relief."
-- I am certain, Celia, they who have never known adversity, cannot truly enjoy
prosperity. I forgot to tell you, that Kingly left us the day after we were
married. Mrs. Kingly stays, till we all go to London. When we are settled
there, I will write you again; but you must not expect any great variety in my
letters; I must, I suppose, at first enter into the gaities of the metropolis,
but I am determined not to be so infatuated as to give up my whole time to
them. I will have my hours of peace and retirement: for in my opinion the life
that is spent in a continued round of insipid pleasures, is not only entirely
useless to society, but in some measure guilty, as we can have no time for the
performance of those duties, which are incumbent on every professor of
Christianity; nor do I think as many do, that people of a certain rank in life
may pass their time in any way most agreeable to themselves, and that they are
not accountable for it to any one. We certainly are answerable to one, who will
demand an account of our stewardship at a time, when no evasion whatever will
serve our turn: and the more elevated our station, the more careful we should
be to set examples worthy the imitation of our inferiors. Examples that may
inspire all, who know us with a love of virtue, be an honor to ourselves, and
a benefit to society in general.

Mr. Rooksby asked me, to whom I was writing. To the friend of my early days, I
replied. We were educated in the same convent. Miss Shelburne chose to take the
veil -- I was of a different religion, and have been called into the busy
scenes of life, but the affections of our youth are always remembered with
peculiar pleasure; especially, when reason approves the election our hearts had
made in the days of childhood. I am certain, my dear Meriel, said he, she must
be amiable, or she would not be honored with your esteem.

You are a flatterer, said, I smiling, but if you knew Celia half so well as I
do, you would know she was worthy of the love of every good heart. I will not
repeat his reply, my friend, as it would favor too much of vanity, if he is as
gallant and tender twelve months hence, I may perhaps, stand a good chance for
claiming the flitch of bacon. He bids me present his best wishes to you. Amelia
also requests to be remembered; but it is impossible that either of them can
love and esteem you with the tenderness and sincerity of

MERIEL.

LETTER XLIV. MERIEL to CELIA.
Harley St. Dec. 19 th, 1781.
I HAVE been in town above a week; but could not command an hour to devote to
friendship and Celia. Indeed, I have been so taken up with mantua-makers,
milliners and toymen, I hardly know what account to give of the last seven
days; then what with here and there a particular friend, who requested to be
admitted, before my appearance at court gave the signal for the whole town to
come and pass their opinion on my house-furniture, etc. I have been wearied to
death with a constant succession of impertinant visitors, who are thus over
polite, for no other reason than the eager desire they have to report the
discoveries they make in regard to my person, dress and manner, to the whole
circle of their acquaintance; but in this they have been sadly disappointed,
for I have received them all in a small back drawing room, and have never yet
varied my dress from a neat dishabille.

I am now summoned to the drawing room: some new set of inquisitives, I
suppose, well, I must attend; for people of fashion live not for themselves,
but others. They are afraid to perform any action, if unfashionable, though
ever so right, least they should be laughed at: and for the very same cause
dare not refuse to do any thing to which fashion gives a sanction, though
reason tells them it is wrong, and should be avoided.

I must leave you Celia.

And who do you imagine my visitors were? Now would I venture to lay a
considerable wager, your mind would glance over the whole circle of my
acquaintance, without being able to guess the right. So to save you the trouble
of conjecture, I will at once inform you. They were no other than my kind aunt
Mossop and her two amiable daughters. I do declare, Celia, when I saw them in
the drawing room I absolutely blushed for them. However, they did not seem to
experience any embarrassment; but paid their compliments with the same easy
air, as if nothing had ever interrupted our intimacy; only with this
difference, their language and manner was more respectful.

"You have been very fly, my dear," said my aunt, "never to let us know where
you were all this time, and then to blaze upon us all at once a splendid bride."

"I thought, madam, after the death of my father, you would feel but little
interested about the fate of his daughter, for whom you never appeared to have
any great degree of partiality."

"Bless me, Mrs. Rooksby, you are vastly mistaken. I was always extremely
partial to you, and I am sure Hester and Susan have talked of you many times,
since last we had the pleasure of seeing you. We wondered what had become of
you."

"I have seen a variety of scenes," said I, "nor would it have been in the
least probable should meet with so advantageous a settlement as I have, had it
not been for the friendship of a young lady, whom I have once or twice seen at
your house, and who at present does me the honor to make one of my family." I
then rang the bell, and desired the servant to inform Miss Sidney we requested
the favor of her company. I saw my cousins look at each other when Amelia's
name was mentioned, Mrs. Mossop changed countenance. "Bless me," said Hester,
"I was thinking of Miss Sidney, the other day: but we have been in town so very
little while, we have seen nobody -- this is positively the first visit we have
made." When Amelia entered the room, I saw she was astonished: I also saw the
constraint and confusion which my visitors vainly endeavored to hide under the
mask of extreme pleasure at the accidental meeting. However, as I imagined, my
cousins courted my notice merely in the hope of sometimes being of my parties,
and throwing themselves in the way of men of rank and fortune, I gave them a
general invitation to my house, and I sincerely wish the event may answer their
sanguine expectations, as it would give me great satisfaction to see them
married to worthy men, possessed of fortunes capable of supporting them in the
manner to which they have been accustomed, and which I fear they could not
continue, was their father to die before they are settled; as he could not
leave them a large fortune, having in general lived up to the extent of his
income. Young Mossop is, I find, in the West Indies. -- Is it not strange, my
dear Celia, that I have heard nothing of my brother these two years past.
However he has forgot me. I often think of him; I pray for his health and
prosperity, and should rejoice to see him return with an independence
sufficient to place him in a respectable situation. -- Oh Celia, this continual
round of visitors, by no means suits the taste of your friend. I am called away
again.

MERIEL.

LETTER XLV. Between this and the preceding letter, several are omited, as they
contained only the common events of life. During this time Mrs. Rooksby informs
her friend she is become the mother of a daughter. The reader may therefore
suppose, more than a year and a half has elapsed, since the marriage of our
heroine.
MERIEL to CEILA.
Oak-hall, June 10 th, 1783.
MY little Clementina, is grown the finest girl you can imagine; and I assure
you, grandmamma is not a little proud of her darling. I wished the dear little
charmer to have been called Frederica, but I dared not say so, least it should
be thought improper. Last night, my dear Amelia arrived: her spirits are
greatly depressed by the death of her excellent mother, but as she will be
happy in the friendship and protection of Mrs. Rooksby, I hope soon to see her
cheerfulness restored. I have got such a habit of seizing every leisure moment
to scribble to my Celia, that I often take up my pen, when I have really
nothing to say. You rejoice, you tell me to find my happiness increase. Indeed,
my dear friend I experience a much larger share than some years since, I could
have imagined would have ever fallen to my lot. Mr. Rooksby is still the kind,
the attentive husband, and the birth of my little girl seems more strongly to
cement our union.

You cannot think, how surprised I was a few days before we left town. Mr.
Rooksby had been out in the morning, and on his return told me he had met with
an old friend whom he had invited home to dinner." He is a man," said he, "with
whom I formed an acquaintance when we were both boys at the same school
together, I have not seen him for some time, but I always thought him a worthy
fellow, and am now happy in the renewal of our intimacy." He did not mention
the name of his friend. You may judge therefore what was my astonishment, when
just before dinner a servant announced Mr. Belger. I know not why it was, but I
felt myself stangely embarrassed while he was paying his compliments. Mr.
Belger too was surprised, and looked abashed at the unexpected rencounter, for
I had not seen him since the cold wet night when we parted at the end of
Kensington. However, I immediately accosted him by name and turning to Mr.
Rooksby endeavored at a smile, while I said, "This is an old acquaintance of
mine too, though I dare say Mr. Belger had not the most distant idea of seeing
me here." I then enquired after Mrs. Belger and Emma.

"Emma is abroad in a convent, madam," he replied -- "and, her mother" -- He
hesitated, and I at that moment perceiving he was dressed in second mourning,
instantly understood his meaning. I felt my eyes fill. I remembered her
gentleness and affection, and I also remembered how ill that affection had been
requited.

"And pray, my dear," said Mr. Rooksby, "where were you acquainted with my
friend Belger?" -- At Kensington," I replied. --

"At Kensington!" said he with visible emotion "Did you know many persons
there."

"Very few, indeed; for at that time I was not in a situation to receive many
visitants."

I did not choose, my dear Celia, to mention having known Mrs. Moreton; as she
was undoubtedly a woman of light character, the being supposed, an intimate of
such a woman, would by no means contribute to raise me in Mr. Rooksby's
opinion, I therefore endeavored to give the conversation a different turn, and
dinner being soon after announced, it assisted my design, and we spoke
afterward only on indifferent subjects. -- I am by no means pleased with
Belger's being on an intimate footing in our family, he is not a proper
companion for Rooksby, I am certain he is of libertine principles, fond of
gaming and dissipated in his manners, yet greatly as I dislike him, I dare not
mention it to Mr. Rooksby, as he seems extremely fond of him and places the
most implicit confidence in his honor, and has actually invited him to pass
some weeks this summer with us here, I am mortified and vexed, Amelia laughs at
me, when I mention my anxiety and says, he will now be fearful of insulting me
by any mention of his love. While I was unprotected he could treat me with
disrespect, without fear of being called to an account, now it is quite a
different affair. -- Indeed, Celia, this is not what I dread, but I think if
Mr. Rooksby should by any means hear how intimate we once were, he would be
displeased, and it might be the cause of great uneasiness between us, I shall
take particular care to avoid all opportunities of being entertained alone by
this man, and feel happy in the reflection that while I am in the country I
shall have Amelia constantly with me.

22 d.

Since I began my letter I have been so agitated and distressed I found myself
totally unequal to the task of finishing it. Now I have sat down for that
purpose, I hardly know how to arrange the extraordinary events that have
happened within these last twelve days, not am I certain that you, my dear
Celia, will entirely approve of my conduct; yet sure you will not greatly
condemn me: for your gentle heart is benevolence itself. On the evening of the
day on which I began my letter, I could not but observe that Mr. Rooksby was
extremely thoughtful and grave, a thing with him very uncommon, as his usual
demeanor is cheerful, and his conversation lively. -- Once or twice, (...)
thought (for I observed him narrowly,) I saw the tears start in his eyes, he
sighed deeply and often. His mother remarked his want of spirits and inquired
if he was well. His answer was, "yes madam, very well, but rather out of
spirits, I shall be better tomorrow, do not pay any attention to it." -- I
thought it was best not to speak, least urgent inquiries might encrea^^ rather
than relieve his evident depression; and in case any family affair had
occasioned his uneasiness I was sensible he would not choose to mention it
before his mother and Amelia. -- I therefore determined to let it rest, if he
thought it right that I should be informed of the cause, he would the first
convenient opportunity communicate it; if not, it would I naturally supposed
only increase his vexation to be teized with impertinent inquiries. When we
retired he spoke but little, seemed buried in thought, and I am certain, slept
little all night. This was too much -- I felt my heart partake of his
uneasiness, though I was ignorant of its origin. I longed to lighten his
anxiety by participation; -- Yet, feared to be troublesome. -- After breakfast
perceiving his dejection rather increase than diminish, I followed him into the
shrubbery, and finding him sitting in a melancholy, musing posture, seated
myself beside him, and laying my hand on his arm, said with a voice, that
evidently spoke my tender solicitude --

"Rooksby you are not happy."

"I am not, indeed, my dear Meriel, I am very far from it; but do not let it
interrupt your tranquillity. The cause of my present dejection will soon be
removed, and then I shall again enjoy with pleasure the society of the best of
wives; but at present, my love, I must request you to leave me, as I am unfit
for conversation."

"And can you, Rooksby, think me worthy of the flattering appelation you just
now gave me, and yet suppose me capable of preserving my tranquillity while I
see you unhappy."

"You know, my sweet girl, I think you all, that is good and amiable in woman,
and it is for your peace of mind I would endeavor to hide my unhappiness."

"But as you connot hide it from the eye of affection, then refuse me not the
pleasure, my dear Rooksby of at least participating. If I cannot alleviate your
anxiety, surely you cannot fear to place a confidence in the chosen friend of
your heart."

"Oh no! but I know it will give you no pleasure to be informed, nay, I fear it
would rather make you unhappy in an eminent degree."

"Then it is something of great consequence either to your honor or interest,
or perhaps to both: if so, I must one day know it, and sure the tidings will
not give me so much pain from you, as from the lips of another."

"Oh! my gentle love, do not press me, you have no idea of what my heart at
this moment suffers, while I refuse to gratify your laudable curiosity. Yes, my
dear Meriel -- I know the only incentive to be thus pressing, is a generous
wish to relieve my anxiety; but believe me, you cannot form the remotest idea
of the cause. If you could, you would look on me with a mixture of horror and
disgust."

"Say not so, Rooksby; do not think so meanly of your wife as to suppose her
capapable of thinking of you a moment without affection, without an ardent wish
to see you as perfectly happy, as it is possible for mortal to be."

"Can, my dearest life, think of no incident that might happen, that would
weaken her affection toward me."

"None. -- Were it possible, (but I know it not) that forgetful of your vows,
you could prove false to your Meriel she could never forget that you had raised
her from indigence! that you were her husband! and the father of her child!"

"Dearest, best of womankind -- false to thee! No -- rather should my heart
cease to beat. I see your heroic spirit is adequate to any trial; no longer
will I keep you in suspense. I have seen Clara." --

"And, is that all! -- fie! Rooksby, fie! could you think that would give me a
moments pain. Believe me were it in my power to be of the least service to Mrs.
Millar, I would instantly fly to do it.

"Angelic goodness! but could you indeed forgive her."

"I have no right to call her too account, my dear Rooksby, for her errors: but
tell me, is she in distress. If so, I know she is my fellow creature, and it is
my duty to relieve her."

"Meriel," (said he catching me in his arms) while tears of exultation burst
from his eyes, "you surpass even the elevated idea I had formed of your
prudence and virtue, Clara is in distress, I met her yesterday, with scarcely
clothes to shield her from the inclemency of the weather. She told me she had
past the two last nights in th e open air, exposed to nocturnal damps; that
lovely form that once was shielded by a tender husband from even the most
trifling inconvenience, had naught to rest upon but the cold earth, no canopy
but heaven, -- and two days had past since she had tasted food." --

"Merciful heaven, said I, (while my eyes overflowed,) why have I been kept
thus long in ignorance, were is she, let us go, my dear Rooksby, shall I
quietly enjoy the luxuries of life while poor Clara is in want of even the
necessaries."

"I relieved her at the time, my love. Do not feel so acutely, I even promised
again to see her; but my heart smote me, I thought should it reach your ears,
you would think me the basest of mankind."

I should think you so, indeed, were you capable of beholding unmoved the
miseries of a woman, with whom you once lived on terms of the greatest
familiarity: but we are losing time. Let us hasten to the poor sufferer. Who
knows, but we may lead her back to the paths of virtue? But hold! You shall go
alone, Rooksby. She may consider my presence as an insult."

"She must, if she reflects at all, my dear Meriel, think it the highest
condescension; and if you will be so generous as to visit and promise her your
protection, I will write her a note to prepare her for the interview, and you
shall see her in the afternoon."

"You will accompany me then?"

"No, dear girl, I will not. After what has past, it is impossible to doubt
either your delicacy or generosity. You shall act entirely as your own heart
directs. I am sure by leaving you to its dictates, Clara will have no reason to
complain: but let me entreat you not to mention this affair, either to my
mother or Miss Sidney. I am sure they would blame the generous ardour with
which you espouse the cause of the unfortunate Clara."

"I promised silence, and we returned to the house, Rooksby all life, spirit
and tenderness; and I planing fifty different schemes for Clara's future
support. At dinner Mrs. Rooksby was quite happy to see Clement's cheerfulness
returned; and Miss Sidney was too delicate and considerate to ask any questions
concerning his late dejection and absence of mind.

About five o'clock the chariot came to the, door, and Rooksby handed me in,
telling me the coachman knew where to drive, I cannot say but during my little
ride, I underwent great agitation of spirits, I am certainly doing right,
thought I, in offering my protection to the unfortunate Clara, and did not
humanity point out my duty, self-interest would urge me to a performance of it,
for should I not prove a friend to Clara, Rooksby undoubtedly would; and
sensible, as I was, of the undue influence she once had over him, I could not
but fear, that influence might again be exerted to his ruin: Besides, said I,
who knows but Clara, had she been blessed with friends to direct her, and counsel
her aright might at this moment have been a shining member of society. Alas, it
might have been my fate to wander forlorn and unprotected through the world, had
it not been for the interposition of providence, who so wonderfully inclined
the heart of the friendly Mr. Welldon to grant me succor and relief; and shall
I who have experienced such blessings and support from an All Governing power,
refuse my feeble assistance to raise from sorrow and infamy, a poor fallen
sister. Oh no! That same benignant Power has pointed out my duty in the
clearest manner, and I trust will not suffer me to be backward in the
performance of it. -- Fully occupied by these and similar reflections, I hardly
perceived what route the carriage had taken, till it stopped at the door of a
small neat cottage. A wholesome looking young woman presented herself. I
enquired for Mrs. Millar and was shown into a parlour and informed she would
wait on me immediately. I was scarcely seated when the door opened, and (judge
if possible my surprise,) Mrs. Moreton entered. -- An exclamation of wonder
escaped me. Oh! Madam, said she, and unable to articulate more, sunk on the
nearest chair, covered her face with her hands and burst into tears.

"Be not alarmed," said I, in the gentlest accent I could assume, "you have
nothing to fear from me. But tell me do you live in this house, and are you any
ways connected with the unfortunate Mrs. Millar."

"Oh! dear lady," said she, (sinking on her knees and raising her streaming
eyes to my face) "I am that unhappy wretch, I am that ungrateful monster who
have injured (though Heaven knows involuntarily,) the very woman, who now
generously comes to save me from despair."

I was greatly affected, my dear Celia, I raised the afflicted penitent, and
bade her be comforted.

"Comfort!" exclaimed she vehemently, "Alas! where can a wretch, whose crimes
are so multiplied as mine, find it?"

"It is never denied to the truly penitent: and I hope you will experience its
benign influence."

"I shall! I begin to feel it already dawn on my benighted soul. It comes
administered by an angel's hand."

I then made some enquiries concerning her present situation, and requested to
be informed, in what manner I could render her service which would be most
acceptable.

"You cannot, my dear Madam," said she, "judge how far I am worthy your
compassion, unless you will permit me to acquaint you with the chief incidents
of my past life. I know at this moment, I appear to you an unworthy
unprincipled wretch. When I think of the situation, in which I left you at
Kensington, I cannot but reflect how little I should expect from your hands.
Nay that my very life is in your power, but when I shall inform how much I
suffered for the unintentional injury I did you, I flatter myself you will pity
and forgive me."

"But I must insist," said I, "that you do not enter upon this detail till your
situation is rendered more comfortable than it is at present."

"Permit me," said she, interrupting me, "to remain at this cottage a few days.
In that time, I will endeavor to commit to your perusal a written account of
my miserable life, from the earliest period of recollection till now. I am
sensible you will find much to blame -- but, alas! you will find much more to
awaken your compassion. -- My crimes, though many, have not been my own: but my
afflictions are I have neither friend or relation to console, comfort, or
alleviate my anguish."

The agony her countenance expressed, as she uttered this, is not to be
described. I felt her solitary, forlorn situation, and while the tear of
sympathy trembled in my eye, I breathed forth the accents of consolation. --
When she grew more composed, I arose to take my leave; -- but was sadly at a
loss how to offer the assistance I was sensible she wanted, without hurting her
feelings. At length I ventured to draw forth my purse. She laid her hand on my
arm -- "That is entirely needless." said she, "Mr. (...) by has been very
liberal. Let me not be thus oppressed with obligation, till some way is pointed
out for me in some measure to show my gratitude." -- "Call it not an
obligation," said I, "It is only a debt due from the happy to the unfortunate."
"I have one request to make dear madam," said she "suffer me then to decline
this offered favor in hopes you will grant me the one nearer my heart." --
"Name it," said I. -- "It is," she replied, "that you will forbear mentioning
the circumstances that past at Kensington to Mr. Rooksby, till you have
received my letter. After that you will think of me with more clemency than you
do at present."

I bade her be quite easy in that respect, and leaving the purse on the table
returned to the Hall, where I found Mrs. Rooksby and Amelia wonderfully curious
to know where I had been. "To keep a particular appointment I assure you," said
Clement, "and as I am the only confident, that is trusted in the affair, I beg
you will not be inquisitive concerning it; for I have promised secrecy."

He did not make any enquiry of what had passed at our interview, but pointedly
avoided the subject. The next morning he presented me with two hundred pounds,
saying, "My dear Meriel's expenses may at this time be greater than usual. Make
use of this my love, and should you require more, you know where to apply."
This sum I shall look upon as the property of Clara, and when we have settled
some plan for her future support, it shall be appropriated entirely to her use.
I was very impatient for the promised letter, as I imagined it almost
impossible for her to extenuate a conduct so unjust and cruel as hers had been
toward me; but resolved at all events to judge as heartily as possible, and
extend toward her a friendship, which may awaken in her mind a just sense of
her past errors, and lead her imperceptibly to the love and practice of virtue.
At length the long expected packet arrived. I send a copy for my dear Celia's
perusal. Oh! my friend, when you have perused it, you will like me, shed tears
of sympathy over poor Clara's sufferings, till her offenses are blotted from
your remembrance. -- Farewell, my Celia. Every affectionate wish for your
happiness, flows from the heart of your

MERIEL.

LETTER XLVI. CLARA to MRS. ROOKSBY.
June 20 th, 1783.
THOUGH I have taken up my pen to address the most benevolent woman on earth, I
shudder to think in what a despicable light I shall appear. -- Oh! Madam, the
heart not entirely rendered callous by guilt, shrinks from the scrutinizing eye
of superior virtue, yet painful as the task is, I feel it is a duty I owe, to
you, to myself, and to my dear forsaken children. -- I am not, madam, as my
sister-in-law represented to Mr. Rooksby, the daughter of a decayed officer;
Alas! my friendship with this cruel sister, has been the chief cause of all my
guilt and misery. My father was a gentleman of genteel fortune, and unsullied
reputation. I was his only child, and at the age of thirteen having lost my
mother was placed at a boarding school near Oxford, where I received a genteel
education; and to my utter regret formed an acquaintance with Eleanor Ramsay,
she was five years older than myself and was a teacher in this school, she had
an expensive taste for dress, and was passionately fond of gaiety and pleasure.
My father made me a liberal allowance for my pocket expenses. Eleanor was not
so amply supplied, she told me that her father had been dead for some years and
her mother's income was extremely confined though she strained it to the utmost
in order that herself and brother might have the benefit of a liberal
education. -- Young Ramsay was a genteel engaging youth, and at that time
employed in the study of the law. He frequently came to visit his sister, and
sometimes took her to places of public entertainment, in which excursions I was
imprudently allowed to accompany them. Ramsay pretended to be struck with my
person; but I have since been convinced the fortune my father possessed and of
which I was supposed heiress, was the chief incentive to the passion he so
ardently professed. Eleanor was plain in her person, but artful and insinuating
in her manner. She constantly contrived parties of pleasure, in which I was
included: and in return I supplied her with money to purchase any article of
finery which her own narrow allowance would not afford. --

In this manner we proceeded till I reached my sixteenth year, when on
receiving a summons from my father to prepare to quit school entirely, Ramsay
and his sister showed such marks of affliction at our approaching separation,
the former declaring his existence depended on my constancy and affection; that
giddy, thoughtless, and easily persuaded, I consented to an elopement and
accompanied these false friends to Scotland, where I sealed myself the most
wretched of womankind, by uniting myself to an unprincipled wretch, in whose
whole family there was not one atom of honor or generosity. -- On our return
we hastened to my father and humbly requested his pardon and blessing. -- Alas!
I had forfeited all claim to both. He spurned me from him, and declared he
would never see my face again. Overwhelmed with affliction, I had now no course
to take, but to repair with my husband to London to his mother and sister, who,
I thought, received me very coldly, considering how eagerly they had strove to
promote the union. Even Ramsay himself was much altered in his manner and I
began to perceive, that they considered me as a burden. I wrote a most
penetential letter to my father, requesting to be received, and offering to
quit a man, whom I found my heart was by no means attached to; but the answer I
received was, that as I had voluntarily quitted his protection for that of a
husband, and taken the liberty to choose for myself, without consulting him on
the propriety of my choice, I must take the consequence of my precipitancy:
but, he feared, if I paid as little regard to the duties of a wife, as I had
done to those of a daughter, my husband would soon have reason to repent our
union. He enclosed me a note for two hundred pounds, declaring it was all I
must ever expect, as he had made his will in favor of a sister's son then
abroad in the navy. This money proved a seasonable relief, as Mrs. Ramsay's
affairs were greatly deranged; but it was soon expended, and I was again
reduced to bear the illnature of all the family; for Ramsay never entertained a
thought of giving me even an apartment to myself, nor indeed was it in his
power, as he had no employment by which we could hope to be supported. We had
been married about a twelvemonth, when he received an offer of accompanying a
young gentleman abroad. This he eagerly accepted, and I was left with Mrs.
Ramsay. My situation was as uncomfortable as you can possibly imagine, I had
not money even for necessary expenses, and I could not help perceiving, that
even my food was grudged by my mother-in-law. I thought once more of making a
personal application to my father, but to my great affliction he at that time
died suddenly, and all hiproperty devolved to the relation I have already
mentioned. Though Mrs. Ramsay's finances were very confined, she lived in an
expensive manner, kept a good deal of company and went frequently into public.
One night being with her at the play, we were accosted by an elderly gentleman,
who sat in the box with us, showed us many civilities during the evening, and
when the entertainment was ended, insisted on setting us down at our own door
in his carriage, I thought there was an impropriety in accepting these
civilities from a perfect stranger; but as my mother and sister acquiesced, I
knew it would only be deemed prudery in me to resist. -- I, therefore, followed
their example, and steped into the carriage. When we arrived at home, the
gentleman asked permission to enquire after our health the ensuing morning,
which was granted. On our entering the house I began to rally Eleanor on the
conquest she had made, as I naturally imagined these civilities were intended
for her, but Mrs. Ramsay cried with more good humor than I had heard her speak
for some time. -- "No, no! my dear, Eleanor has no right to the glory of the
conquest, I fancy it is you, my pretty Clara, who have attracted the old
gentleman's notice; Eleanor's person is not adapted for making conquests. -- "I
hope you are mistaken, madam," I replied; "for I should greatly rejoice in any
good fortune which may happen to my sister. For my own part, my lot is cast."

The next morning, Mr. Millar (for it was he, who had accosted us the night
before) called, and after chatting some time on indifferent subjects, offered
to take us that evening to Ranelagh. From this time an intimacy commenced, and
I soon really understood, that my unfortunate person had been the object of his
pursuit. It was in vain I remonstrated on the impropriety of a married woman
listening to overtures of love. Mrs. Ramsay treated the remonstrance as folly
and romance. What shall I say, my dear madam, ill treated at home, distressed
in my circumstances no friend near to whom I could apply for advice or
assistance. I insensibly gave way to the delusions of splendour and affluence,
and one evening at a masquerade consented to my ruin. -- A few days after this
fatal night, I went with Mr. Millar to Oxford, which was the place of his
residence. Eleanor accompanied me and I assumed the name of Millar. As I had
not received a line from my husband since his departure from England, I
imagined he had totally forgot me and would be as happy to be released from the
burden of maintaining me, as he once pretended he should be in obtaining my
hand.

Mr. Millar was extremely fond of me, I endeavored as much as was in my power
to return this affection with gratitude; but alas! madam, I was far from happy.
Conscious guilt had fixed her fangs in my bosom and knowing myself unworthy the
attentions I daily received from the virtuous part of my sex. I began to envy a
superiority, the consciousness of which had given me so much pain; but though I
was far from happy I had not yet tasted the misery of loving one object, while
I felt myself bound to another. That superlative excess of anguish was reserved
for me, 'till accident introduced Mr. Millar to Mr. Rooksby. I will not repeat
the steps I took, (tears of contrition bathe my cheeks while I write it) to
deceive the worthy Mr. Millar, and indulge my tenderness for Rooksby. Suffice
it to say I gave a loose to love, and experienced its effects with more
violence, as it was the first time my heart had ever been sensible of the
passion; and certain it is, when we have taken one step in guilt we never pause
at a second or a third, when either interest or pleasure urges our pursuit. You
have no doubt been informed of my leaving Mr. Millar and following Mr. Rooksby
to town; I shall therefore pass over every circumstance that ensued until my
acquaintance with you, (then Miss Howard) at Mrs. La Course, and your subsequent
removal to Kensington. At that time I had relinquished the name of Millar; but
as I had an invincible aversion to that of Ramsay, and Mr. Rooksby refused me
his, I assumed my own maiden name of Moreton. While I resided at Kensington, I
received Mr. Rooksby's visits very privately, as he was anxious for me to
preserve my character, and I wished to appear to you in the light of an amiable
woman. I saw you regarded me with esteem, and I knew your heart too well to
suppose that esteem would be continued, if you knew I was a slave to guilty
passion. -- Believe me, dearest, best of womankind, I never entertained an idea
to your disadvantage. I wished from my soul to promote your welfare, and have
taught my heart to rejoice in your prosperity, though that prosperity has torn
from my agonized heart every earthly good: but to proceed -- The day before I
called on you and bespoke the linen for my sister Eleanor, I had received a
note from Mrs. Ramsay informing me that a particular relation was come to town,
and as they were unacquainted with my connection with Mr. Millar, etc. and
still regarded me as the wife of her son, she wished me to come to town and
make them a visit, taking the eldest child with me. On the morning preceding
the day on which this visit was to be paid, Eleanor let my watch fall, and
without acquainting me with the circumstance sent it to have the damage
repaired. You know what followed. I went to town; but, alas! on my arrival at
my mother's, who should I meet but my unworthy husband. I now too late
discovered that my sister had been in the plot to betray me. He instantly
claimed me, as his lawful wife, and insisted on my accompanying him abroad,
from whence, he said, he had only returned to fetch me; as he had through the
interest of his friend, obtained a very respectable place under the French
government. It was in vain to remonstrate. I was was obliged to comply, and
early the next morning we set off for Dover, leaving the children with Mrs.
Ramsay. On our arrival in that place, it was too late to think of crossing the
channel that night. We therefore bespoke a passage on board a packet, and as it
was to sail by five o'clock the next morning, we retired early to bed. But
judge, dear madam, if possible, my anguish and surprise, when awaking about
seven o'clock, I found my husband and sister had left me, and taken with them
my trunks containing all my clothes, jewels, money, etc. leaving me nothing but
about six guineas which I had in my pocket.

I arose with a heavy heart, and ordered some breakfast. While I was taking my
solitary meal, I thought I heard a voice that was familiar to my ears, and
inquiring of the maid who attended what company was then in the house, I learnt
that Mr. Rookysby was there on his way to France, and that the packet he had
taken for himself and servants did not sail till the next tide. I then
remembered his informing me at his last visit, that he should be obliged to
visit the continent before he could see me again, and overjoyed to find him in
the same house with me, considered the treatment I had suffered from my husband
as a fortunate circumstance, as it would probably procure me the pleasure of
accompanying my adored Rooksby abroad. Pardon, madam, these involuntary
expressions of affection, I will strive to restrain my pen: but when the heart
has once been strongly attached, it is hard to break it of its usual effusions
of tenderness. I bid the servant show me to the room where he was, and rushing
into it, overcome with the various emotions, which agitated my bosom, I fainted
in his arms. It will be needless to repeat our conversation. I must only
remark, that as I had never informed him of my unfortunate marriage with
Ramsay, and, as he had always supposed me the wife of Mr. Millar, I did not
dare explain to him the real cause of my abrupt appearance at Dover. He
attributed it solely to my affection to himself, and I blessed the chance which
had led me to him.

On our return from the continent, I made many enquiries concerning my dear
Miss Howard, for whom I had suffered many an anxious hour; but could not by any
means learn where you had taken refuge after the inhuman treatment you had
experienced at Kensington. I make no doubt, madam, but you are acquainted with
every circumstance, preceding the time in which I had hoped to be united to Mr.
Rooksby. I had previously wrote to Mrs. Ramsay, requesting, she would use her
interest with her son to relinquish all claim to me as his wife, and indeed, I
had been informed I could refute that claim by pleading infancy at the time of
my imprudent elopement. To these letters I received the most satisfactory
answers, signed by both Ramsay and his mother, declaring they were heartily
weary of the connection and would gladly renounce it, on condition of my paying
a stipulated sum of money, to which I readily agreed, and began to look forward
with hope to days of future happiness, and let me add innocence, for I felt my
heart so firmly attached to the generous Rooksby, as to render it impossible
for me ever to injure him even in thought. But, ah! my dear madam, how soon
were these bright prospects overclouded, how quickly was this charming hope
snatched from me, and, my bosom left a chearless and desolate chaos, which
peace or joy can never more enliven. When I endeavor to retrace this most
heart rending period of my life: such agonizing feelings overpower me, that my
tears flow in scalding torrents down my cheeks; and sighs of acute anguish rend
my bosom. I cannot at present proceed in my recital. -- Oh! heavens, that one
who knows so well the just value of virtue, should be irresistibly impelled to
actions from which her soul shrinks with horror. The innocent may pity, but
they cannot have the remotest idea of my sufferings.

IN CONTINUATION.
My heart is more at ease, tears are a sweet relief to the unfortunate, and
when I remembered the words of consolation which I had listened to from the
lips of angelic purity, when the benevolent Mrs. Rooksby cheared me with her
presence, a soothing reflection, something like hope, pervaded my bosom, and
though tears still continued to fall, they fell without pain. I will now
proceed in my narrative.

On the evening preceding the day on which I flattered myself with becoming the
happiest of my sex, I expected Mrs. Ramsay to receive the money which I had
promised to pay her, and therefore, desired the servants to deny me, even to
the chosen master of my affections. Unfortunate hour, of what scenes of misery
were thou the harbinger, but I will not complain, I acknowledge I deserved it
all, for had I not deceived the best the worhiest of mankind, by daring to
accept his honorable offers, when I knew myself already sacrificed (I will not
say united) to a villain. But what will not a woman do, who loves, who doats to
madness and fears to be separated forever from the object of her adoration,
what errors will not the heart involuntarily commit when under the influence of
hoodwinked passion? --

It was about nine o'clock as I was sitting in the nursery, with my two dear
boys, that a servant informed me the person whom I expected was below, I kissed
my sweet cherubs bade them good night and repaired to the parlour, which I had
appointed to receive Mrs. Ramsay in; but now great was my astonishment on
entering the room to see my inexorable tormenter and his sister Eleanor, with
their mother. I gave a shriek and sunk trembling on the nearest chair. Ramsay
approached me with feigned tenderness -- "why these alarms, my dear Clara,"
said he "why should you start thus to behold the man who adores you, and who
though you have cruelly deserted and injured, is ready again to receive you to
his arms, and willing to forget all that is past." -- "would to heaven" said I,
"that every past action of my life could be buried in eternal oblivion,
particularly that to which I was artfully led by you and your insinuating
sister, of giving you my hand, when a moment's reflection would have convinced
me you had no share in my heart." --

"It is well, madam," said he, "you have made a frank confession but know it is
amply in my power to revenge the repeated insults and injuries I have received
from you. -- You flatter yourself it is in your power to annul a marriage
contracted in your minority, but it is not; and unless you consent to make me
master of all the money and jewels at present in your possession, and leaving
this house accompany me wherever I choose to go, I will tomorrow follow you to
the Church and in the face of the whole congregation expose your infamous
conduct, and claim my prior right not only to your person, but to all the
wealth your infatuated lover has heaped upon you." -- What were my sufferings
at this horrid moment. Turn either way, infamy stared me in the face. I was
unable to determine what plan to pursue. To remain in London was impossible,
after what had past as I should undoubtedly have been the jest even of my own
servants. At length I concluded, whatever might be my fate, the generous
Rooksby should not be involved in the shame that would consequently ensue on a
public exposure of my guilt, I therefore told Ramsay I was ready to accompany
him wherever he pleased; but as to the presents I had received from Mr.
Rooksby, I did not conceive I had any right to take them with me. --

This was not what the wretch wanted. Horrible menaces and threats were used to
prevail on me to give him my cash and jewels, I was entirely in the power of
these three wretches, nor did I dare even to call for the assistance of my
servants, as they all declared my life should pay the forfeit of such an
attempt: and when they had gained their point, and I attempted to go up stairs
to fetch the jewels, both Mrs. Ramsay and Eleanor accompanied me. On returning
to the parlour, they desired me to send for a Hackney Coach. -- Then it was,
dear madam that my innocent infants darted across my memory. "I must have my
children," said I. -- "Indeed, said the unfeeling Ramsay, but you will not. The
brats are none of mine; leave them then to him who has a right to maintain
them."

To describe my anguish at this cruel speech is impossible. -- You, madam, are
a mother, and it is only a mother can conceive my sufferings. I knelt, I bathed
his feet with tears, and embraced his knees, but in vain. Too much under the
dominion of fear to exert myself to insist on their being taken with me, I
suffered myself to be led more dead than alive to the coach; and that very
night we all ser out for Cornwall. What arts they made use of to deceive my
servant, I know not; but before our departure from London my trunks were
brought to Mrs. Ramsay's, and one small one containing every necessary for
traveling was opened that I might dress myself in a proper manner for so long
a journey. I never could learn how they had contrived this, but am rather led
to imagine they had bribed my own woman to their interest. -- During my
comfortless journey, all my thoughts were occupied by my beloved children, who
were left entirely to the humanity of a man, whom I had deceived and injured in
the grossest manner, and who might avenge the mother's crimes by deserting her
offspring. I was sensible Rooksby possessed a benevolent heart, but when I
remembered the provocations I had given him -- I trembled for the fate of my
poor infants, whose only birthrights were poverty, shame, and the contempt of
the world. It is impossible for any one, who has not been in the same situation
to judge of my distress. The anxiety of my mind affected my health, and before
we arrived at our journey's end I was in a high fever. We stopped at a village
near Saltash, where my disorder increased to such a degree that it was
dangerous to think of removing me. A delirium ensued and I raved (as I have
been since informed) incessantly for Rooksby and my children. At length, youth
and a good constitution combated the strength of my disorder; and after a
profound sleep of many hours, I awoke to perfect reason; but Gracious Heaven!
what were my feelings, to learn when I enquired for Ramsay and Eleanor, that
they were gone, and with them all my property. The clergyman of the parish a
humane sensible man had frequently visited me, during my illness, and now
entered the room with an intent to see if I yet lived. It was to him I had been
indebted for all the attentions that had been shown me: and when he found me
capable of reading, he put into my hands a letter which he said my brother had
left for me. At the word brother I expressed some astonishment: but my
curiosity and impatience to read the letter would not then permit an
explanation. This was the letter

TO MRS. MORETON.
In your attempts to dupe others you have been effectually duped yourself.
Vain, foolish woman, who thought your boasted beauty would insure you admirers
in all who beheld you. Ramsay is not your husband. He was mine long before he
saw you. From the first moment he beheld you, I saw you had supplanted me in
his affections, and therefore determined on revenge. I have (thank my kind
genius) amply effected it, and reduced you to the lowest abyss of infamy and
shame. My mother exults in your debasement, and bids you go vaunt your fancied
superiority, and se^ if it will regain the reputation you have lost.

You have no right to the name of Ramsay, nor indeed, to any but that of
Moreton, which you have shamefully disgraced. Ramsay, was my maiden name, and
as my marriage was a private one, my husband when visiting me always chose to
assume that, and pass for my brother. I enclose you ten pounds, if you live it
will be of some service to you, if not, whoever opens this may make use of it
for past expenses. I sincerely, and from my soul, wish your recovery, as my
triumph will not be complete, unless I know you have felt the misery, in which
I glory to have involved you.

ELEANOR.


Before I had finished this inhuman letter, I fell into strong convulsions,
which occasioned a relapse of my disorder, and I was again reduced to insanity.

The humane clergyman had me removed to his own house, and by the kind
attentions of himself and a daughter, I was in time restored to health and a
keen sense of my deplorable situation.

As my strength returned, my afflictions recurred to my mind with greater force
-- My dear deserted infants perishing for want, or exposed to the harsh usage
experienced by children left to the parish, were constantly before my eyes, and
I resolved at all events to return to London and learn their fate. Ill as my
benevolent host could afford it, he lent me three guineas to help me on my
journey, and gave me a letter to a poor woman, a late parishioner of his, who
was married and settled in London, requesting her to render me every service in
her power. With this slender sum, I sat forward and after a wearisome journey
sometimes riding, sometimes walking, I arrived sat in town, and took up my
abode with the person just mentioned. From the enquires I made (for I had the
temerity to venture to Mr. Rooksby's house) I learnt his happy marriage with
the amiable Miss Howard, and inwardly rejoiced to think that in such a union,
his future happiness must be secure. I also learnt, that my children were in
Devonshire. The maternal heart will yearn to pour forth its affection. I had
determined to walk to the environs of Oak-hall and endeavor to gain a sight of
my beloved little ones, when a most untoward accident prevented my putting my
designs in execution. This was my kind landlady falling ill, and as she kept a
shop, her husband earnestly entreated me to remain with them till her recovery;
to which as I was under many obligations to them, I could not but assent. Her
illness was painful and lingering, and in the end terminated her life. Soon
after her decease, I proposed removing from the house, when the very man, who
had so earnestly entreated my stay, now demanded payment for my board and
lodging. I had neither money nor friends. What could I do? I thought once of
applying to Mr. Rooksby; but the fear of giving you pain prevented me. I
submitted to my hard fate in silence and was conveyed to prison. Three months
did I linger in this wretched place, huddled among the most abject and
miserable of the human race; and barely existing on the scanty pittance allowed
me, and the charity of the benevolent. At length, I was one day recognized by a
tradesman, with whom I had dealt in my days of affluence. He commiserated my
condition, generously paid the sum for which I had been confined, and gave me
two guineas in my pocket. No sooner was I at liberty, than I resumed my wish of
going to my children. I set forward and almost begged my way to this place; but
alas! when here, what could I do for support, what door would open to receive a
poor wretch like me? I wandered every day round the environs of the hall, and
once had the extatic pleasure of catching a glance of my children: but I dared
not speak to them, though I longed to fold them to my maternal heart. My little
stock of money was soon exhausted, though I lived almost upon bread and water,
and at night, rested my weary limbs on the damp ground. But conscience told me
it was all right, and only a just punishment for my errors; so I bore it
without complaint, and watered my cold pillow with tears of unfeigned
repentance. One afternoon, as I was wandering in the adjacent fields, overcome
by hunger and distress, I sat down beside a brook that ran along the woodside
and after reflecting a few moments on the horrors of my situation, I conceived
the impious idea of putting a period to my existence. I arose from my seat to
put my design in execution, when hearing a rustling on the other side the
hedge, I started; and in a moment saw Mr. Rooksby come across a style into the
field where I was. I gave a faint scream and sunk to the ground oppressed by
undescribable emotions. Urged by humanity, he approached and raised me from the
earth. I opened my eyes; but dared not look at him.

"Poor soul," said he, in the accent of benevolence, "you seem ill. Where shall
I lead you, or what can I do to serve you." "Leave me," I replied, with a look
and voice of destraction -- "Leave me Rooksby to the fate I merit." --
"Gracious heaven!" said he, "is it possible, or do my senses deceive me?" --
"Oh!" said I, clasping my hands, "pity the wretched Clara, and leave her to die
in peace."

"Clara," cried he, slackening the arm that had supported me, "poor infatuated
woman, how came you thus reduced?" --

I need not repeat what answer I made -- suffice it to say, I saw the tear of
compassion sparkle in his eye, and heard him declare, I should be permitted to
see my children. -- He gave me relief with a liberal hand, and at parting,
desired I would let him know where to find me, that I might not be again
reduced to such misery.

Thus, madam, have I retraced a life of complicated guilt and sorrow. I am
fully sensible of the benevolence and candor of your heart, and I trust my
unfeigned penitence joined to my sufferings will expunge from your memory my
faults. Teach me, dear madam, how to convince you of my gratitude for your
great condescension in interesting yourself in the fate of so worthless a being
as I am, and whatever plan your goodness shall strike out, I will invaribly
pursue, in hopes that my future life will convince you, with what abhorrence I
reflect on my past misconduct. I have the honor to be, etc;. etc;.

CLARA MORETON.

LETTER XLVII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, June 29th, 1783.
I WAS obliged to send away my last in such a hurry, I had no time to make the
least remark on Clara's letter. I will confess the story it contained did not
strike me as altogether consistent or probable; but I made great allowances for
that self love, which urges us ever to extenuate as much as possible our
errors; and endeavor to set our conduct in the fairest point of view. I also
remembered, that whatever had been her errors, she was now penitent and in
distress; and must, unless some friend stepped forward to save her, sink into
an untimely grave. I did not hesitate in resolving to become that friend,
though I determined to keep the whole affair concealed from Mrs. Rooksby and
Miss Sidney, and, indeed, I inwardly wished that Rooksby might not desire to
see Clara's confession, as by reading it he must discover that I had known her
before, which would immediately bring on an explanation of her cruel behavior
to me, which he would not be very ready to overlook or pardon. -- Fortunately
he never even expressed the slightest desire to know what she had said. I told
him, she should never want a friend, while I had power to assist her; and he
seemed perfectly satisfied of the sincerity of my assertion. Accordingly I
wrote to her, informing her if she would mention any place where she would like
to reside, I would undertake to pay her board and besides allow something
handsome for other necessary expenses; but recommended to her to fix her
residence in the country, where there would be fewer allurements to draw her
from the laudable resolutions she had formed of amendment. I received for
answer, that the fondness of a mother impelled her to wish her residence might
be in the neighborhood of Oak-hall, and that she was perfectly satisfied with
the family, with whom she then was; (...) disapproved of her remaining there,
she was ready to remove to any other place I might think more suitable.

I am a mother myself, my dear Celia, and I found it was impossible to deny her
request. She is now settled at the farm, and I have ordered the two boys to be
taken twice a week to see her, though under this restriction, that she does not
betray herself to them, as that would involve us all in confusion at the hall,
as I am certain my mother and Miss Sidney would be greatly displeased with my
taking any interest in her affairs, or suffering her to be so near our
habitation; she continues the name of Moreton, and as she live retired, and I
would hope a truly penitent and virtuous life. She does not excite any
enquiries that might lead to a discovery.

IN CONTINUATION.
August 3d.
Last night Mr. Belger arrived. I cannot account for it, Celia, but the
presence of this man always distresses and alarms me. I am never comfortable
when he is in the family, though it is only for a visit of a few hours. How I
shall support his company for six weeks or two months, I cannot tell. It is a
long time since I have mentioned my sweet Clementina; believe me, were I to
give inclination the reins; I should fill a whole sheet with accounts of the
dear little cherub's daily improvement. But, though the theme would be
delightful for a fond mother to expatiate upon, I am sensible it would be but
insipid, when offered to the perusal of one who though interested in all my
concerns, never felt a mother's tenderness, anxiety and solicitude.

10 th.

You will be surprised, my dear Celia, when I tell you, I am become the lady
Bountiful of all our poor tenants and their families. I walk round every
morning or evening; that the weather permits, and administer to the deseases of
both body and mind. In the first I am assisted by a worthy apothecary, who
having a large share of merit, Fortune thought he had sufficient, and was
therefore extremely sparing of her favors; so that the poor man with a great
deal of knowledge in his head, much benevolence in his heart, and a large
family in his house, had but very little money in his purse. I heard of him by
accident, and not being extremely well, sent for him, though his unpowdered wig
and threadbare coat would not have been a recommendation, had I consulted his
appearance only; but I chatted with him half an hour several mornings
successively, and found his company more efficacious than his medicines; for I
was always better after his visits, the reason of which was, I thought the
doctor himself seemed happier. So one afternoon, Amelia and I took a stroll
across the park, and spent an hour or two with his wife and her six chubby,
rosy cheeked children, and at parting, contrived it so that at the next visit
the doctor came neither in an unpowdered wig or threadbare coat; since which
time he has constantly been our escorte in our visits to the sick. I find money
and he finds physic, and I do assure you we are both very well pleased with our
several departments. Besides you cannot think how the doctor is rising in
reputation, since his appearance is so mended. He is now often seen coming out
of the doors of the wealthy, which I hope presages he will one day become
wealthy himself.

13 th.

I am extremely flurried and vexed, indeed I think my evil genius prevailed,
when Rooksby first formed an acquaintance with Belger. The man is an
unprincipled libertine, and Amelia was greatly mistaken, when she imagined any
tie however sacred, would be restriction upon his licentious passion. --

Rooksby had rode out last evening, Amelia was reading to Mrs. Rooksby, and I
imagining Belger was with my husband, took a book in my hand and strolled out
to indulge a contemplative mood, which at that time prevailed over my mind. I
rambled farther than I at first intended, and before I was aware of it, the
shades of night came on. -- The evening was remarkably fine, the moon arose
veiled in a fleecy cloud, which served only to increase the glory it could not
hide; a gentle zephyr whispered through the trees, and I felt a sensation of
gratitude, wonder and delight pervade my soul; whilst admiring, I beheld the
beauty of the surrounding scene, at the top of a walk at no great distance from
the house, but on a little eminence, there is a summerhouse greatly admired by
all the family for the charming view it commands of an extensive well
cultivated country. In this place I had been working in the morning, and in
passing it, recollected I had left my workbag there, in which was something I
wanted. I therefore stepped in with a design of bringing it away. The moon
shone through the windows full upon an organ which was placed there for me to
entertain myself with, and as I am fond of solemn music, the stillness of the
evening and the serenity of every surrounding object inspired me with a wish to
touch the instrument. I therefore sat down, and following the impulse of my
soul, began the following Hymn to Gratitude:

Wherever I turn my ravished eyes,
New scenes of beauty round me rise,
My heart exulting glows;
And While I view the wondrous whole,
To the Creative Power my soul,
With gratitude overflows.
Yon burning orbs, that round the pole,
In solemn grand succession roll,
Declare their Maker's power;
Then while such glories deck the sky,
Can such a weak frail worm as I
But worship and adore.
Father of all thou do bestow
On us poor reptiles here below,
Each good we are taught to prize;
And though sometimes we feel thy frown,
The truly grateful heart must own
Thy judgments just and wise.
Hail, Gratitude, celestial guest,
Come make thy mansion in my breast,
Thou spark of love divine;
Inspired by Thee, though troubles rise,
My soul shall mount toward the skies,
And heaven itself be mine.
I had sung it over once, and was just repeating the last stanza with all the
real fervor which at that moment warmed my soul, when hearing a footstep, I
turned round and saw Mr. Belger enter the summer house.

"So you are returned," said I, rising from my seat; "but pray where is
Rooksby."

"I have not been with him," replied Belger, "nor do I think he is returned. I
have been enjoying a far greater pleasure, than any he can meet with abroad. I
have been listening to your charming voice, which with such enthusiastic
fervor, has been pouring forth the grateful emotions of your soul."

"I have been here some time," said I carelessly, "and I believe it is getting
late. Pray do not let me interrupt your intended ramble; but I am afraid of
taking cold should I remain here any longer."

"You must not go, dearest, loveliest of women, I cannot lose this only
opportunity which I have had of speaking to you without observation. Hear me,
pity me! From the first moment, that I beheld you, my heart has known neither
joy nor peace. In every place, in every hour, sleeping or waking, your image
still pursues me. I love, I dote to madness and yet have only the hope of
exciting your compassion."

"My contempt sir, you certainly excite, by this unparalled effrontery. I
thought Mr. Belger had received my answer on this subject some years since, and
am surprised however, he then dared to insult an unprotected girl, that he
should suppose he might with impunity now repeat those insults to the wife of
his friend."

He listened not to what I was saying, but placing himself between me and the
door, forcibly seized my hands, and was proceeding to the most romantic
professions of platonic love, when I saw Mr. Rooksby coming up the walk.
Agitated and distressed beyond measure, I cried "cruel, persecuting Belger, you
have exeposed me to the suspicions of my husband, who must suppose a guilty
assignation has been the cause of our being alone here at this late hour." I
had no time to say more. Mr. Rooksby entered. "why, my dear Meriel" said he,
"do you stay out thus late exposing yourself to the dews of the evening," then
perceiving Belger, he added, "but you have company with you and, perhaps, I
intrude on an agreeable tete-a-tete." I endeavored to compose my agitated
spirits, and answer him in a style of raillery; but it was impossible. I
discovered by the manner in which he spoke, that the unhappy jealousy of his
temper was awakened, and that it would not be an easy matter to convince him,
his suspicions were without foundation, I trembled, as I took hold of his arm;
and we proceeded in silence to the house. When we entered, my mother tenderly
expressed her anxiety and fears of my having taken cold, Amelia too gently chid
me for playing truant as she called it. I do not know how I looked, but I am
sure I felt very disagreeably. Indeed, the raillery of Amelia, the cold reserve
of Rooksby, and the humiliating glances of Belger so powerfully affected my
feelings; that I pleaded indisposition and retired to my apartment, where I
have given vent to my tears, and in some measure (...) my heart, by relating
the cause of my uneasiness to my friendly Celia. I fear, it will be long before
Rooksby will again look on me with tenderness; and when I recollect, the manner
of my leaving Mrs. Rooksby and Amelia, the length of time I was absent, and my
being found at so late an hour in the summer house with Belger, who no doubt
had also been rambling about for some time, though we had but that moment met.
All these circumstances must tend to make me appear guilty of impropriety, if
not imprudence. Again and again I repeat it. Belger seems doomed to be the bane
of my happiness.

Amelia has just been with me. I informed her of the cause I had for
uneasiness. She blamed me for retiring so early, saying it gave me an
appearance of conscious guilt, though she was fully sensible that every thought
of my heart was purity itself; she bade me assume an air of cheerfulness, as
she was afraid that the timid embarrassment that modesty and real innocence
ever discovers, when glanced on by the eye of suspicion, would only tend to
increase the doubts Rooksby already harbored. But I hear him coming. I must
quit my pen and retire to bed, though greatly I fear, not to rest.

14 th

When Rooksby entered the apartment, a mixture of sorrow, anger and distress
sat on his countenance. -- "I thought, madam," said he, "you were indisposed,
as you retired so early; but I see you are not in bed yet; but agreeable
meditation is certainly more pleasing, than the company of those we dislike.
Pray do not let me disturb your reverie." -- "You speak in riddles, Mr.
Rooksby. Whose company did you suppose I fled from, when I left the parlour.
Solitude, indeed, was more agreeable than to be in company, and witness the
frown of displeasure that sat on your countenance. It was not the headache
impelled me to retire; it was a pain more acute." -- I could not proceed, but
laying my hand on my bosom, the involuntary tear choked my utterance.

"My beloved Meriel, "said he, sitting down by me, and speaking in a softened
accent, "do not weep. Those precious tears would melt a heart of adamant: think
then, how much they must distress one who glows with unutterable tenderness
toward you."

"Ah Rooksby, why, if you really experience such tender emotions in my favor,
why have you wounded my heart, by uttering such unkind, I may say, cruel
suspicions."

"Meriel", said he, looking at me intently, "did you not confess you knew
Belger some time since at Kensington."

"Most assuredly, I did."

"And during the time of your acquaintance there, did he never express his
admiration -- his esteem -- his love to you."

"How can you ask such a question? He was at that time" --

"Married, you would say," cried he, interrupting me, "but I know he was not,
and I remember hearing him once speak of a beautiful creature, he knew at that
place, who had more power over his heart than all the rest of the sex put
together."

"And therefore, it follows," said I, "that I must be the person he meant
(attempting a smile.) My dear Rooksby, if you have such an opinion of your
Meriel's attractions, she has a far more humble one of herself."

"But you had certainly been indulging him, this evening, with a long
tete-a-tee."

"You are mistaken, He had not been in the summer house above three minutes
before you joined us."

"There is such an ingenuous frankness in your manner, dear girl, that it would
be almost a crime to doubt of your sincerity. Yet when I reflect" --

In saying this, he started up and striking his forehead with his hand, he
cried, "these doubts will unsettle my reason" -- I was terrified, and rising
from my seat endeavored to sooth him. He took my hand and pressing it to his
lips, said, "I cannot credit aught to your disadvantage. Your countenance is so
expressive of innocence, that it is impossible to believe you otherwise.
Forgive my ungenerous conduct. It is the fault of my nature. Forget it, and I
will be careful how I offend again." You may be sure, I was not backward in
promising a total forgetfulness of this painful event: but I am sensible, my
dear Celia, it is impossible to keep my promise, for though we all met this
morning in the same social manner as usual I felt such a restraint upon myself
whenever Belger addressed me, and answered the most trifling questions with
such evident imbarassment, that to even an indifferent spectator I must have
appeared strangely agitated.

Indeed, my friend, I began to wish I had not concealed from Mr. Rooksby any
thing, that passed during my residence at Kensington. If I had informed him of
Belger's unprincipled behavior to me at that place he might not have renewed
his intimacy, but I always have an objection to relating any tale whereof I am
myself the heroine, and in this point I avoided it, fearing to incur the
imputation of vanity, and in so doing, I have incurred that of guilt. -- To
mention these circumstances now would be impossible, as it would only tend to
confirm Rooksby's suspicions, perhaps engage him in a quarrel with Belger and
by making it a public affair, cast a blemish on my reputation, which no future
conduct will ever wipe off. But I think through the whole course of my life I
have been particularly unfortunate in having my most innocent actions
misconstrued, and though my own bosom conceals not a wish which does not tend
to the universal happiness of mankind in general. I have never wanted enemies,
who are ever ready to catch at the errors, to which frail mortality is liable;
and magnify them into crimes. -- I have however a sweet consolation Celia. My
heart is conscious of its own integrity and relies on that Power, who knows its
innocence to support it through every trial, which in His wisdom He may see
proper to lay upon it. This is a consolation of which no afflicton, however
severe, can rob me.

Mrs. Rooksby is I fear, in a declining state of health. Age and its attendant
infirmities bend her frame to the earth; but her mind is still in full vigor.
She is the same pious, resigned cheerful christian, as ever: and her company is
equally sought by the young as well as by those more nearly of her own years. A
journey to the south of France is judged necessary for her the ensuing winter.
Mr. Rooksby does not wish to leave England; so I have not hinted my desire of
accompanying her. Indeed, my present situation would render traveling
dangerous, Amelia goes with her, and I mean to invite Susan Mossop to spend the
winter with me in town, not that I expect to reap much pleasure from her
society; but I think a residence in my family may be of service to her; and
should any proper match offer, the want of a fortune shall not be an obstacle,
Adieu my friend, yours ever.

MERIEL.

LETTER XLVIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Oak-hall, October 9 th, 1783.
SURELY, surely, my friend, I was born to be the sport of fortune; for truly
can I say with the Poet, That ever the cup of joy could reach my lips,
'Twas dashed with gall. --


I had but just began to taste the supreme felicity of domestic happiness, had
began to look forward to rising years of peace and comfort, when this Belger,
like a demon of cruelty appears, and all my pleasing prospects vanish -- Like
some poor traveller, whom Merlin leads
Through fragrant bowers and delicious meads;
And while his feet the magic paths pursue,
And while he thinks the fair illusion true --
The baseless vision melts in fluid air,
And woods and wilds and thorny ways appear.


Yes, my beloved friend, the sweet enchanting scenes of happiness now fade upon
my sight, and like the delusive vision of a disordered imagination, serves only
to make the surrounding desolate prospect, the more dark and gloomy.

From the time of my last letter, Mrs. Rooksby's health has evidently become
worse and worse every day; so that we were obliged to hasten her departure for
the continent, as the physicians feared the cold autumnal blasts would be too
much for her enervated frame to bear. We were busy in preparing for her
departure, when one evening just as the sun was set, a little girl came and
informed me a poor tenant of our's was taken suddenly ill, and wished very much
to see me. -- As Amelia was busy in her own apartment, I would not interrupt
her to request her company; but taking some cordials with me and bidding Thomas
follow, I took hold of the little girl and bid her lead me to the cottage. When
I arrived the poor woman told me she had been seized with a sudden fit, and
imagining herself dying -- she had sent for me to recommend her children to my
care; but as she now found herself much better, she humbly hoped I would pardon
the trouble she had given me. As I had walked very quick, I found myself
somewhat fatigued and sat down for a few moments to rest. Whilst I sat, I
busied myself in making enquiries concerning the poor woman's family, and
learnt that she had seven children and a very bad husband. -- "I have been in a
deal of trouble, madam," said she, "Robin has been very idle this summer and
had gotten himself in debt; but we were relieved from our necessities by a
gentleman, who is I believe, at the Hall; for the children say they have seen
him there. Oh! madam, he has been the preserver of me and mine, and I am bound
to pray for his prosperity." She was eagerly proceeding, when casting my eye
toward the window, I saw Belger open the wicket, which served for a gate, and
come in. -- "Here is your benefactor coming good woman" said I, and slipping
two guineas into her hand, went toward the door, but was not quick enough to
escape, before Belger entered. -- "Bless me my fair hostess," said he, in an
accent of surprise; "who could have thought of seeing you here; not that it is
surprising to see Mrs. Rooksby in the cottage of poverty sweetly alleviating
its attendant evils, but the lateness of the hour and to see her without Miss
Sidney."

"Amelia was engaged," said I endeavoring to pass him, "and indeed, I did not
observe how late it was." --

"You will permit me to see you home?'

"By no means Mr. Belger. I have my servant with me."

"Do not, dearest madam, deny me the felicity of walking by your side and
enjoying a few moments uninterrupted conversation, a blessing I cannot obtain
at the hall."

"Nor can I think, sir, you have any thing to say to me, to which the whole
world might not be a witness, I desire you will suffer me to go home alone. I
have particular reasons."

"I know your reasons, most lovely, most injured of women. Rooksby is jealous,
weary of the possession of the most inestimable treasure, he seeks by accusing
your spotless purity to excuse his own errors." --

"Stop, Belger, I will listen no longer, Rooksby is too just to suspect the
integrity of a heart, with whose very emotion he is acquainted. As to errors I
neither suspect him capable of any; derogatory to his own honor or prejudicial
to our mutual happiness; and know, sir, the person who would endeavor to
awaken suspicion in my bosom, will be ever held as an object of contempt and
detestation."

I then darted at him a look expressive of my honest indignation, and
endeavored to quit the house: but he threw himself on his knees before me, and
forcibly taking my hand earnestly requested to be heard for only one moment.
From the instant Belger first entered, the woman had from a motive of respect
left the room, and my servant was without side the gate, waiting for my coming
out.

I was hesitating for an answer, by which I might hope to make him relinquish
his design; when I heard my husband's voice enquiring of the servant, "whom he
was waiting for?"

"My mistress, sir," replied the man.

"Your mistress is here then -- and who is with her?"

"Mr. Belger went in a few moments since."

"Damnation!" exclaimed he, and pushing by the man with violence instantly
rushed into the house. How I looked, or what I said, I cannot pretend to
determine, but of this I am certain my feelings were undescribable.

"It is well, madam," said he, "I have at length discovered the true cause of
your frequent rambles toward this cottage, and by heavens." -- Rage choked
him, I summoned all my resolution and endeavored to calm his agitated spirits.

"Frequent rambles, Mr. Rooksby, I do not understand you; I never was at this
cottage before, nor should have come now had I not been sent for."

"I know you were sent for. That is the very thing that drives me to madness.
Oh! Meriel, to think on the very last evening before my mother and Miss Sidney
leaves England, you could quit them and taking advantage of my absence fly on
the wings of love to meet your abandoned seducer. But, this is no time for
argument; tell me, thou vile reptile, who under the mask of friendship have
dishonored me, what reparation can you make for the peace you have destroyed,
for the purity you have sullied? --

"Dear Rooksby," (said Belger in a tone of dissembling gentleness,) "you are
carried away by a wild ungovernable passion, I give you my honor I had not
been in the house ten minutes when you entered; nor had I the most distant idea
of meeting Mrs. Rooksby here, you injure her by these unjust suspicions, and
what ought to be at this time a material consideration, you agitate her
spirits, impair her health and endanger her valuable life." --

"Belger" said my husband, with a voice that made me tremble, "you are both a
coward and a villain."

"You cannot mean what you say."

"I do," reiterated Rooksby, fiercely.

"Then, sir, tomorrow between five and six o'clock, I shall expect to see you
in a proper place to settle this difference. But remember Rooksby, I warn you
of the remorse that will seize you, when you discover how injuriously you have
treated both your wife and friend.

"Belger," said I exerting all the firmness I was mistress of, and laying my
hand on his arm, as I spoke. -- "If you are not callous to the voice of
humanity, explain this horrid mystery, for I am certain the accidents of this
night have been concerted to ruin me in the opinion of my husband. You call
yourself his friend. How well you deserve that title your own conscience can
best inform you, that and the all-seeing eye of a just providence knows my
innocence, and I trust, it will hereafter, be made appear clear as the noon day
sun. In the mean time, dare not as you value your eternal welfare, to lift your
impious hand against the life of Rooksby; or, by throwing yourself in the way
of danger, run the hazard of rushing unprepared into the presence of your
offended Maker, for let honor give it what false gloss it will, the man, who
wantonly throws away his life is as much guilty of suicide, as the wretch who
ends his existence with a loaded pistol. And in the case of duelling vanquish
or be vanquished, you are equally a murderer. Go, leave us, would to heaven, I
could say to that peace which was uninterrupted, till your arrival here. --
Return to London, or go any where, so as I may not have the weight of bloodshed
to drag my almost broken spirit to the earth.

Rooksby started up with fury and snatching my hand from off Belger's arm,
cried -- "by heavens you tremble only for him. So as he is safe you care not
what becomes of me. But come, madam, let us return, it is almost dark." As he
said this, he pulled me rudely from my seat. I attempted to walk; but terror
had unnerved my limbs. I sunk down again on the chair, and had not a flood of
tears relieved me, I must have fainted. He was alarmed and called the woman to
bring some water, and saying he would send the carriage to fetch me as I was
unable to walk, -- he went out, followed by Belger in sullen silence. When he
was gone, my agitation became so great, it threw me almost into hysterics. I
was not sufficiently mistress of my recollection to ask the woman any
questions, but gave vent to my overcharged heart in a torrent of unrestrained
affliction, and when the carriage arrived, threw myself into it almast
distracted with the violence of my emotions, where, to my great comfort, I
found my kind soothing friend Amelia. I related to her what had just happened;
she comforted me all that lay in her power, and told me Belger had retired to
his apartment immediately on entering the house, and that Rooksby went to the
library, where he was busy writing. She said she would endeavor to see the
former before she went to rest, and persuade him to set off for London,
entreated me to hide my uneasiness from Mrs. Rooksby, as her weak state of
health would but ill support the shock of such intelligence, when she supposed
us the happiest of the hymenial votaries, and lamented her being obliged to
leave me in so disagreeable a situation.

I thanked the dear friendly girl; but entreated her not to be uneasy; said she
could not perform to me a more acceptable service than by attending to the
welfare of my mother, promised to be guided by her advice and bear my
afflictions with patience.

And so I will, my dear Celia; for have I not conscious innocence for my
support, and is it not my duty to submit without repining, to the will of Him,
who never lays on his creatures the rod of affliction but for some wise
purpose. He can humble the frail body to the dust the more to exalt the soul.
He can cause the bones that he has broken to rejoice, and heal the broken
heart. I feel his mercies at this moment abound in the comforts of an approving
conscience. I acknowledge his judgments just, and pray only for meekness and
resignation to bear his dispensations as I ought.

Celia, I must break off, I am ill; when able I will again continue my
narrative. heaven bless you.

MERIEL.

LETTER XLIX. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, Nov. 29 th, 1783.
I HAVE been extremely ill since I last addressed my dear Celia, occasioned by
the violent agitation my spirits had undergone. The morning after the
disagreeable rencounter mentioned in my last, I found myself much indisposed;
but as it was the day intended for Mrs. Rooksby's departure, I arose at the
usual time and endeavored to appear as cheerful as possible, that the dear old
lady might not perceive the distress of my mind. Rooksby seemed inspired with
the same wish and though he had not spoken to me during the whole night, yet at
breakfast assumed his usual tenderness of manner. It was with infinite pleasure
I learnt that Belger had set out for town long before any of the family were
stirring, leaving only a card to my mother pleading urgent business as his
excuse for so precipitate a departure, and wishing her intended journey might
have the desired effect and restore her to perfect health. At twelve o'clock
the chariot drew up to the door -- I felt my spirits sink. I looked first at my
dear Amelia, then at my mother, and taking a hand from each, pressed them to my
heart and burst into tears. It was in vain any longer to hide my sorrows -- I
saw these invaluable friends departing from me at the very moment when I most
wanted their soothing attentions. I looked on my generous benefactress,
perhaps, for the last time. Her wan cheek and emaciated frame, too plainly
announced her approaching dissolution.

I threw my arms round her -- I endeavored to articulate an adieu -- but words
were denied me. -- "God bless you my dear child," said she. "Clement, be tender
of her -- comfort her -- study her felicity -- and may Heaven shower its
choicest blessings on you both." She then took up my little Clementina, and
letting fall a tear as she pressed the smiling Cherub to her bosom, cried
emphatically, "Oh thou sweet angel! Heaven grant that you may live to be an
honor to your father and a blessing to your mother -- may thou be endowed
with all her virtues without any of his faults." She then once more embraced me
and went to the carriage. Amelia stayed behind a moment to comfort and
re-assure me. She bid me keep up my spirits and trust in that Power for
support, who never yet forsook the innocent.

Rooksby accompanied them some miles on horse back. I followed the chariot with
my eyes as long as I could, and then retiring to my chamber, threw myself on
the bed, and gave a loose to unutterable sorrow. However the spirit may be
afflicted, nature exhausted by various conflicts will insensibly sink under the
balmy influence of sleep. -- This was my case: I slept about two hours, but
awoke unrefreshed, and in acute pain. My head ached, my tongue was parched, and
I had every symptom of an approaching fever. However I endeavored to rise and
dress, to be ready to receive Rooksby, as he proposed returning to dinner: but
to this task I was unequal. My head was giddy and my limbs trembled. Hester, my
woman, was alarmed. She rang for the house-maid, who just came in time to help
to support me; for in attempting to go from my bedchamber to the dressing room,
I had fainted. On recovering, I found much worse consequences were to be
apprehended, than I had at first imagined. I sent immediately for medical
assistance and about four o'clock the next morning, I was delivered of a dead
child. For some hours I was totally insenble, and for more than a week my life
was despaired of. Rooksby was frequent in his enquiries after my health; but I
could plainly perceive, he thought more of the loss of his son than my
evidently dangerous situation. However it pleased Heaven to restore me, though
by slow degrees, and the moment the physicians pronounced me able to bear the
fatigue of traveling, I set off for London, vainly hoping that variety of
scenes, company and public amusements would restore in some measure my lost
cheerfulness; at least I thought it would banish those corroding reflections
which gnawed and goaded my poor lacerated heart. Oh! my beloved Celia, Rooksby
no longer retains the smallest degree of affection for me. In company he is
polite, but distant; when by ourselves (which is indeed but seldom) he is cold,
unkind, and my Celia will hardly believe it, he once on my gently remonstrating
on this painful change, struck me, nay cursed me, and called me by a name, my
soul shudders to think on. That he hates and despises the woman he once doated
on is now become too evident to be doubted; for he has never returned to my
apartment since my illness, but occupies one in another part of the house.
Susan Mossop is with me. She is possessed of more tenderness and goodness of
heart than I at first suspected. She labors incesantly to amuse me, and though
I cannot partake of her cheerfulness, I am grateful for her attention. Hester
is married to a man of genteel fortune, but from what I can judge of the
character of both, I think they will pass that kind of insipid life so well
described by Prior in his epitaph on sauntering Jack and idle Joan.

Nor wished, nor cared, nor laughed nor cried,
And so they lived, and so they died.
I am just returned from an airing in Hyde Park, and have been greatly
astonished to see Clara there, whom I left in Devonshire. She was on
horseback, elegantly mounted and attended by a servant in livery. A confused
idea ran through my mind, when I first saw her, yet surely she can never add
ingratitude to infamy, by seducing the affections of the husband, when she has
been rescued from want and misery by the wife, yet, what can have brought her
to town, or how is it possible she can afford to appear in the manner just
described. --

I am satisfied Rooksby must still hold some intercourse with Clara. We have
just had a tete-a-tete in which he accused me of deceiving him, of giving him
my hand when my heart was devoted to another; and of having been long
acquainted with Belger, with whom it was well known, I had an illicit
intercourse. Dearest Celia, imagine the agonizing feelings of my heart on being
subject to such unjust, such cruel suspicions. It was in vain I attempted to
assert my innocence; he was well informed, he said, of every incident that had
passed during my residence at Kensington; that I had been the intimate
acquaintance of women of light characters; that my own conduct in regard to
Belger was notoriously infamous, and that I was in reality the exact reverse of
what I had speciously appeared to his mother, or she never would so strenuously
have pressed our union. Oh! my friend, would to heaven, I had trusted to the
dictates of my own judgment, had been guided by the impulse of my heart which
strongly urged me to reject this man; but compassion, gratitude, and the
combined wishes of those whom I most loved and respected, operated so
powerfully on my feelings, that I was unable to withstand their solicitations;
and Heaven be my witness, I have not in one instance since I have been united
to Rooksby infringed the smallest duty incumbent on the sacred character of
wife. A letter -- it is from Amelia, Heaven grant no ill news. -- Read it
Celia, I enclose it for your perusal, and wonder not that my fast falling tears
oblige me to bid you adieu! --

MERIEL.

LETTER L. AMELIA to MERIEL.
Aix-la-Chapelle, Nov. 9 th, 1783.
IT is with infinite regret, I take up my pen to inform my dear friend, that
the flattering appearance of Mrs. Rooksby's returning health, which had so
elated my spirits are entirely vanished, and an increasing debility of frame,
baffles all the skill of the physicians and alarms us to an imminent degree. My
mind is in such a state of painful anxiety, that I hardly know what I write.
When I am present with the dear invalid, I endeavor to command my feelings and
appear cheerful, but the effort is vain, and when I contemplate her pale, yet
placid countenance, the tears will involuntarily burst from my eyes. She, this
morning, observing my emotions, called me to the bedside, (from which she is
now scarcely able to rise, even while it is making) and taking my hand, "my
dear Miss Sidney," said she, "do not let my approaching dissolution give you
pain. -- I see it draw near with no other apprehension than what frail
mortality must feel, when called from a temporal to an eternal state, into the
immediate presence of the Creator of the Universe! -- I have had my span
lengthened out far beyond what I had ever expected. -- I feel no regret at
leaving this transitory life; -- for my only care was centered in the happiness
of my son, and him I shall leave happy in the affection of the best, the
worthiest of her sex. I know my beloved Meriel will feel my loss: But time will
mitigate her affliction and she will bear it with the fortitude of a christian.
I have one thing to mention, which nearly concerns your happiness. I have a
nephew here whom you have seen -- Captain Onslow is a man every way worthy the
esteem of a woman of sense. He is not insensible to the merit of Miss Sidney,
and has requested me to plead his cause. I flatter myself you will not refuse
his suit." -- She paused. I was silent. I had frequently seen and admired
Captain Onslow: he is in the East India service; for though a man of fortune,
he prefers a life of activity to one of supine indolence. An indifferent state
of health, brought him to Aix-la-Chapelle; but being now perfectly recovered,
he proposed rejoining his regiment, which it is expected will be ordered to
Bengal the ensuing season. I should not be thus particular, but knowing from
some disagreement between Mr. Rooksby and the Captain, you were totally
ignorant that you had such a relation, and therefore might wish some
information. I had without vanity reason to suspect the Captain's partiality;
nor can I with truth assert, that my bosom felt that indifference toward him,
which it had ever maintained toward the rest of his sex. Yet Mrs. Rooksby
taking me at a moment so unprepared, I hesitated, and knew not what to answer.
She saw my confusion and then continued, "I have in my will left you a small
token of my regard, which if you listen to Onslow's suit, I shall insist on
seeing settled on yourself, if it is not painful, my dear Amelia, I could wish
to hear your candid sentiments on this subject, and it would give me infinite
satisfaction of see you united to so worthy a man before I breathe my last; as
the welfare of every one dear to my charming daughter-in-law must ever interest
my fondest solicitude," I thanked the generous woman in terms of heartfelt
gratitude, assured her I was perfectly happy in my present situation, but that
if it was my fate to change, I knew of no person I should prefer to Captain
Onslow. My only objection would be the difference subsisting between him and
Mr. Rooksby, as I feared it would prevent that social intercourse that I must
ever wish to continue uninterrupted between Mrs. Rooksby and myself. "I will
obviate that objection my dear," said she, "for it shall be my last request to
Clement that all animosity be laid aside, as he values my blessing. And now,"
continued she, with a faint smile, "there remains nothing to be done but for
you to take your pen and bid my son and his amiable wife to your nuptials. The
jaunt will be of service to Meriel after her late illness, and she will have
the double pleasure of seeing her beloved friend enter into an honorable and
happy marriage, and me into a state of everlasting bliss; and tell her from me
she should celebrate the two events as equally joyful." "Oh! my dear madam,
said I," in an agony of grief, "do not talk thus, I hope you will recover." --

"Impossible," said she, waving her hand with a solemn yet benignant look, "I
have enquired of the physicians how long they suppose I can remain. They
informed me, yesterday, I may possibly continue three weeks or a month longer;
but that is the utmost; therefore my dear Amelia, lose no time. I could wish to
see my dear children once more, and I am certain the bare mention of that wish
will be sufficient to bring them eagerly to me."

Thus, my dear Meriel, have I executed the desire of my almost expiring
benefactress; hasten to me my friend that we may pour our affliction into each
others bosom, and by participation lighten the burden that will press so heavy
on our hearts. I flatter myself the deathbed of an amiable and respected
parent will have a good effect on the mind of your unkind truant, and bring him
back to a sense of the happiness he is wantonly trifling away. I trust you will
use all possible expedition. I have agreeable to Mrs. Rooksby's desire wrote to
her son requesting his immediate acquiescence with her wish. Oh! my dear
Meriel, my mind is sorely oppressed. I shrink from the though of uniting myself
to Captain Onslow at the very moment, when tears of real sorrow will dim the
luster of the hymenial torch: but your better judgment shall in this and every
particular direct that of your

AMELIA SIDNEY.

LETTER LI. MERIEL to CELIA.
Paris, January 29 th, 1784.
From this great theater of dissipation and folly does Meriel once more address
her friend -- but why am I not permitted to see you? why in the same kingdom
does indispensible duties keep me from flying to you, and in your peaceful
cloister burying myself at once from the world and all its sorrows? Alas I too
plainly feel that even there I could not now be at peace: for thither should I
carry corroding thought, the pangs of disappointed love, the remembrance of
abused confidence, ingratitude and ill requited friendship. -- Strange scenes
have passed, my friend, since I wrote you last; I have hovered on the brink of
eternity, from whence I was only snatched to be the victim of future misery;
but let me pursue some method in my narrative and carry you back to the time
when the receipt of Amelia's letter hurried us to proceed as expeditiously as
possible to Aix to catch the parting sigh and receive the dying blessing of my
last dear parent, my more than mother. Every preparation necessary for our
departure was soon made, when the evening previous to the day on which we were
to set out, Rooksby came into my dressing room, where I was busy in making some
necessary arrangements with the housekeeper, and bidding her quit the room sat
down beside me, and looking with more complacency than he had lately done, when
addressing me, said, "I have unknown to you Meriel made a little addition to
our party to the continent, and flatter myself it will not be disagreeable." --
I believe I looked surprised when I replied, "had our journey been one of
pleasure I could certainly have no objection to any person, whom he should
think proper to join us, but on so mournful an occasion I must suppose the
presence of a stranger" --

"It is not a stranger," said he (interrupting me eagerly,) "it is poor Clara."

"Clara, sir?" in a tone of angry surprise.

"Yes, my dear," he answered hesitatingly, "She is in a bad state of health; I
met her lately by accident. She cannot well afford so long a journey; and it is
a good opportunity."

"Rooksby said I," fixing my eyes upon his face: I think you know me well
enough to be certain that if Clara is really ill and in want, she has a claim
to every tender office of humanity from me as a fellow creature, but" --

"Nay, Meriel, no buts: surely (affecting a smile) "you are not jealous?" --
"No, sir, you may rest quite easy on that head. I cannot think so meanly of you
as to suppose after what had passed you would again be the dupe of an artful
woman; for however my compassion may have been awakened toward Clara, I cannot
help thinking her a woman capable of the basest duplicity."

"She is going to be married to Belger," said he, endeavoring to hide his
evident embarrassment under the mask of carelessness.

"But I hope, sir, he is not to join us!" said I, reddening with indignation at
the remembrance of past injuries, which I could now trace to their right source.

"No, he will follow Clara to Aix, and if my mother dies, we shall all spend
the winter in Paris."

The evident composure with which he mentioned such an afflicting circumstance,
out me to the soul. -- "You speak of your mother with great indifference," said
I, and the tears gushed from my eyes.

"Indifference, no, indeed I am extremely sorry; but you know, my dear, she is
an old woman, and we must expect it, and that you know prepares us for the
stroke, and prevents the shock we should otherwise feel. I have been thinking,"
continued he after a little pause, "that I shall have the Hall pulled down next
summer and built in a more modern style."

I turned from him with silent contempt and resting my cheek upon my hand gave
a loose to melancholy reflections. Celia I have been deceived in this man. He
has no heart, no sensibility; every feeling of his soul is absorbed in self.
Why, why was my fate united to such a man. I was roused from my reverse by a
loud knock at the door. -- "That is Clara," said he, starting up. "I desired
she would sleep here, that we might be ready to set off together in the
morning." I felt a faint chillness seize me as he spoke. I believe my voice
faultered as I said, go down then and receive her; I will just take one more
look at my dear little girl and join you immediately." When he had left the
room I sunk motionless on the sopha. "Good heaven," said I, "and is it come to
this. Can it be possible, that the man whom I have promised to love and honor
should thus forget what is due to me, to his child and to himself? But I will
not judge too rashly, continued I, rising and drying my eyes. Perhaps they may
not be guilty. Jealousy magnifies every object, and construes even laudable
actions into crimes." I then visited the nursery and having passed a few
minutes in caressing my little Clementina, I descended to the drawing room
where I found Clara negligently seated on a sopha by Rooksby, and Susan Mossop
playing on the Piano Forte. Clara rose from her seat, colored and hesitatingly
said something about intrusion. I confess I was not less embarrassed myself;
however I paid her the civilities necessary as being my guest and we
immediately went to supper, soon after which I retired on pretense of making
some further preparations, and having given orders about an apartment for
Clara, I sat down and wrote a few lines to Susan requesting, as she intended
staying in town, till she heared from us the result of our voyage and whether
we returned or past the winter on the continent, that she would be particularly
attentive to the child, and in case of her father's sending for her begged she
would accompany her to Paris. This I did by letter, being sensible I should
have no time to speak to her in the morning; and I did not think proper to send
for her up stairs at that time. Early in the morning our post coach was at the
door, and by six o'clock Mr. Rooksby, Clara, myself and Lester my woman were
seated in it; and we proceeded with all imaginable speed to Dover. Rooksby
immediately on our arrival sent to speak to the master of a Packet. We found it
was impossible to think of embarking till the next morning, and were informed
by the man that a gentleman and lady just arrived from town had taken their
passage on board his vessel. While we continued talking, a gentle tap at the
door interrupted us, and on its being opened who should enter but Mrs. Kingly.
It was a most agreeable surprise to me, though I believe not so to Rooksby.
"Well met my dear cousin," said she, affectionately saluting me, "it is
fortunate that we should both be traveling the same way. I saw your livery in
the yard and immediately made my enquiries." Kingly is gone out, so you see I
took the opportunity and eloped to you; but when he returns I am sure he will
be as happy as myself to pay you his respects." While she was speaking she did
not notice who was in the room, and, indeed, Clara sat in an obscure corner by
the fire, but as she finished the last sentence, turning hastily round she saw
her; but not recognizing her immediately cried, "I fear I am guilty of
rudeness, you have company." -- "No one particular," said I. It is only Mrs.
Moreton." Clara was now under the necessity of rising; Mrs. Kingly started and
curtsying formally, while she gave Rooksby a most expressive look, said she
could not have expected to see Mrs. Moreton in this party, not knowing we were
acquainted. I really felt for Clara; her color varied from red to pale and
from pale to red, till I thought she would have sunk. Rooksby looked mortified,
and I only slightly said, that Mrs. Moreton having but indifferent health
wished to try the air and weather of Aix, and we having an empty seat in the
coach I had offered it to her. -- Mrs. Kingly looked inquisitive, as much as to
say, "do you know who she is." But she repressed the impulse of curiosity and
made enquiries after my dear mother, whom she did not know till then, was in so
dangerous a state.

In about an hour Kingly came in, when after the first salutations were past,
he began to recognize Clara, I think it would be impossible to give you an
adequate idea of the anger and contempt that agitated his expressive
countenance, her presence was a restraint upon us all, it checked conversation,
we were for some moments silent and embarrassed -- she saw it and guessing the
cause, complained of weakness and fatigue and ringing for a light retired to
her chamber.

She was no sooner gone than Kingly cried "why Mrs. Rooksby, how long have you
been acquainted with that woman."

"Some time," I replied affecting as much ease as possible.

"Had you any knowledge of her before you were married?"

"O yes, I knew her very well; come I know what you would say, but I shall stop
you at once; her former errors are nothing to me; at present she is in
distress. It was in my power to render her a trifling service, and I only
followed the dictates of humanity."

"Neglecting those of common prudence," interrupted he tartly.

"Pshaw! nonsense," I replied laughing, "do not let us talk any more about her."

"You are the most unaccountable woman," said he, "that ever existed, I declare
if almost half your life is not an inexplicable riddle."

"My dear," said Mrs. Kingly, to turn the conversation, "my cousins have taken
their passage in the same packet with us; so we shall cross the channel
together." This had the desired effect; we insensibly fell into mutual
enquiries concerning the motives of our intended voyage: the conversation
became by degrees cheerful, and Clara was for the moment forgot. I found that
Mr. and Mrs. Kingly were merely on a jaunt of pleasure, and that we should have
their company no farther than Calais, as they intended to proceed to Brussels.
But, my dear Celia, vain are the appointments of man; we look forward to many
coming years, we mark out plans of future pleasure and enjoyment: and cry, Thus
we will do, and thus. When suddenly the unexpected blasts of adversity pass
over us, the beauteous vision fades before our sight, while darkness clouds and
tempest shut the expected joys forever from our view, and hurl them far beyond
our reach.

Like some poor hind, who during the fatigues of the day, had looked often
wishfully toward a distant shady grove, where he might repose from the
scorching noonday sun. -- "When my daily task is ended," says he, "I will
retire there, and as I rest my weary limbs, enjoy the cool refreshing breezes
as they pass over the banks of flowers." These reflections sweeten his toil,
and he tastes a thousand times by anticipation the pleasures he expects to
enjoy. At length the hour arrives, he quits his labor and hastily flies to the
scene of fancy, promised bliss. "How delightful is the cooling shade," he
cries, as he draws near the grove; "how charming the gurgling of the clear
stream that glides over the pebbles and falls into a basin formed by nature;
how delicious the fruit that hangs from the trees and courts the hand to gather
them. Oh! I could live and die in so sweet a place. How happy I shall be, when
I reach it, and stretch my weary limbs on the soft grassy turf." -- Alas! poor
swain, do thou not see the sun is sunk beneath the hills, the gloom of
evening comes on apace, and ever thou can reach thy desired haven, the clouds
of night will obscure its beauties from thy view, and the chilly dews prevent
your taking the repose you so ardently wish for.

My dear Celia, I am at present unable to proceed; when I recover my spirits, I
will again resume my pen, till then farewell.

MERIEL.

LETTER LII. MERIEL to CELIA. IN CONTINUATION.
Paris, January 30, 1784.
WE passed the night as proposed at Dover, and at an early hour were called to
go on board the packet, the wind and tide both favoring us. We embarked before
it was well light, and the wind freshening as we proceeded we were soon obliged
to retire to our cabins, being seized with the sickness incident to those, who
are unused to the boisterous element. -- For some time we were too ill to pay
much attention to the motion of the vessel, but at length I thought it was very
violent, and enquired of Kingly, if it was usual to be so much tossed about in
crossing the channel; his reply alarmed me; "the wind is changed," said he,
"and the clouds threathen a boisterous (...); we shall make good sailors of you
all, for I do not think you will reach Calais today, at least not till late in
the evening."

Soon after this the wind increased to a tremendous degree, and I saw by
Kingly's countenance that he was uneasy. He went frequently upon deck; then
returned to the cabin, endeavored to cheer us, and said he had advised the
Master to turn back as the wind was so much against us, and we should not feel
the surges so much, when we went before it. Happy would it have been for us
all, if this advice had been taken while daylight remained; but the man was
obstinate, and continued beating about till nearly the close of day; then
finding it impossible to make his intended port, attempted to return to Dover.
As night came on, the storm increased, and though so late in the season was
attended with the most vivid lightning and heavy claps of thunder; the sea was
unusually agitated, the wind varying almost every instant and resting at no
settled point. It is impossible, my dear Celia, to give you an adequate idea of
the horrors of our situation in so small a vessel, driving about at the mercy
of the waves and wind in a night, the pitchy darkness of which was only
alleviated by lightning, which served to give us momentary views of the
surrounding dangers. And how shall I tell my dear Celia, that in the midst of
this distress and terror, I had one pang to encounter more acute by far than
the near approach of expected death. Rooksby attached himself entirely to
Clara. All his care, all his anxious solicitude was expressed for her. We had
all risen from our beds, Kingly supported his wife in his arms. "My dear boys,"
said she, "Heaven protect them." -- "Heaven will protect us all, I hope my
love," said he, passing his hand across his eyes.

Rooksby sat in a distant corner of the cabin beside Clara, who rested her head
upon his shoulder. Sad and solitary, I supported myself against a table, that
was fastened to the cabin floor, and resigning myself to that Power, who could
in an instant either rescue us from impending death, or plunge us at once into
eternity -- thus gave the reigns ^o reflection. Through every scene of my past
life, how large has been my portion of misery, and how small comparatively, my
allotment of joy: then why, coward soul, do thou shrink from the friendly
stroke, that will set thee free from the heavy clog of mortality, and lift thee
above these regions of transitory, fading joys, to one where pleasure will be
immutable, unchangeable and can never end! -- Oh! Almighty Father of the
Universe, weary as my pilgrimage has been, I acknowledge thy mercies have been
ever beyond my deserts; to thee then do I commit myself -- do with me as thou
will -- only; Oh! benignant Creator, grant me a portion of meekness and
resignation equal to my afflictions. Thou art the Father of the fatherless;
under thy protecting care my child will ever be secure. Do thou never forsake
her in the hour of trial, and of thy mercy, grant she may never forget thee.
Forgive my manifold offenses, as from my soul I pardon every offense I may have
received from my fellow creatures. As these reflections passed through my mind,
I felt a calm serenity take possession of my soul. I looked with an eye of
complacency on Clara and Rooksby, whose horrors were depicted on their pale
countenances, I even wished them peace of mind and fortitude to meet the
impending danger as they ought. This world seemed fleeting from before my eyes,
and I looked forward with humble hope, to that which was to come.

"Chearily! chearily! my dear cousin," said Kingly, taking my hand, which hung
motionless by my side, "come, come, we are worth half a dozen dead folks yet.
-- It Is a tight little vessel -- my life for it, we weather the storm, and this
will be a seasoning for you. You will not be easily frightened after this."

"My dear Mrs. Rooksby," said Mrs. Kingly, laying her hand on that of mine,
which her husband held, "how much reason you have, to hate me, and all my
family."

"Hush," said I, (frightened, least she was going to reveal my secret) believe
me, I love and respect all of your family, whom I have ever known."

"Do not say so, thou much injured woman, look there, (pointing to Rooksby) You
cannot esteem that wretch, and yet you are linked to him for life, while the
only man capable of rewarding virtue like yours: but no matter, it is I have
done it all, and I deserve to be unhappy."

I was greatly distressed to hear her talk in this manner. But before I could
interrupt her, she thus continued.

"We are now, my dear cousin, hovering on the brink of eternity. Which of us,
or whether any may escape the horrors of this awful night, heaven alone can
tell; but we have both children. Promise me then my friend, should you survive,
to be a mother to my poor babes, while they shall require a mother's tender
care: and should it be my fate to escape and yours to perish; here in my
Maker's sight, I swear to consider your Clementina as my own child."

She had hardly spoke, when a severe shock which the vessel received convinced
us we had struck on some rocks, and immediately from the deck issued a confused
noise of "lost! gone! all is over!"

Rooksby started from his seat and clasping Clara in his arms, rushed upon the
deck: Kingly did the same by his wife. The love of life still prevailed over
the sense of misery and I followed them as well as I was able, crawling on my
hands and knees up the steps. Kingly met me just as I had reached the top and
taking me in his arms carried me to his wife. Here a new scene of horror
discovered itself; the day had begun to dawn just enough to show us that we
were on a reef of rocks which ran a considerable distance from the shore, and
that the rage of the breakers, while the wind continued so violent would
prevent any boat from coming to our assistance.

"See," cried Mrs. Kingly, "there is no hope." I could not answer. -- We sunk
upon the deck folded in each others arms, Kingly knelt beside and endeavored
to support us, and thus in silent agony, we waited the expected shock when our
vessel would fall to pieces.

But it was near two hours before this event took place. At length unable to
withstand the repeated shocks, she parted and I saw Rooksby and Clara plunged
into the waves.

My terrors and grief here became too great for human nature to support and I
lost all sense of my sufferings. How long I remained insensible I cannot tell,
but on recovering my recollection, I found myself alone on the wreck, slightly
fastened to it by a small cord, that was passed round my waist and tied to a
ring on the remaining part of the deck.

The terrors which at that moment took possession of my mind, are still too
fresh in my memory to suffer me to proceed.

Adieu, MERIEL.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART, A NOVEL. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY MRS. ROWSON, OF THE NEW THEATER, PHILADELPHIA, AUTHOR OF CHARLOTTE, FILLE
DE CHAMBER, INQUISITOR, etc. etc.

-- If there is a power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he must delight in virtue.
The soul secured in her existence, smiles,
At the drawn dagger and defies its point.
VOL. IV.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY MOUNTFORD, BIOREN and CO. NO.75,
DOCK-STREET. SOLD BY MESSRS. CAREY, RICE, CAMPBELL, ORMROD, YOUNG, AND THE
AUTHOR, CORNER OF SEVENTH AND CHESNUT-STREETS. M.DCC.XCV.

TRIALS OF THE HUMAN HEART.
LETTER LIII. MERIEL to CELIA. IN CONTINUATION.
Paris, Feb. 2 d. 1784.
I CONTINUED in this situation but a few moments -- when I heard a faint voice
call "Meriel," I turned my head and saw Kingly emerging from the sea and
holding by part of the wreck -- "Oh, Heavens!" said I, "are you alive then, and
is there any chance of escaping?" -- "Some little chance," said he, coming near
me and beginning to nutie the cord that was round me.

"But where is Mrs. Kingly?" -- "Safe, I hope," he replied, "I have conveyed
her on board a coasting vessel, which you may see at no great distance from us;
but which cannot come nearer on account of the wind blowing strong in shore,
and the sea running so high a boat could not live in it. Come, my dear Meriel,
throw off the most cumbrous part of your dress, the chance of saving you is but
very small; yet, should I be so happy, I shall esteem myself blessed beyond
expression, and should I fail, I shall at least have the satisfaction of dying
with the only woman I ever loved with ardency and sincerity."

"No, Kingly," said I, "if my life can only be preserved at the hazard of
yours, leave me, I beseech you, to my fate. I am a poor forlorn creature of no
consequence to any one: -- here let me lay down the burden of painful
existence! -- Do you return to your amiable wife. You may alone survive the
fury of the waves; but encumbered with me, it will be impossible. Go, my kind,
my dear friend, be a father to my child, and sometimes think on her unhappy
mother."

"Cease, dear Meriel, cease, thus to wound my heart, and trifle with the
precious moments in which I may snatch you from impending death. I once had
fondly hoped to live only to render you happy; -- but since fate has ordered it
otherwise, I will preserve your life or perish in the attempt."

"Oh Kingly," I replied, "leave me, let me die while I am innocent. This
generous conduct awakens all the softness of my soul, and should I live, I
shall live only to endure the tortures of hopeless love, rendered doubly
agonizing by the pang of conscious guilt."

"Dearest, best of women," said he, "let me but preserve you, and certain I am
that the rectitude of the heart that can harbor such fears will ever preserve
you from the guilt it dreads."

The wind now seemed a little to abate. I plainly saw the vessel coming nearer
-- "Now is the time," said he, almost forcibly tearing off my upper garments,
and binding a long shawl tight round my waist, he fastened it to his arm, and
catching me up plunged into the water. I now became once more insensible, nor
do I remember the least circumstance that followed, till I awoke, as it were,
from a profound sleep, and found myself in a bed on board a small dirty vessel.
I raised my head from the pillow and the first object which met my eyes, was
Kingly on the opposite side of the cabin, apparently dead. -- Mrs. Kingly with
a pale haggard countenance hanging over him; and stretched on a mattress, which
was spread on the cabin floor, lay Clara and Rooksby just recovering from a
state of insensibility. Weak as I was I desired to be lifted from the bed and
crawling to that on which my preserver lay, I began to enquire what means had
been used for his recovery. I found every proper, every probable method had
been tried without effect; they also informed me, that he was alive, when they
took us up, but immediately on his getting on board, nature exhausted with the
exertions he had made to save me, had given way at once, and he sunk lifeless
on the deck. Tortured almost to madness by this account, I entreated them to
re^ew their applications -- nay, weak and exhausted as we were, both Mrs.
Kingly and myself joined our endeavors, while Rooksby and Clara drank a little
brandy and water, and being covered up warm, fell into a profound sleep. For
more than two hours we continued our applications without the least appearance
of success; at length I was convinced I felt a faint palpitation of the heart.
I mentioned my hopes to his wife, who thought the same. This gave us fresh
courage, and in less than another hour we had the superlative felicity of
seeing him open his eyes. The rapturous expressions of joy that burst from Mrs.
Kingly on this token of returning animation are better imagined than described,
nor was mine far short of what she expressed. -- No sooner were we ascertained
of perfect success by his gently pressing our hands and saintly articulating,
"God bless you both," than bursting into tears of the most exulting rapture, we
sunk on our knees, and as we wept on each others bosom, poured forth our thanks
to that benignant Power, who had crowned our humble exertions with success.

Never Celia! no never! till that moment did I fully comprehend what real joy
was: the tide of delight that rushed upon my heart when I heard him articulate
the words "God bless you," more than compensated for all the anguish I had ever
endured. The vessel which had taken us up, was bound to Calais, whither it now
bent its course; the elements growing much calmer, and the wind becoming more
favorable, and we were once more (...) on Terra Firma by three o'clock the
next day.

I find the place, on which we were wrecked is a dangerous reef on the Sussex
coast, fortunately, only one life was lost and that was poor Lester, as the
vessel which preserved us seeing our distress came as near as they possibly
^ould in hopes of rendering us some assistance; Rooksby is an expert swimmer
and Clara a woman of intrepid spirit.

We resolved on staying a day or two at Calais to recruit our spirits. Indeed
we all found ourselves astonishingly recovered after a good nights rest, except
Mrs. Kingly, who appeared weak and languid, was unable to sit up and in the
course of the day was seized with alarming faintings. Medical assistance was
called in, but they declared her frame had received so severe a shock that in
all human probability she would fall into a rapid decline; however change of
scene, cheerful company, and invigorating medicines might prove great
restoratives. -- This was a heavy stroke to poor Kingly. We were unable to stay
any longer than the next day with him and it was evident that his Margaret
would not be able to travel so early. But there was no alternative; my mother's
danger pressed us to pursue our journey, and accordingly the next morning we
took leave of the drooping patient angel, and her afflicted husband, and set
forward for Aix, flattering ourselves that a few days would bring them to join
us.

On our arrival at Aix, Clara left us, and we proceeded to my mother's. Amelia
met us at the door. "Is she yet alive?" said I eagerly pressing forward. "She
is," replied Amelia, but greatly distressed. "We heard a packet was lost and
feared it was the one in which you had embarked." -- Before I could answer I
found myself in Mrs. Rooksby's chamber. The dear woman held out her hand to me
as I entered; but was unable to speak. Rooksby approached her bedside, took
her other hand, and pressed it to his lips with reverence; but we all remained
silent, I was pleased to see he still retained sensibility enough to be shocked
at his mother's altered appearance. When she was a little recovered, "my dear
children," said she, pressing our hands, "it diffuses a transient gleam of
pleasure over my heart to see you once more, and to see you safe and happy; how
have you left my sweet Clementina, was she well? does she remember her
grandmother?" -- I assured her she was in health, and if any thing could remain
on her infant mind, it must be the sense of her grandmother's kindness and
affection. -- She smiled approbation, then turning to Rooksby -- "Clement,"
said she, "you are arrived in good time to close my eyes and to smooth my
passage to the grave, by passing an act of amnesty with your amiable relation
Captain Onslow. Come, promise me that the trifling cause of your dispute shall
be no more remembered, and that you will rank him among the choicest of your
friends. I know he longs to convince you, that his affection toward you is
unaltered."

"Your wish, my dear madam," he replied, "must be to me a law. All our former
differences are from this moment forgotten." -- "'It Is well," said she; "then
tomorrow I hope to see my dear Miss Sidney exchange the name of virgin for
that of wife. I shall then have nothing more to wish in this world.

Amelia made no affected objections to this proposal, and that evening Captain
Onslow took his tea with us. When the articles were signed, in which he settles
on my dear Amelia, five thousand pounds, which was the bequest Mrs. Rooksby
mentioned to have made in her will; he also presented her with a very handsome
watch, a pair of bracelets sat with brilliants and a pair of diamond earings.
The next morning she accepted his hand at the altar with that modest reserve,
free from every prudish affectation of bashfulness, which ever distinguishes
the real woman of sense.

From that time no material occurrence took place for three or four days; only
that I observed my mother seemed more cheerful, and I flattered myself that our
united attentions might contribute to her restoration, I carefully concealed
not only from her, but even from Amelia, the cause I had for sorrow, as I knew
it would pain their friendly hearts, without in the least relieving the anguish
of my own; though I knew by the frequent and long absences of Rooksky, that the
chief part of his time was devoted to Clara. But why, thought I, should I give
my dear Amelia a bad opinion of a state, into which she had just entered, by
revealing to her the art, the duplicity cruelty and perfidy of which man is
capable. Will it not lead her to fear a future change in the husband, who is
now so fondly attached to her. Was not Rooksby once as fond of me, Oh! had he
been like Kingly, hither tended all my reflections on the subject, I was
terrified to find myself making these comparisons and strenuously endeavored
to chase from my mind the only object on which it could dwell with delight and
grateful tenderness.

But these ideas were soon interrupted by the intrusion of some still more
painful. My dear Mother was one morning seized with a sit of coughing and
expired before I could reach her apartment, though I was called the instant the
attendants perceived her danger, though her death was hourly expected by those
about her, I had vainly flattered myself she might recover; I therefore felt
her sudden departure the more severely, and as if my heart was not already
overcharged with affliction on the second day after her decease, Amelia entered
my apartment with a letter open in her hand. There was an air of melancholy and
surprise about her countenance, which awakened my curiosity. My thoughts
instantly reverted to England and my child. "Is Clementina ill" -- cried I,
eagerly, snatching at the letter. -- "No!" she replied, folding it up and
putting it in her pocket, while she calmly seated herself beside me, "the
letter is not from England." -- "Are you sure of that Amelia," said I, looking
at her with a scrutinizing eye. "Perfectly so, my dear Meriel, but have you no
other friends, in whose welfare you are interested beside those you left in
England." "Perhaps it is from Kingly?" -- "You are right," she replied, "and
the contents are so much less dreadful than your mind forboded, that I think I
may commit it to your perusal."

"Poor Margaret is worse, I sear," said I, as I took the letter. She made me no
answer, and I read it with a composure at which I have since been astonished. I
send you a copy, and believe me, Celia, every line as I retraced it, has been
wet with my tears.

Farewell, my dear girl, methinks you must be weary of a correspondent who
writes only on melancholy themes. -- Ah! my Celia, the miserable know no luxury
equal to that of dwelling on their sorrows, and weeping over their source. In
this you have ever indulged me, and it is a privilege I shall not easily
forego. -- Adieu! God bless you.

MERIEL.

LETTER LIVE. MR. KINGLY to MISS SIDNEY. He did not know of her marriage with
Captain Onslow.

Calais, Jan. 13 th, 1784.
MISS SIDNEY is the friend of Meriel Howard (for I will not call that dear
woman by the name of her unworthy husband;) to her then I may address myself
and pour forth the sorrows that lie heavy at my heart.

Oh, Amelia! unless you could for a moment place yourself in my situation, you
can have no idea of my wretchedness. My wife! my friend! my lovely! and
beloved! Margaret is no more. I have taken up my pen to inform you of her
placid, her heavenly end: -- but I feel I am unequal to the task. -- I must
pause. -- My tears will flow. -- in such a cause the bravest need not blush to
indulge their sensibility.

I am more composed -- I have gazed on the serene countenance of my departed
angel, and gathered fortitude from the remembrance of her virtues; from that
blessed assurance, that the stroke which pierces my heart has secured to her
felicity which will never end.

The disorder which alarmed us so much, by its appearance, before Rooksby left
Calais, terminated in an inflammation on the lungs and a putrid sore throat
occasioned by the cold the dear creature had taken and the agitation her
spirits had undergone. It made rapid advances. She knew her own danger, and
seemed resigned to quit the world, only that her heart yearned for her
children: but even when she thought of them, her pious soul extracted
consolation from the reliance she placed on a divine guardian and protector to
whom she solemnly recommended them.

Just before the last awful scene was closed, she called me to her bedside,
"Kingly," said she, "I am going. -- Four years of superlative felicity is as
much as humanity can expect. I am resigned to my fate, and humbly thank my
bountiful Creator that I have not lived to know the privation of your
affection. That, my dear Frederic, I fear would have been a trial to which my
fortitude would have proved unequal. I need not recommend my children to your
care. I am satisfied you will never forget you are a father."

I assured her of my constant attention and undeviating affection to those dear
pledges of our love, and begged she would not too much exhaust herself by
talking.

"I must speak, my love," said she, "Alas! in a few hours that power will be
denied me. I have something of importance to say. You have been vilely
deceived. Mrs. Rooksby ever loved you. -- She is truth and purity itself." --

She was proceeding, when a kind of convulsion seized her -- and she recovered
only to speak in incoherent sentences -- "Be the unalterable friend -- She is
worthy -- In my cabinet you will" -- She endeavored to finish the sentence,
but in vain -- her eyes closed -- her gentle spirit fled forever! --

The anguish of my heart is better imagined than described. Though I ever
endeavored to promote the happiness of my Margaret; yet, when I reflect that I
did undoubtedly love another, and that however, by the most grateful attention,
I endeavored to veil my feelings from her, yet she knew the situation of my
heart, and knew the worth of the object. I cannot but fear it hurt her
sensibility and preyed upon her spirits.

I shall immediately return to England to attend her remains to their last
dreary mansion, settle my children, dismiss my servants and solicit immediate
employment; for idleness will only be the nurse of affliction, and it is my
duty to live and endeavor to recover my spirits that I may attend to the dear
bequests of my Margaret, be father! mother! every dear relation to her
children, and the firm friend of -- I need not write her name. I have sometimes
thought her capricious and inconsistent, but the words "you have been viley
deceived," have awakened sentiments in my bosom, which it is improper to
indulge, tell her, my dear madam that while I live, I shall consider myself as
bound to support! honor! and protect her! Alas! what right have I to protect
her? is she not the wife of another? -- Yes she is, -- but that other is a
villain, as such every man of honor and sensibility has a right to step
forward in her defense.

"She is purity itself" -- true but that purity cannot excel the pure the
friendly affection that glows in my breast. A person who looks not beyond the
surface of things, may think that these expressions are an insult, a sure mark
of disrespect, to the memory of my departed Margaret, but you my dear madam
will consider them as they are meant a proof of my confidence in her veracity,
a wish to fulfill her last desire. Meriel is the wife of Rooksby. -- My soul
ever abhorred seduction of any kind; but to seduce a wife! a mother! horror!
infamy! -- the wealth of Indus, the joys of paradise would not tempt me to such
a measure. No, Margaret no! my beloved partner. Meriel may be the adopted
mother of your children, may implant in their minds those virtues which have
supported her under all her afflictons, but for me, I will seek employment
abroad, and fly from trials, which might be too powerful for me.

I have just received Rooksby's letter informing me of the death of his mother,
and your union with Captain Onslow. May heaven shower its choicest blessings on
you; may costancy love and peace crown your nuptials, and may you never know
the pangs which at this moment rends the heart of

FREDERIC KINGLY.

LETTER LV. MERIEL to CELIA.
Paris, February 7 th, 1784.
MY dear Celia may perhaps be surprised that we did not attend the remains of
our revered mother to England: but the obstinacy of Rooksby was not to be over
come, and I was afraid to leave him lest by my absence I should appear to give
a sanction to a connection which though I could not entirely prevent, I was
determined as much as possible to interrupt. My friendly Amelia and her husband
were returning to England, and proposed seeing the last duties fulfilled to my
beloved parent, while I heavily and unwillingly attended Rooksby to Paris,
where we were soon joined by Clara and Belger, the former of whom has now
thrown aside all restraint, appearing publicly as the mistress of Rooksby. Her
house and establishment are elegant; she gives splendid entertainments, and
though her infamy is well known, she is courted, followed and caressed by the
fashionable world; while I am left a poor solitary creature, in the midst of a
busy multitude, without friend or comforter.

The parting with Amelia was like severing soul and body. I felt as if in
losing her, I lost all support, for though I am sensible, that you, my dear
Celia, compassionate all my sufferings, yet secluded as you are from the world,
you cannot participate the sorrows of which you have no idea. I remember, once
in the moment of exulting happiness, I condemned the torpid gloom of a monastic
life. Alas! have I not since had sufficient cause to wish, that torpor, that
insensibility had been mine. Yet why should I repine? why utter so ungrateful a
wish, since had I never mingled in the active scenes of life though I might
have escaped the knowledge of a Clara, Belger, or Rooksby, I should also never
have known the transcendent worth of Amelia Sidney and Frederic Rainsforth.

Rooksby proposes remaining here till June, I could almost wish time would
double the rapidity of his motion and hasten the hour when I shall again
embrace my Clementina. Heaven protect my child, and shield her from the
afflictions that have almost bowed to the earth her unhappy mother. Oh! my
friend, hard as the task would be, I would sooner resign her to him who gave
her being, than see her live to be a prey to sorrows, which, though sympathy
may soften, nothing but death can relieve.

Adieu, MERIEL.

LETTER LVI. MERIEL to CELIA.
Paris, March 19 th, 1784.
I FEAR my dear friend that Rooksby is in the high road to ruin, Clara sets no
bounds to her extravagance. She gives splendid balls, concerts composed of the
first performers, and pretends to countenance all the literati of the age;
besides she is an amateur in painting, and it is almost incredible what sums
she squanders, in these pursuits. My dear little girl has now been with me
three weeks. Susan Mossop came over with her, Susan is a lively girl and
immediately attracted the notice of Belger. It gave me pain to see it, as I was
too well acquainted with the principles of the man to think he meant an
honorable attachment, and in a friendly manner warned her to beware. Would you
believe it? my attention to her happiness was construed into jealousy, and from
that moment she has treated me with contempt and insolence.

I am just informed a gentleman desires to speak with me. It is something
unusual for me to have a visitor especially a male one. It may be some English
acquaintance I must leave you my Celia for a short time.

Oh heavens! how hard are my trials: when will the throbbings of my bosom cease!

When I left my pen and descended into the drawing room, the door of which
stood partly open, I saw sitting with his back toward me, a gentleman in deep
mourning. He arose as I entered. Conceive my surprise. -- It was Kingly.

"My Kingly," said I, endeavoring at a look of composure, while my pale
countenance and tremulous voice betrayed my emotions. -- He took my hand, led
me to a sopha and seating himself beside me endeavored in vain to restrain the
tears that trembled in his expressive eyes.

"I have obtained an appointment, my dear Cousin" said he recovering himself
"and in a few months shall sail on a three years station to America: but I
could not leave Europe, without taking a personal leave of the best of women
and recommending to her care my dear boys, Heaven only knows what may be the
fate of their father. Say, should I never return, will you be their mother,
their counselor, their friend?

"Surely Kingly," said I eagerly, "you cannot doubt my readiness to render them
every service, within the narrow compass of my power. The friendship I bore
their departed mother, -- "

"And is there nothing due to the affection with which you once honored their
unhappy father. Ah Meriel! your laudable deception is now of no avail: in my
dear Margaret's cabinet I found a letter written by her own hand and addressed
to me, in which she explains every part of your conduct, which had before
appeared so mysterious. Yes my constant, my adored Meriel, I am now satisfied,
that you must have thought me the basest of mankind, as I at one time believed
you the most capricious of women: but I can easily trace the black mischief to
the fountain head. Hester Mossop, had frequently made me advances, which it was
impossible to mistake. -- Need I tell you I slighted her. Ah! my beloved
Meriel, how amply has her arts revenged her slighted beauty."

He caught my hands, while I in vain endeavored to suppress my tears; but
unable to command my voice sufficiently to answer him, I continued silent and
he proceeded.

"My own disappointment, my own sufferings I have learned to bear without
complaining; but yours, dear Meriel, torture me beyond imagination. I see you
married to a man, who ungratefully throws from him a gem, which might add
splendour to a diadem. I see you unhappy; and feel I have not the power to
alleviate your sorrows.

"Your friendly anxiety," said I "does me honor; and while I possess the
esteem of my friends I can never think myself totally unhappy. But you mistake,
in thinking Mr. Rooksby" --

"Pardon me Meriel, I know you would endeavor to draw a veil over his vices;
but they are too glaring. All the world must see how you are injured! -- Would
to Heaven, Rooksby was not your husband, or that there was any way to oblige
him to do you justice without injuring your fame, which I would die to preserve
unspotted."

"Ah, Kingly!" said I, "your life is too precious to be lightly thrown away.
Consider your children -- for their sake, for the sake of your friends,
preserve it."

"And may I rank Mrs. Rooksby among those friends, who are interested in my
safety?"

"Do you doubt it Kingly? who is there on earth so dear?" -- I paused -- I
recollected I was a wife -- I was a mother! -- The glow of self-reproach,
crimsoned my face. He sunk on his knees before me.

"Oh! most adored of womankind! am I still dear to thy heart? -- Speak! finish
the blessed sentence! say you still love me! -- and I will live in the sweet
hope that some happy moment may arrive, when every barrier will be removed!" --
He pressed my hands to his bosom: my head sunk upon his shoulder and my tears
flowed without restraint. Oh, my Celia! let the prude, the rigidly virtuous
blame me: the affection of my heart at that moment triumphed! I looked back to
the time when to love him was no crime! the felicity I might, have enjoyed in
his society arose to my view! I felt, that spite of all resistance, I still
loved him, and was still ardently beloved -- but at the same moment, I
remembered I could never be his. --

"Believe me," said I, "my heart has never wandered."

"Ten thousand thanks!" cried he, wildly kissing my hands. At that moment the
door opened and Rooksby entered. To describe the scene that ensued would be
impossible. I felt I had been to blame -- I dared not assert my innocence,
though I had forgotten myself but for a moment. -- "Detested villian," said
he," darting a fierce look at Kingly; "and you prevaricating wretch, where now
is your boasted virtue?" -- He at the same time seized me rudely by the arm:
Kingly interposed -- "Dare not to treat your wife injuriously -- she is an
angel."

"An angel of darkness, I believe," said he, contemptuously, "but I shall
expect to settle this matter in another place."

"Rooksby," said Kingly, with an air of dignity, "you are the husband of Meriel
Howard. I believe you do not doubt my courage: but worlds should not tempt me
to lift my hand against your life."

"Base subterfuge -- cowardly villain!" -- cried the enraged Rooksby, and
struck him. I saw no more. Sense forsook me and when I recovered, I found they
had left the house together. I am dreadfully agitated: Six hours have I past in
the most agonizing suspense; during which time, I have at intervals endeavored
to compose my perturbed spirits by writing: -- But, alas! I can no longer
proceed. Interested in the fate of both, should they fight, I am destined to be
unhappy.

Rooksby is returned -- Kingly is dangerously wounded, and in a few hours my
husband sets off for Italy. I return to England with my child; but Susan Mossop
forsakes me in my distress and goes to Clara, where ruin and infamy, I fear,
will soon overtake her. I shall write no more on this side the channel. Heaven
grant that Kingly may recover, and Rooksby awaken to a sense of his errors.
Then may the pale messenger of peace beckon me from this vale of sorrow to that
blessed mansion, where the tear shall cease to flow, and the heart be eased of
its anguish.

MERIEL.

LETTER LVII. MERIEL to CELIA.
Glamorganshire, August 27 th, 1784.
THE hasty scrawl I wrote on my first arrival in England, Does not appear.
informed you of my safety; but there are many other things you no doubt wish
to know, as you must have been surprised at my long silence. A variety of
incidents have contributed to make me appear neglectful of my friend; but they
are now all past, and I am settled in a little neat retreat far from the busy
scenes of life, where my chief occupation is the care of my sweet girl. I think
my Celia, after buffeting as I have done the waves of adversity, the calm
serenity of my little dwelling diffuses a degree of comfort over my heart, to
which it has long been a stranger.

On my arrival in England, I went immediately to our house in Harley-Street,
where I spent a week in the most torturing suspense expecting every day to hear
of Kingly's death, as I had desired a gentleman in Paris to inform me of that
event immediately, if it should happen, or in case of his recovery, to let me
know when he was out of danger. My dear Amelia came to me the day after my
arrival and every tender attention, which friendship could bestow, I
experienced from her and Captain Onslow. At length the long expected letter
arrived and I read, to my surprise and joy, that Kingly was in a fair way of
recovery. This was an infinite relief to my mind, and I began to regain some
degree of composure, which was only interrupted by the idea of parting with my
friend Mrs. Onslow, who was on the point of accompanying her husband to India;
but the privation of her society was an event I was prepared to expect from the
day of her marriage; I lamented it in silence, and only congratulated the dear
woman on the felicitous prospects that seemed to await her, without damping her
spirits by a mention of my sorrows of which her departure from England was not
the least.

She had not been gone above a month, when I was alarmed and terrified by an
execution coming into the house, and on enquiring into my husband's affairs,
learned that his folly and Clara's profligacy had involved him in irretrievable
embarrassments; that he had mortgaged or sold almost all his property and could
not command a thousand pounds clear in the world, except the estates which had
been settled on me at my marriage and the small one in Glamorganshire, which he
had presented to me previous to our union. I consulted with Mr. le Sage, a
particular friend of Rooksby's whether any thing could be done to relieve him,
and offered to cancel my marriage settlement; but of this he would not hear.
However I determined to retrench every superfluous expense in my housekeeping,
to discharge my servants and lay down my carriage. Having made this resolution,
I instantly set about the execution of it, called in all my accounts and paid
to the utmost of my power every thing due, I then told Mr. le Sage that I
should leave London and did not wish my place of residence to be known to many
of my acquaintance; but that I should esteem it a favor if he would inform me,
whenever he heard of Rooksby, and forward to me any letters that might come
from the continent. I then with only two servants set forward for
Glamorganshire. I found the journey very fatiguing especially when I drew near
its conclusion. My income was now very confined yet I thought two hundred a
year would be a sufficient support for myself and child with economy, and would
be a certain refuge for her, whenever I should be no more. As to my marriage
settlement I did not consider it as my own, but held it merely with a view of
being serviceable to my husband in any future emergency. Do not think, my dear
Celia, I mean to insinuate that affection for Rooksby led me to act thus. No,
that had long been extinct, gratitude had at one time awakened in my bosom an
affection pure and tender, if not ardent, but his conduct since has entirely
extinguished it, and whatever I do now proceeds from a motive of duty, and a
consciousness of right. He is the father of my child. He is the man I have
solemnly promised to prefer to all his sex. Oh! Celia! what an awful state is
marriage and yet how thoughtlessly do many rush into it. How ought we to
reflect before we take a promise it may not be in our power to keep. While I
live I hope my actions will ever be the result of principle, and that principle
rectitude. Let me perform my duty cheerfully, and leave the event to heaven.
But I am wandering. When I drew near the house which stands on my little farm,
I was shocked to see how very desolate it appeared, it had been untenanted two
years and only a young man and his mother lived in one part of it; the one
looked after the farm; and the other milked the cows, made the butter and sent
it to market. Part of the garden was cultivated but the largest half was
overrun with weeds. Rooksby had not seen it for seven years past, and in that
time it had been sadly neglected, so that though its original value had been
two hundred pounds per year, it did not now produce half that sum. A cold
chillness seized my spirits as we drove up to the gate; the woman had been
taught to expect me for I wrote to the young man, that a couple of bed-rooms
might be prepared and well aired; the coach stopped, the door was opened and
from the house come -- judge who, my dear Celia. Why no other than my dear old
nurse, Deborah Ellis. I do really believe, I screamed with joy when I saw her.
She, poor old soul, had no remembrance of me; but stood curtsying, and fearing
my ladyship was very much fatigued. I followed her into the house -- a small
parlour wore the appearance of comfort; a table was covered with a clean coarse
cloth, and in a few moments Deborah brought in a couple of boiled chickens, a
bottle of current wine, and every other appurtenance for dinner. I could not
now withhold from discovering myself: but stopping her as she was about to
leave the room, "Deborah," said I," have you forgot me Deborah." A silent look
of enquiry and surprise was her only reply. "Surely," said I, "you must
remember your poor little Meriel. -- "Meriel madam! what my dear Miss Meriel
Howard?" -- "Yes Deborah, your own Meriel, pray speak to me, I am Meriel
Howard." -- She laid her hand on my arm and looking earnestly in my face the
large drops of joy chased each other down her aged countenance. --

"I think you are like her," said she, "but you are altered, you did not used
to be so thin nor so pale." Then clasping me in her arms she continued, "I know
you now, for well I remember you was the child of affliction. --

I then told her in as concise a manner as possible every occurrence that had
passed since my removal to London, still carefully concealing every thing that
might lead to the subject of my leaving so abruptly Woodbine cott, and the
unhappy consequences that preceded it. But I can plainly discover she too well
guesses the cause of that elopement. -- She comforted and consoled me under my
present circumstances, and declared she would never again be separated from me.
I learnt from her, that the mother of the young man who managed the farm, was
her sister, that she was lately dead, and that she herself had come by her
nephew's desire to get the rooms ready for his lady's coming; but she had, no
thought of finding in that lady the dear little girl, whom she had nursed, and
loved like a child of her own.

You will readily imagine, my dear Celia, that the presence of Deborah greatly
contributed to my comfort. I soon got settled, discharged my man servant, whom
I had only engaged to accompany me on my journey, and with Deborah and Lucy, a
young woman whom I had engaged to wait on myself and attend Clementina, I
entered on an entire new way of life; and believe me, when I say, it is by far
the most comfortable I have experienced for many years. Colin, Deborah's
nephew, superintends the farm, which I flatter myself, will soon be in a
flourishing state. My old fashioned casements are overun with jesmine and
honey-suckle, and before my door, are a variety of roses, pinks,
sweet-williams, and other flowers, which, though common are not less sweet,
than the rare and expensive exotics that flourish in the green-houses of the
first noblemen in England. My parlour and dining room are ormamented with pots
of myrtle, geranium, mignionet, and balm of giliad; the furniture consisting
only of plain oak tables and neat matted chairs. My bed chamber and that of my
child, is furnished with while dimity, but made as plain as possible. Before I
left London, I went to see Kingly's two children. They are in perfect health,
and placed where I think they will meet with every tenderness and attention. I
engaged the lady under whose care they are placed, to write frequently and
inform me of their welfare; for should illness attack them, I should not
hesitate a moment to fly to their assistance. The world might perhaps, blame
me, yet surely, my Celia, the world must be more unfeeling than I have even yet
found it, should the conduct of a woman incur its censure, who having a child
of her own, loves and compassionates those who are deprived of a mother's
tenderness.

In this retreat then, my friend, I hope to pass some few years in
tranquillity. Even if Rooksby returns to England, he will be accompanied by
Clara and I should be only thought a troublesome intruder; therefore, unless he
requires it, I will not leave my retirement. Could I be of any service to ward
off any impending misfortune, or comfort him under affliction; should a
declining state of health require the kind attention of a nurse, then will I
fly on the wings of duty, and prove myself a wife and friend. But alas! I fear
he may perhaps even quit the world without my either seeing him or knowing
where he is; for he has not wrote to me since we parted at Paris, and knowing
as I do his impetuous temper, I am sensible, especially connected as he is with
such a woman as Clara, he may be drawn into dangerous quarrels. But I grow
tedious on this subject, which is ever uppermost in my thoughts, and cruel as
he has behaved to me, I daily offer up a prayer for his safety. Nay, sometimes
I fear, least I have not loved him as I ought. Perhaps love so ardent as his,
was quick sighted and could discover the difference between passion and
friendship: yet, from the first of our acquaintance, I never attempted to
deceive him or feign a tenderness I could not feel. Clara, I am certain has
been the chief and only cause of alienating his affection from me. -- I
remember when I first knew her as Mrs. Moreton at Kensington, I told her in the
unsuspected openness of my heart every circumstance of my my life, my sincere
attachment to Rainsforth, my misfortunes, my rash and imprudent step to relieve
my mother. These perhaps, with aggravated circumstances have been repeated to
Rooksby, and he has imputed my union with him to interested motives. Nay, he
might even think the reluctance I showed to it at first was the effect of art.
-- These reflections often lead me to think more favorably of his conduct than
perhaps others will say it deserves. While I ever behaved to him in one uniform
manner, tender, attentive, but calm and serene. Clara has no doubt affected the
most impetuous passion and by his means has gained that ascendency over him
which I greatly fear will end but in his total ruin or death.

August29 th.

I have just received a letter from Kingly. He is going on a three years
station to America. May the God of Battles defend him. He had heard of
Rooksby's misfortunes and sent me a letter of credit on his banker; but of this
no necessity whatever, should tempt me to avail myself. No, Celia, I feel my
heart too much oppressed already with the weight of obligation. I am already
but too apt to make comparisons of what is, and what might have been my fate,
and this shall be the last time I will indulge myself in writing of him to you.
Speak of him, I cannot, as no person here knows him; and I will endeavor not
to think of him, for when I remember that there is such a man, I must also
remember that it was he first taught my heart affection, it was he who saved my
life almost at the expense of his own, and that possessed as he is of every
amiable quality, he is unhappy. -- Oh! human nature, how weak thou art! -- Poor
unstable beings that we are, conscious of our errors, we suffer reason to take
the reins for a moment, and renounce them! But, scarce has the renunciation
past our lips, perhaps in the very instant of self applause, some trifling
circumstance will awaken the feelings of our hearts, and we, imperceptibly,
return to those very follies, the remembrance of which, had covered us with
confusion! --

Adieu! -- dear Celia -- remember me in your pious oraisons, and continue to
let me hear from you. I shall write, but my letter will contain only the
insipid detail of what passes at my solitaty habitation, or the, perhaps, not
less insipid encomiums a fond mother will bestow in enumerating the growing
perfections of a darling child. -- Oh! may that child live to be my comforter.
I will hide her from the world, and all its allurements: So, may she never!
never! feel its excruciating pains! -- I will make my will, Celia, and leave
this idol of my soul to your care, in case it should please Heaven to deprive
her of her mother. You, I know, will teach her that in the bosom of retirement,
she alone can find peace. Oh how blessed the heart whose sensibility has never
been awakened, who, though dead to all the joys of love or friendship, feels
not the pang of disappointment, or the piercing sting of ingratitude! -- Once
more, Adieu! -- May Heaven ever bless you.

MERIEL.

Between this letter and the next there are several omitted, which Mrs. Rooksby
wrote to her friend during her residence in the country, where she continued
four years, unnoticed by her husband and forgotten by a world, where her
virtues had never been esteemed as they deserved. As these letters contain
nothing material it was not judged necessary to print them. Mr. Rooksby's
return to England called her again into the busy scenes of life, and as her
distressing situations are most feelingly described by her own pathetic pen --
we here again take up the correspondence.

LETTER LVIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, Dec. 13 th, 1788.
HAVE you never heard, my dear Celia, that mariners, who are accustomed to the
vicissitudes of the unstable element, never experience a long succession of
calm serene weather, but they hold themselves prepared for a heavy storm. The
sea is deceitful and the inexperienced sailor may be lost ever he is aware of
danger. This has been my case. Lulled into security by the calm I had been
allowed to enjoy I fondly flattered myself that I should sink quietly into
oblivion, forgetting and forgotten by the world. The accounts I heard of my
husband were vague and improbable. I was at a loss to think how he subsisted. I
was told he had sunk into the detested character of a sharper and gambler. He
never wrote to me, never enquired for me; nay, I was once informed that he had
spread a report of my death. A few days after my last to you as I was
instructing my little darling in the first rudiment of the English language, a
letter was brought me which I enclose for your perusal.

MR. LE SAGE to MRS. ROOKSBY.
MADAM,
IT is with infinite regret I take up my pen to inform you of what I am
sensible will give you the most lively affliction and disturb that
tranquillity, which through the exertions of your own good sense you have for
some time enjoyed.

Mr. Rooksby is in England. He arrived at my house last night extremely ill
both in body and mind; he informed me in a few almost incoherent words, that he
had killed a man at Brussels, where he has resided for some time, that in the
fray he met with a slight wound in his shoulder, which had never been properly
dressed, as his servant had hurried him to England with the utmost rapidity,
and that he himself was unwilling to stop after crossing the channel till he
arrived in London.

I found he was very much fatigued, and from the agitation of his spirits and
anguish of the wound, very feverish. We persuaded him to go to bed and sent for
a surgeon, who examined the wound and pronounced it slight; but in a bad way
from being neglected. He was very restless all night, and toward morning I
thought rather wild in his discourse, I asked him if I should send for you, --
"send for who" said he, raising himself hastily, for "Mrs. Rooksby? for which
of them," said he, wildly "I have two wives." -- I thought this was a certain
indication of delirium and forbore to answer him, but he caught hold of my hand
and obliging me to sit down thus continued, "if you mean Meriel, I have injured
her too much to expect she will come, and as to Harriet, or Clara -- Oh! do not
tell Clara where I am!" -- He then appeared violently agitated and soon after
raved in a very incoherent manner. I thought, madam, it was necessary you
should be informed of his unhappy situation, and therefore send an express off
with this immediately, requesting you will set off for town as quick as
possible; your presence may in some measure calm his perturbed spirits, and be
the means of a recovery, which I believe the Physician considers at present
very doubtful. Fearing you might not be accommodated with cash for so long a
journey, I have taken the liberty of enclosing a fifty pound note, which you
can repay at your own convenience.

I am Madam, with great respect, your humble servant, EDWARD LE SAGE.
Welbeck Street, Sept. 9 th, 1788.

MERIEL, IN CONTINUATION.
YOU will readily believe, that when the shock my spirits had received was a
little subsided, I sat about hasty preparations for my journey: I took Lucy
with me and left Clementina in the care of Deborah. I made but (...) stoppages
on the road, taking but little refreshment, and no rest till I arrived in town.
Anxiety kept me up, nor was I sensible of the fatigue I had undergone: -- But
when I alighted in Welbeck Street, and attempted to walk up stairs, I found the
exertion was beyond my strength, and I sunk almost insensible on the landing
place. Mr. Le Sage was very attentive and friendly, as was also his amiable
daughter; and by their kindness I soon found myself able to enquire after poor
Rooksby. They told me he was better, that he knew I was expected, and, that he
was impatient to see me. I rallied my spirits, and having at the request of my
kind host taken a glass of wine, I proceeded to the sick chamber. I approached
the bed cautiously. -- Good Heavens! -- what havoc has intemperance and
sickness made in his person? How little should I have known him for the
blooming elegant Clement Rooksby, whom only seven years before I had accepted
as my husband. Pale, emaciated, and haggard was his countenance; his words so
weak they could not be understood. He fixed his eyes for an instant on me; his
lips moved, he stretched one hand out toward me and with the other covered his
face. I took the offered hand; compassion overpowered resentment; I raised it
to my lips and wet it with my tears.

"Oh! thou dear generous woman," said he saintly, "I have not deserved this
tenderness -- I am a wretch, unworthy of your notice: but you are an angel of
mercy come to whisper pardon to my soul that I may die in peace."

"You will live many years yet," said I, "many years in comfort and health."

"Never," said he, eagerly, "I do not wish to live. Health may return: but my
heart will never know peace nor joy again; therefore. 'twere well, if it were
cold and motionless. But, oh! my beloved -- I do not deserve to live and I am
afraid to die!"

Here the nurse interposed, and I was forced to leave him; for while I stayed,
he persisted in talking to me, which irritated the disorder. I had not left him
long, when he sent to know if I had brought Clementina with me; and seemed
greatly disappointed when he found I had not. His anxiety of see the child,
pleased me, and tempted me to write to Deborah to come with her to town
immediately. The tender assiduity, which inclination prompted me to show my
poor Rooksby, accelerated his recovery and in about six weeks I had the
pleasure of seeing him able to bear a removal to a small house we had taken at
Pimlico. I had carefully avoided suffering him to dwell on past disagreeable
circumstances and endeavored by every means I could devise, to direct the
melancholy I saw daily increasing; but my attempts were vain, and indeed had I
known the real source of that melancholy, my own heart would have been equally
oppressed.

We had been in our new habitation, but a fortnight, when one morning as we
were at breakfast; two men entered and arrested Rooksby for a debt of five
thousand pounds. which he told me was a gaming debt, and the same which had
involved him in the unlucky quarrel at Brussels as he suspected the person who
won it of him, did not win it fairly. I cannot tell you what I felt. Weak and
low as he was, it was death to see him conveyed to a prison, yet that I knew
must be the inevitable consequence of the arrest, as I had no means to
extricate him from that and several others of a similar nature, for which he
had been draw in to give his note. With a heart almost breaking I (...) him
depart, and then immediately sent for a lawyer, whom I determined to invest
with power to sell the little property we possessed, I did not consult Mr. Le
Sage. I knew his cold Philosophy would strongly oppose my giving up my
settlements. Yet sure, my dear Celia, I should have been wrong to hesitate a
moment, or out of a pretended care for the future welfare of my child to suffer
her father oppressed with sickness and tortured by remorse, forsaken by those
gay triflers, who once called themselves his friends, to waste the remainder of
his wretched life in a prison.

"When I had given every proper direction for the raising what money we could,
and endeavoring to bring the unjust holders of his notes to some composition,
I visited him in his sad abode and endeavored to cheer and comfort him. That
duty fulfilled, I returned to my solitary home and taking my dear girl on my
lap gave a free vent to tears which flowed from real anguish of heart.

Deborah brought in my tea. She shut the windows, stirred the fire and twice
attempted to speak; but the honest creature's own feelings were too acute to
permit her to comfort me.

My poor Clementina, from sympathy had laid her dear head on my bosom and mixed
her tears with mine "Mamma is sick, Deborah," said she. Deborah took her
silently from me, wiped off the tears that trickled down her innocent face;
once more attempted to speak, but unable to articulate turned hastily from me
and wept aloud. How long this scene of mute sorrow would have continued I know
not; but we were aroused from it by a coach (...) and a loud rap at the door. I
trembled, I knew not why; I wished not to see any visitors, yet had not
presence of mind to forbid any one being admitted, and before I could compose
my countenance or wipe away the traces of sorrow from my face the door opened
and a most lovely young woman entered. Her dress was second mourning, neat in
the extreme and she was visibly pregnant. Her looks were characteristic of
modesty and truth. Her manners at once attractive and commanding, such as she
appeared to me at that moment, fancy now represents her to my mind, and I find,
sorrowful as my heart is, it has yet a vulnerable part that feels for her
afflictions.

She curtsyed and with a look and voice humility entreated pardon for the
intrusion, she had hoped to have found Mr. Rooksby at home. "He will not be at
home tonight madam," said I, as I entreated her to be seated, "but if you will
favor me with your commands I will serve you to the utmost of my power."

"Pardon me, madam," said she, "commands are not for the unfortunate, I came
not to command but entreat. -- To entreat Mr Rooksby will call to his
rememberance an unhappy woman, who deprived of his friendship must be forever
lost."

"If you mean Mrs. Millar, madam," said I with some surprise. "I am astonished
she could employ so respectable a person on so very improper a message."

"Alas! madam I do not know Mrs. Millar, I have indeed heard of her and that
she had used Mr. Rooksby extremely ill, but it is not for her I would plead, it
is for myself."

"Yourself," cried I, in breathless agitation, "Does he owe you money."

"Oh no! no! he owes me succor and support, I am his wife! and he has forsaken
me." I believe the wildness of my looks terrified her; for she caught hold of
my hand and thus proceeded. -- "Dear madam, do not be angry, you perhaps are
his sister, you blame the unequal alliance. I was poor, madam; but indeed, I
will never disgrace the name he has honored me with."

She might have proceeded longer without interruption. A sudden stupefaction
seemed to deprive me of sense or feeling. This agravation of my calamities was
more than I could bear, and nature sunk under the shock. She was alarmed and
hastily rung the bell. The entrance of Deborah and the child awakened me to
sensibility, and the tears which the dreadful discovery I had just made had
suspended, now gushed forth afresh. I gave them free vent, and thanked heaven
for the relief they gave my heart. When I became a little composed, I reflected
on the sad intelligence I had to communicate to my unfortunate guest. At one
moment I resolved in compassion to her situation to hide the truth from her;
yet on reflection that appeared impossible. My next care was how to break it to
her in the tenderest manner; I invited her to partake my repast, and soothed
her by the kindest attention; yet by degrees hinted to her that all was not as
it should be, that I feared her expectations would be greatly disappointed,
that Rooksby was in trouble, and I would advise her at that time not to attempt
to see him.

"But if he is in affliction, madam, is it not my duty to fly to him, though he
has forsaken me." -- "I fear, my dear, you would meet a shock, should you
attempt to see him. He at present could not with propriety receive you." --
"Could not, -- perhaps you think he would not?" -- "I do not mean so. I never
heard him mention you; but I know there are very forcible reasons against his
receiving you; reasons which make it altogether impossible for you to be with
him. -- Yet do not be alarmed though Mr. Rooksby cannot I will be your friend.

It seemed as at one moment she had comprehended the extent of her misfortune,
for starting hastily from her seat she cried "Oh! I see it all, you, you madam,
are not his sister, you are his wife, and I am undone forever!"

To give a proper force to the scene during the rest of the evening would be
impossible. I detained her with me and in the language of the purest
simplicity, she told a tale that for a moment stole me from my own sorrow, to
lament hers. I have requested her to commit it to writing that I might transmit
it to you. She has complied and bid me tell you if she can save enough from the
wreck of her little fortune to pay her entrance she will come and in your
convent bury her shame and her misfortunes. Oh! my Celia, should she come,
receive her with the kindness of a sister, and strive to alleviate the sorrows
of her heart. She is innocent, unsuspecting, and full of sensibility. Comfort
her then, and think in so doing you are chearing the heart of your

MERIEL.
P. S. I will continue my melancholy tale the next packet. At present neither
my strength or spirits are equal to the task of writing more; besides my adored
Clementina is far from well, and I have also with me Clara's two boys who,
neglected at the school where they were left, had been very ill treated. -- I
have but little for myself, but while that little lasts, the grandchildren of
my revered Mrs. Rooksby, the relations of the sainted Margaret Kingly, shall
share with my own child the morsel kind heaven bestows.



LETTER LIX. MERIEL to CELIA.
December 29 th, 1788.
I RESUME my melancholy narrative, though God knows my heart bleeds at every
vein, and the only consolation I have left, is, that you will pity -- you will
pray for me -- my child -- my beloved -- my only comfort: -- but Heaven's will
be done.

Arrayed in robes of white,
In yonder fields of light
-- She dwells in presence of the eternal king --
Placed on a throne divine;
Round which resplendent orbs of fire
Forever glow -- for ever shine!
Hark! hark! -- methinks I hear her sing,
And with a rapt, a grateful soul, admire
The verlasting joys that round her spring.
She was sweet as the roses that bloom,
And perfume the breath of the May,
But, alas! to my sorrow as soon,
She faded and withered away. --
Bring me lilies that grow in the vale,
And sprigs from the jessamine spray,
They are sweet -- though they are sickly and pale --
She was fairer and sweeter than they.
Her soul like the lily was pure,
Like the Jessamine fair to the eye,
Was her form -- but, alas! when I though it her secure,
'Twas decreed she should sicken and die! --
And now in the cold -- cold -- grave she lies --
No more she glads my heart, or chears my eyes.
But I Will rise with the morn!
To visit the turf
That over the blessed seraph is spread;
Whilst I pluck from the earth
Nettle, thistle or thorn!
That unknowing her worth
May, spring over her innocent head.
For in her breast, no boisterous passion dwelt --
She never envy knew; or malice felt.
But pure as angels -- from this world she fled
To yonder realms! so exquisitely fair --
She sleeps -- the cherub sleeps -- she is not dead!
She will awake to joys eternal there.
And that we may all awake there, is my earnest prayer. Poor Clementina! -- I
laid her by the side of my dear mother. Oh, Celia! the one was not more
innocent, more worthy a place in the mansions of the blessed, than was the other:
-- I am poor! Celia -- very poor! -- there is no monument: -- no, not even a
stone, to tell where their beloved ashes repose -- but sacred be the dust that
covers them! They who knew their worth, will revere the spot where they rest --
and none who love their memories, as I do, will pass it without a tear! --

I took up my pen to write: I know not why -- for I have nothing to say -- only
that this is a sad -- very sad world to live in. -- For if we love any thing we
are sure to lose it. God forgive me, I often complain, when I have no right to
do so -- for we were all born to suffer. -- Oh! my dear Celia, I wish you more
patience that I have: for I am very impatient -- sadly impatient: -- but then
indeed I am very -- very -- wretched! --

LETTER LX. FREDERIC KINGLY, ESQUIRE. to COL. ONSLOW.
London, Jan. 20 th, 1789.
I ARRIVED in England, dear Onslow, just in time to administer relief to the
most amiable, most lovely of her sex. When I went to visit my dear boys, I
enquired when they had seen Mrs. Rooksby. They told me that for some time past
they had neither seen or heard from her. I then repaired to Le Sage, who I knew
was Rooksby's banker. From him I learned that Rooksby was in prison, and the
dear worthy Meriel in distress for even the common necessaries of life. Her
child, her beloved Clementina had been ill with the measles, and was even then
in the utmost danger from a disorder which had settled on her lungs. I hastened
to seek her out, and found her, Onslow, in a small lodging up three pair of
stairs, in the vicinity of the King's bench prison, where her unworthy husband
was confined. When I entered the room, she was kneeling by the bedside, her
face, her hands, elevated toward that Heaven whose mercy she supplicated in
behalf of her dying child. Beside her knelt two lovely interesting boys, whom I
afterward learned were the children Rooksby had by Clara. I spoke to her. She
took but little notice of me, for the feelings of a mother had absorbed every
other. She signed for me to sit down, and pointing to her daughter looked
unutterable anguish. I enquired whether she had proper advice and assistance;
her answer cut me to the heart. She had not the means to procure proper medical
advice! -- Every thing of value had been disposed of to support her husband. --
I did not remain long with this dear suffering angel! -- But sent a Physician
and a nurse to her, telling the latter, I would defray every expense -- for
will you believe it, Onslow, the dear creature, though reduced to the utmost
distress, had never availed herself of the letter of credit I sent her previous
to my departure from England. On the third day after this arrangement, I called
to enquire how she was and found her sweet little girl had just breathed her
last. That was not a time to offer consolation. I took the two boys from her,
and gave orders for the funeral. She had a very decent woman with her, whom she
called Deborah, and who I saw was both respectful and affectionate in her
behavior. I thought my company at that time might be more intrusive than
welcome; besides I was sensible the world was ever ready to censure an unhappy
woman, who in distress met with friendship, however disinterested from our sex.
I therefore determined to wait till the funeral was over, before I attempted to
see my dear afflicted Meriel; but on the very evening that the child was
buried, I received a message from Deborah, saying her mistress was extremely
ill, and she wished I would come to her immediately. I had been told that my
adored girl had once before from the effect of a very heavy affliction, lost
her senses for some days -- (though what that affliction was, I never learned.)
-- But from this intelligence, I was prepared to find the same misfortune had
befallen her. I was not deceived. She was writing when I entered the room, to a
Miss Shelburne, with whom she spent the early part of her life in a convent at
Bologne, such a letter, Onslow, as would melt the most obdurate heart. I waited
till she voluntarily resigned her pen, which she soon did, when folding her
letter and speaking to me, as though I was her servant she bade me make haste
with it to the Post or I should be too late. It was by stratagem I got her to
accompany me home, where I provided medical and other assistance. Deborah has
faithfully attended her, and I am told she is now in a fair way of recovery,
though her senses are still wandering. -- During her confinement I have taken
care that Rooksby should want for nothing; because I believe it is the first
wish of the dear creature's heart. But I cannot bring myself to see or converse
with a man, who has reduced so noble a mind as Meriel Howard's to insanity; for
sure I am, her mental faculties must have been greatly weakened by prior
afflictions or she would not so powerfully have felt the loss of her child. Her
pious soul, if in the unimpaired use of her reason, would have severely felt
the privation but still submitted with patience. --

Deborah sends for me. May it be good tidings from her, who is all in all to
me, and who though the wife of another, possesses my tenderest affection. Blame
me not, my right was prior to his, and believe me my affection is pure as the
soul of her who inspires it.

She is restored to reason, thanks be to heaven for it, I have not yet seen
her, nor does she know in whose house she is; but I am all joy at the fair
prospect of her returning health. Tell your lovely amiable wife that every
exertion necessary for the restoration of her friend shall be used, and that I
hope my next letter will inform you of her perfect recovery. God bless you. May
I see my dear Meriel in health before I am ordered again to leave England and I
shall go without regret. Adieu,

Yours in friendship, F. KINGLY.

LETTER LXI. MERIEL to CELIA.
London, March 16 th, 1789.
ONCE more snatched from death, or what is to a thinking mind far worse, a
total deprivation of reason; I have next to an almighty providence, to render
thanks and bless the hand of Kingly. Why am I doomed to be thus obliged, where
I have no power to return the obligation but by grateful prayers and tears; I
have some faint recollection of having wrote you a letter after the death of my
beloved Clementina; but I fear it was very incoherent and hardly intelligible;
but I will now endeavor to go back to the period when the poor young creature
whom my husband had so vilely deceived came to my house at Pimlico. I resolved
to prevent her, if possible, from seeing Rooksby, as I knew it would only
irritate his sufferings, without in the least alleviating her own; I therefore
prevailed on her to remain with me till I could form some plan that might be of
use to her; and as I every day expected Kingly in England, I thought he might
render himself of service to her, without subjecting her to the unjust
censures, which would be cast on me should I accept favors from his hands.

My time passed wretched enough for three weeks. At the end of that time I
perceived that Harriet, which was the name of my Protegee appeared somewhat
more cheerful and on enquiring the cause, she informed me that she was certain
she had seen her mother's brother pass our house frequently, that she had
inquired his name and learned it was the same she had thought it to be, that he
lived in the neighborhood and was a wealthy widower without children. From
this information Harriet had conceived the idea of writing to him and
faithfully explaining her unhappy circumstances. She showed me the copy of a
letter she had prepared, which as it contained the chief events of her life, I
requested leave to send to you. I enclose it, and as it is necessary you should
read it before I proceed I shall here break off.

LETTER LXII. [INCLOSED IN THE FOREGOING.] HARRIET VENABLES TO GEORGE PREVOTT,
ESQUIRE.
December 24 th, 1788.
PERHAPS, my dear and honored uncle will be both surprised and offended to
receive a letter from one whom no doubt he has heard, conducted herself in a
manner that has thrown an odium on her family, I have been to blame, greatly to
blame, but not so very culpable as you and perhaps all the world imagine.

I am fully sensible of the many disadvantages I labor under, while addressing
you, yet when I remember that out of a numerous family you were the only one,
who showed a friendship for my poor mother when her union with my father so
highly offended all. When I recollect the many instances of your affection I
have myself witnessed when I was but a child, I cannot but hope you will not
turn away from the daughter of that once loved sister. -- Oh! why was I so
early deprived of her maternal affection, or why did not the same stroke that
snatched her from the world take also her unhappy daughter; for surely of all
the forlorn beings the world contains a girl deprived of her mother is the most
pitiable. She may, it is true, meet with relations or friends that will in some
measure supply her place, but alas! they will not have the watchful care, the
fond solicitude of a mother. Had I never lost that dear parent I should not
have been the unfortunate creature I am; for there is a sort of talismanic
virtue in the very name of mother, that while it fills our hearts with
sensations undescribably delightful, is tempered with such awe, such fear of
giving pain or incurring displeasure, that it must be a very insensible
daughter who would wilfully do either.

My dear father was the tenderest, the fondest of parents, and strained, to the
utmost, his little income, to procure for me an education befitting a
gentlewoman. He placed me as a boarder in a convent near Abbeville, his place
of residence, that he might keep a watchful eye upon my conduct; for the honor
of his family and that of my mother's were ever dear to his heart, and he often
said that he would sooner see me in my coffin, whilst a child, than have me
live to fully the name I bore and the family I sprung from. My life passed in
uninterrupted tranquillity, 'till I was seventeen, at which period a
Mademoiselle St. Far was going to leave the convent and marry. She had ever
conceived a great esteem for me, was five years older than myself and had
resided in the convent from the death of her father, which happened when she
was very young. She was a woman of an enlightened understanding, lovely in her
person and elegant in her manners. She ever preserved that dignity, which
renders our sex respectable, yet mixed it with such charming vivacity, such
sprightly wit and unaffected good humor that she at once commanded respect and
conciliated affection. I have been thus minute in my description of
Mademoiselle St. Far, that you might not be surprised at my father's ready
compliance with a request she made, that I should accompany her to Brussels,
and remain with her during the winter season. Young and volatile my heart
bounded at the prospect of the liberty and pleasure I hoped to enjoy under her
protection. Her husband Monsieur Melville was a gallant man, and from the day
of their marriage, promoted every entertainment that he imagined could give
pleasure to a young beautiful woman, just emerged from the gloom of a convent.
But Madame Melville was a woman of too much discernment to suffer dissipation
and folly to have a moments ascendency over her mind. After sharing in the
amusements of Brussels a few weeks, she expressed a wish of living in a more
domestic manner, and retired to an elegant chatheaux, which her husband
possessed on the banks of the Seine. Thither I accompanied her: but, alas! sir,
my weak mind had been fascinated with the pleasures of the gay world, and I had
lost all taste for retirement, and rational society. The account in some
measure for this change I must heartily inform you, that during my stay at
Brussels I had formed an acquaintance with an English gentleman of the name of
Rooksby. -- He was a man of fortune, lived in an expensive style, and (I blush
while I own it,) at that very time lived publicly with a woman of an abandoned
character.

But, he had paid me numberless attentions and a profusion of compliments, so
fascinating to the inxeperienced female heart, that I fancied, (fatal mistake!)
had he an affectionate wife, whom he loved; she might reclaim him from the
follies of which he seemed so fond. He had often professed a passion for me,
but not openly, and there my errors commenced; for at his request I forbore to
mention his pretensions of Monsieur or Madame Melville. That lady soon
discovered the alteration in my spirits, after my leaving Brussels, and
inquired into the cause. I evaded her kind questions: and soon after her
brother coming to their chatheaux on a visit brought Rooksby with him. My
chagrin vanished; I was again cheerful and happy. A change so visible could not
escape Madame Melville's penetration; she imagined it might be the attractions
of her brother (who was in every respect her counterpart) which had made an
impression on my heart. With a smile she entreated my confidence; but by the
unembarrassed air with which I answered her interrogations she discovered her
error. The smile was changed to a look of apprehension. "I hope Harriet, said
she, you have not listened to any flighty tales from that young Englishman. I
do not like his character. My brother brought him here from a motive of
friendship to endeavor to detach him from a set of gamblers, who in
combination with a very vile woman, are leading him blindfold to ruin. He is a
very weak young man, and possesses no stability."

After this conversation she kept a very strict eye upon me, and soon
discovered enough to make her think it necessary to send me back to the convent
sooner than she at first intended. Rooksby followed me -- I had not attempted
to conceal from him the sentiments he had inspired me with. We found means to
correspond: he laid a plan for my escape from the convent, I followed his
pernicious councils, and we were privately married; but under a strict
injunction never to divulge our marriage till he should give me leave.
Imagining that obedience to him was now become my first duty, I took a most
solemn oath, never to reveal our union, though by so doing, I could avert the
heaviest misfortune. Gracious Heaven! how little did I suspect the dreadful
calamity, which then hovered over my head? Happy as I was, in having, as I then
thought, secured him to myself, I still felt a considerable alloy from the
reflection that I had acted undutifully to my dear father; that I planted a
dagger in his heart, perhaps incurred his heaviest malediction, yet dared not
sue to him for pardon. Another source of disquiet was, that whenever Mr.
Rooksby was absent for any length of time, I suspected he was with Clara the
woman he had so publicly kept. To divert the melancholy, these fears
occasioned, he proposed going for a few weeks to Paris, and thither I
accompanied him. I had been there but ten days when one night, as I was at the
opera, dressed in the gayest style and in company with a woman to whom he had
introduced me. Just as the performance began, I saw Madame Melville enter a box
opposite to me, led by a gentleman whose face was from me. Judge, my dear sir,
if possible, my emotions, when he turned round to seat himself, I discovered my
father. His pale dejected countenance struck me with horror, an involuntary
shriek escaped me, he raised his eyes, he saw! -- he knew me! -- "Great God!"
said he, clasping his hands, and sunk from the seat in a state of
insensibility. What my feelings were at that moment, I will not, I cannot
pretend to describe; nor can I tell how I got round from the box where I sat to
the one that contained my father. All was confusion; but the distraction of my
brain prevented my attending to any thing, but my parent, whom I saw before me
to all appearance dead! -- And, alas! bitter reflection, murdered by my
ingratitude and disobedience! --

When he began to recover, madame Melville hurried him out of the house, and I
followed them almost unknowingly into the carriage. My father suffered me to
hold his hands in mine, but did not speak to me during the time we were going
to Madame Melville house. When we alighted, I percieved he trembled so he could
scarcely stand. I followed him into a parlour, where he sunk upon a sopha. I
fell on my knees before him. Forgive me, father, dear father, forgive me."

"Harriet," said he, "what am I to think from your appearance. -- tell me, tell
me instantly and without prevarication. -- Are you married?"

"Do not ask me, I cannot answer." -- "Enough," said he, "I understand my
dishonor." -- Oh! my father, will you not pronounce my pardon?

"Yes," said he feebly, "may heaven eternally bless you and forgive you as I do
now." When I heard of your departure from the Convent it was like a bolt of ice
shot through my heart. Oh! child, I have not had a moments peace since; but, if
my pardon can give you comfort, from my soul I pardon you -- But you are
dishonored. Oh! my child, how have you forgot what was due --

He was proceeding; but his voice faultered and his head sunk on my shoulder, I
thought it was a return of his faintness, and shrieked for help. Alas! how
shall I proceed. The horrors of that moment will never be blotted from my
memory. We raised and laid him on the sopha, we strove to revive him; but in
vain. His noble soul had never known dishonor, and the springs of life before
exhausted by sickness and many afflictions gave way at once under the pressure
of a calamity he was not prepared to bear. Oh! sir, when I reflect on that
night, when I remembered it was my folly, viper that I was; that stung him to
the heart, my brain turns round, and only that he forgave me, with his parting
breath, the very idea would deprive me of reason.

Madame Melville suffered me to remain at her house till the last duties ware
paid to his beloved remains; but as my character was now become equivocal, she
forbore ever after to show me any countentnce. I sincerely lamented the
privation of her friendship, and the more as I found it was an example that was
followed by every woman of character with whom she was acquainted.

My situation on that account became extremely painful, and I mentioned to Mr.
Rooksby, my desire of returning to Abbeville, to take possession of the small
patrimony my father had left me. He acquiesced, and we set forward immediately.

Three months, three little months, passed on in tranquillity, when my husband
informed me he had particular business which called him to Brussels, that it
would be impossible for him to return, and he thought it most expedient to sell
off what furniture, etc. we possessed, and to settle at that place. -- Alas! my
dear sir, fond of his society, and having no will but his, I hesitated not to
comply.

At Brussels, a new scene presented itself; a scene which gave me a pain,
impossible to describe! and which no one but a wife who loved as I did can
possibly conceive. -- Mr. Rooksby renewed his connection with a set of gamblers
and swindlers, who live on the follies of the unwary. -- He became their dupe
and in a few months was a very beggar. -- It was one hot afternoon, in the
middle of August last, when overcome by the weight of the atmosphere, and
oppressed by my own reflections, I had retired to an arbor, which terminated
the small space of garden belonging to the house we occupied, and was
endeavoring to divert my sorrow, by the perusal of an English novel, which had
been recommended to my notice. I was deeply interested in the sorrows of the
"Welsh Heiress," (who never having known the pleasures of maternal tenderness,
felt her heart expand toward those whose affection supplied the place of a
mother.) My mind was occupied, my heart softened, the tears stole from my eyes,
but they were tears that flowed from a source so pleasing, I wished not to stop
their course: for while sympathy for poor Anna's distresses awakened my
sensibility, I felt the most exquisite delight in the remembrance that there
was an author, a female author Mrs. Bennett, author of Juvenile Indiscretions,
etc.
, who in conjunction with a Burney and Lee would snatch the British novel from
oblivion, and future ages should with pleasure peruse the productions of her
pen. Pardon me, sir, but with such fervor do I revere those superlatively
happy few, who to a brilliant cultivated understanding, add a fertile natural
genius, an elegant refined taste, and great sensibility, all other subjects are
forgotten, and I am like a rapt enthusiast, all wonder and veneration. But to
return to myself, I was employed in the perusal of the Welsh Heiress, when
Rooksby with a hurried step and embarrassed air entered the arbor: he sat down
beside me, struck his hand against his forehead, and breathed a sigh that
seemed to come from his heart. My dear uncle must have a bad opinion of my
heart, if he thinks fictitious distress could longer engross my thoughts, and
though he had been from me then above a fortnight, yet as I knew he was my
husband -- I also knew it was my duty to receive him on his return with a
smile, and, if possible, alleviate the afflictions which seemed to oppress him.
I threw aside my book and taking his hand inquired the cause of this visible
dejection. He told me he was ruined past redemption, that he had even lost more
than he possessed the means to pay. -- Unexperienced, my heart overflowing with
affection, I endeavored to sooth his sorrows; and to calm the immediate
perturbation of his mind, I put into his hands almost the whole of my worldly
possessions: for I thought the most abject poverty preferable to seeing him
labor under such dejection of spirits. He left me soon after and I, visionary
like, amused myself with the hope of seeing him return (after he had paid his
debts of honor) a true penitent, and that some little might be left from the
wreck of his fortune, on which we might live in decent competence retired from
the world, and yet enjoy all the real blessings of life.

But, alas! sir, these pleasing, delusive hopes lasted but a short time. Night
advanced, and Rooksby did not return? Day after day passed, and I saw him not!
I sent to inquire after him -- he was still with his dissolute companions! -- A
fortnight passed in the horrors of the most torturing suspense -- at the
expiration of which, the following inchorent scrawl was put into my hand.

HARRIET -- I am lost. -- I have killed a man -- I am wounded myself, yet
flying from the hand of justice. -- I am a wretch, a very wretch! and what is
still worse, dear injured Harriet, I am a villain!!! -- Forget me -- for you
will never see me more. --

ROOKSBY.
I know I deserve it, yet do not, dear Harriet, do not, curse me.




The perusal of this horrid billet threw me into a state of insensibility, and
when I recovered the power of thinking, it was too late My husband was set off
for England. I would have followed but a fever occasioned by the agitation of
my spirits, confined me to my bed. Long and doubly tedious were the hours of
sickness, as they prevented my following and even in prison attending him. The
anxiety of mind retarded my recovery, and I felt myself much hurt and neglected
at receiving no tidings from Mr. Rooksby. At one moment, I thought him dead! at
another, languishing on a bed of sickness. At length, I heard by accident, that
he was recovered from the consequence of his wound, and this intelligence in
some measure relieving my anxiety, I began to regain my health, and when I was
able set forward for England. On my arrival in London, I went to a Mr. Le Sage,
whom I had often heard Mr. Rooksby mention was his banker. By him I was
directed to Pimlico. -- But, Oh! my dear sir -- I cannot proceed. -- I am not
his wife! -- There is another a -- prior claim to mine! -- He has a wife --
angelic creature! I am now under her protection. She has held forth to me the
hand of benevolence -- though, much I fear, she has scarcely the means to
support herself, as she told me the other day that she must leave the house she
was then in, and discharge her servants, as her income would afford nothing but
the necessaries of life; yet added she, with a smile of friendly attention,
small as my power is, you shall be welcome to share with me the little I have
left.

Oh! my dear uncle, let me entreat you to extend your kindness toward me. All
I request is means to return to France, and spend the remainder of my days as a
pensioner in a convent, where by a constant course of penitence and prayer I
may in some measure atone for my offenses. -- One thing more. I hardly know how
to write it; but -- a few months will make me a mother. Should this unfortunate
child of affliction prove a girl; with me shall she be buried in the shades of
obscurity: if a boy to your care I must commit him, for alas! I have no means
to support him, and may you, dear sir, teach him to avoid the vices of his
father, and whenever he sees a wretched forsaken woman, to pity and endeavor
to comfort her, in remembrance of the sorrows of his mother. -- In hopes of
your pardon and protection, I beg leave to style myself your

Dutiful Niece. HARRIET VENABLES.

MERIEL, IN CONTINUATION.
IT was not long after this letter was dispatched before Mr. Prevott came and
personally offered to Harriet an asylum in his house. Their meeting was tender
I shared her joys as far as my own unhappy situation would permit, but cordial
as was the offered friendship of her uncle I could perceive he felt, severely
felt, poor Harriet's dishonor. I was greatly relieved by her having found so
able, so proper a protector; for indeed, my dear Celia, I was reduced very low,
and two days after she left me I removed from the house at Pimlico and which we
had taken ready furnished. I discharged my servant and would have persuaded
good Deborah to return to Wales to her friends, offering to pay her expenses
home. But this was attempting an impossibility. She told me I might send her
from my presence, but no power should force her from London. She would remain
near me, nay, she would serve me while she had life. Such a proof of
disinterested fidelity awakened all my gratitude, and from that moment I took
her for my companion, my friend, my adviser, and we removed together to a small
lodging near the King's bench prison, where poor Rooksby was by this time
removed; for his distresses were so complicated and his affairs in such a
distracted state it was impossible to procure his enlargement. Here it was I
first began my letter to you, in which I meant to have included the whole
account of my sad change, but my dear girl sickened with the measles, and after
languishing near a month was taken to eternal bliss. I fear, my beloved Celia,
I behaved in a manner unbecoming a Christian, I did not submit as I ought I
gave way to despair and was punished by the loss of reason, for several weeks.
In this situation Kingly once more stepped forward to preserve and rescue me
from the horrors of a mad house; for to that dreadful state, or perhaps worse
to that of a poor wandering lunatic destitute and forlorn, I might have been
reduced but for his timely interposition. He had me removed to his own
lodgings, attended by the best Physicians, nay, he even extended his
benevolence to my unfortunate husband, whose feelings had been strongly
awakened by the death of his child. But those feelings were soon overcome, and
his heart again become calous. When I first began to recover my recollection,
it was carefully concealed from me where I was. Deborah by degrees informed me
of all that had passed and told me Kingly requested to see me. I was too weak
in mind and body to resist, and for some time I was accustomed to pass an hour
or two with him every day, I saw not the danger, the impropriety of my
situation, till roused from my dream of security by the following circumstance.

I was well enough to leave my apartment for the adjoining room, where I had
dined for the first time with Kingly, who, as he said, to surprise me agreeably
had sent for his dear boys from school, and also Clara's two children, whom he
has taken under his protection. At the first sight of the children my sorrows
all revived and I gave way to a violent burst of tears, which relieved the
oppression that seemed like a cord to be bound round my heart. I wept
plentifully, nor did any one attempt to prevent me. The dear children had all
by degrees drawn nearer to me, and the youngest boy climbing on my lap, wiped
off my tears with his frock, whilst he kissed me and bade me not cry any more.
I know not how it was; but the anguish of my heart gradually subsided. I am not
destitute of comfort said I mentally; these dear children, the friendship of
Kingly, is something yet! how many at this moment, a thousand times more
deserving, are more wretched, more forlorn than I am. During dinner these
reflections occupied my mind. I spoke little, but I felt a degree of serenity
pervade my breast, to which it had long been a stranger. When the desert was
removed, the boys growing rather boisterous in their play were dismissed to
another apartment. Kingly seated himself next me. We were for some moments
silent.

"I hope," said Kingly, "my dear Mrs. Rooksby, you will now soon be able to
reap the benefit of fresh air, and go for a short time into the country. It
will be of great service to you."

"I hope I shall," replied I, "soon be able to go out; for then I can go to
poor Rooksby, for I wish to see him and learn how he is accommodated; I fear he
has been very uncomfortable during my illness." -- "Surely my dear creature,"
said he, fixing his eyes on my face with a look of expressive tenderness,
"surely you cannot mean to return to that man."

"Why not, Mr. Kingly. He certainly wants a friend and comforter under his
present uneasy circumstances." --

"But are not his present calamities the fruit of his own folly; and has he not
behaved in the basest manner to you? has he not forfeited all right --

"Not to my duty and attention," said I, eagerly interrupting him, "if he has
forgot his duty, it is no rule for me to neglect mine."

"But should you leave him, all the world would acquit you."

"Yes Kingly; but I must be acquitted by a higher, a more sacred tribunal than
the world. I seek the approbation of my own conscience, and the continued
protection of a Being; wise! as he is great and merciful." --

"But surely, my dear Meriel, as you have done your duty, nothing more can be
expected from you."

"Yes Kingly, yes while I live, and Rooksby is in existence I know my marriage
vow is in full force; and may I soon be able to fulfill the sacred engagements
I entered into."

"Oh! Meriel you surely love, spite of his errors this ungrateful Rooksby."

"No -- no, -- mistake me not, I mean not to arrogate to myself the merit of a
virtue to which I have no claim. I pity him from my soul, nay would sacrifice
my own peace; to restore his tranquillity; but did I love him; Oh! gracious
heaven, did I love him, I could not live and retain my reason under my present
circumstances."

"Then, why Meriel, why will you sacrifice your own peace, to a chimerical
notion of duty? If you love him not, why return to him: why fly from a man, who
not only loves, but almost adores you? Then stay with me, thou beloved of my
soul, share my fortune and be the friend of my bosom; Rooksby shall enjoy all
the comforts, nay if you require it, all the elegancies of life."

Shall I tell you, my friend, shall I confess that strong as was my sense of
rectitude, I felt my resolution slacken. My treacherous heart even debated
whether I should not stand excused, if I accepted his offer. -- Oh, God! pardon
the weakness of frail humanity, if for a moment, I forgot what was due to the
Deity I served -- the religion I professed. Yes, Celia, I listened, I thought
myself convinced, and had consented to leave the man to whom I had promised
love and obedience to the latest period of our lives.

Kingly, though ardent in his wishes for me to be separated from my husband,
was respectful in his behavior and we passed the evening in a friendly
conversation, which would not have called a blush on the cheek of a brother and
sister. Deborah had during my illness always slept in my apartment. But a few
nights preceding the one I have mentioned, we had prevailed on her to go to
another room and suffer one of Kingly's servants to occupy her place on a
mattress by my bedside.

When I was retired to rest, when I no longer saw the expressive countenance,
or heard the persuasive tongue of Kingly, reflection returned with double
force, and I perceived I was standing on the brink of a precipice, from which
if I receded not in time, I must plunge into everlasting ruin. Weak as I still
was from the effects of my disorder, I resolved to fly, while I had sufficient
reason left to direct me from the dangerous temptations which surrounded me. --
Forsaken, injured by my husband, and under the immediate protection of the man,
who first taught my heart to beat with affection, who had conferred on me
obligations I could never repay, who still loved: -- And, Oh! my dear Celia,
(the glow of confusion covers me as I write it,) who still was beloved by me.

To deliberate a moment; was to be lost, another such an interview as the last,
and I might rush on irretrievable destruction.

The servant who slept in the room with me, wearied by the employments of the
day enjoyed a sound and undisturbed repose -- The clock had struck three, when
convinced of the danger of remaining longer under his roof, I resolved to fly
from Kingly. A candle was always burning in my room: I arose with as little
noise as possible, wrapping myself as warm as I could and tying up a change of
linen in a handkerchief, I glided softly down stairs, and opening the street
door ventured into the street. I knew there were coaches employed in the night
as well as the day, and did not fear but I should soon find one to convey me to
the house where I had lodged, previous to the death of my ever regretted
Clementina, and where I knew I should be received and might remain till the
hour when I could be admitted into the prison to my husband.

You will, perhaps, blame me, for leaving the protection of Kingly, in so
abrupt a manner. Perhaps you will say why not stay till the morning, and then
inform him of my resolution. -- Alas! my friend, I dared not stay. I was
sensible of the weakness of my heart, and had he entreated! had he looked
unhappy! I know it would not have been in my power to persevere.

His lodgings were in Westminster near the park, and I found no stand of
coaches near. Add to this, my weakness and the penetrating keenness of the
night air, made my head swim, and I staggered like a person intoxicated. I was
proceeding as well as I was able toward Westminster bridge, when a cry of
thieves and a watchman's rattle arrested my attention. I was then near the end
of Parliament-street, and before I had time for a moments thought found myself
surrounded by a number of watchmen, constables and other strange looking
people, who one and all, persisted that I was an accomplice with a gang of
thieves, who had, by the assistance of the housekeeper, broke in and robbed a
lady's house in Georgestreet.

I attempted to speak; but had not the power. A cold chillness seized me, and
my limbs failed, though I still retained my senses and felt the horrors of my
situation in their full force! -- Imagine, my dear Celia, for a moment what my
feelings were. I feared my reason would again wander: but it pleased Heaven to
preserve me from that dreadful calamity. They conveyed me without resistance to
the watch-house, where they threw me like a beast upon the floor, imagining my
inanimation to proceed from the effects of liquor. Though unable to speak, I
groaned pitiously and felt the tears gush in torrents from my eyes: but still I
was unnoticed by all, except a young creature who I am sure could not have
counted above sixteen years, and who habited in a white bedgown, a tattered
silk petticoat, and a pair of old satin shoes that would scarcely save her
feet from the ground, sat in a corner of the place near where they had thrown
me down; and as I then verily believed, where I was to end my days. For the
sudden shock that had deprived me of the power of speech and motion seemed like
the stroke of death, and I lifted up my soul to that Power who I thought was
calling me to himself from a world, where from a child, I had experienced
little else but sorrow.

The poor girl, whom I heard them call Peggy, knelt down beside me raised my
head on her knee and put a small glass of warm punch to my mouth, which the
constable had just given her. -- "Let her alone Peggy, said he, she has had
enough already. She is so drunk she can neither speak nor stand. --

"Poor soul," cried Peggy, in an accent of the softest compassion. "She is ill
I can see she is, and may die for want of assistance. Come, continued she,
swallow a drop of this. It may revive you."

Celia, the love of life is so strongly impressed on human nature, that though
bending beneath the weight of almost insupportable afflictions we struggle
still to preserve existence. I swallowed the offered refreshment, Peggy chaffed
my hands and laid my head upon her bosom; my spirits revived, my strength began
to return and in less than half an hour I could articulate my thanks to my
preserver. Till tea the ensuing morning I remained in this miserable place, nor
was I even able to procure the least accommodation for myself or companion in
sorrow; for they had not only taken my bundle from me but even rifled my
pockets of a guinea and a half, which was all that I possessed in the world. At
ten o'clock a coach was called and with several others I was carried to a
justice's for examination; for it was alleged that I was the woman, who had
opened the door to the thieves and that having got what booty I could myself, I
was making off when they stopped me; in evidence of which they produced my
little bundle which contained two shifts a petticoat two muslin handkerchiefs
and a linen gown. The constable also swore that I had more property about me;
but that I had thrown it away when they pursued me and they could find nothing
but a gold watch chain which they had picked up, and which they immediately
produced wrapped in a fine cambrick handkerchief. Judge my surprise, Celia,
when on opening the handkerchief I saw my own watch chain, to which was fixed a
miniature of my departed child set round with pearls, and on which I had
desired Deborah to raise some money, I imagine the faithful creature had
deceived me and raised the money on something of her own -- yet how the chain
could be dropped by me was a mystery, unless as I have since reason to think it
was with the gown I had packed up and might drop from the bundle. During my
examination, a coach stopped at the door and an elderly lady entered. It was
the lady, whose house had been attempted. The moment she saw me she pronounced
me not guilty.

I never saw her before, said she, with visible emotion, and even had she lived
in my house. I could not have suspected her. --

I cannot, my dear Celia, describe this lady to you such as she appeared to me.
There was a mixture of majesty and condescension in her manner, her countenance
beamed benignity, and it appeared a countenance rendered grave by affliction
rather than that by nature. Several other persons were now brought in, who had
been apprehended by other watchmen, and from a variety of evidences I was
acquitted; when I heard those words pass the justice's lips, I was hastily
leaving the place, but a man stopped me and told me I could not go till I had
paid all fees. -- "Indeed sir," said I, in a voice scarcely audible, "I have no
money; that watch chain I think was mine, yet how it came here I know not nor
dare I demand it. Permit me to go and if ever it is in my power" -- "I shall do
no such thing, mistress," said the man, "either pay the fees or stay in our
custody till you can."

I could not answer, but raising my hands and eyes to heaven was returning in
silent agony when the lady advanced and inquired the cause of my new distress.

"And are these your British laws" said she, "that when a person is falsely
accused and their innocence made perfectly appear, are they to be detained from
their families for the paltry consideration of a few shillings?" She then put
her hand in her pocket and presented me with two guineas, at the same time
asking if she could be of any further service to me; I would have thanked her,
but my feelings were too powerful to permit me to speak, she saw my gratitude,
she perfectly comprehended from my looks more than words would convey. -- "You
interest me," said she, "can you not tell me how I may serve you. Oblige me,
madam; make me your friend I will not abuse your confidence; but pardon me, I
am to blame. This is no place for conversation. Do me the favor to wait till I
have finished the disagreeable business that brought me here, and then give me
leave to take you to any place you wish to go to in my carriage." -- I curtsyed
my assent to this humane proposal, for indeed Celia, I was unable to walk, and
could but ill afford to procure a coach. Harrassed as my spirits had been, my
strength was exhausted and I was almost sinking with faintness. When the lady
had ended her business, she desired me to follow her, just as we were stepping
out of the door, poor Peggy who was just released, passed us on the steps. --
"Forgive me, madam," said I, "if I presume to share with this benevolent girl,
the bounty of your hand. She did all in her power last night for me, I fear I
should have perished, but for her humanity." -- I then gave her the remainder
of the guinea I had changed to pay the fees of the office. "God bless you,"
said she, pressing the hand that offered her the money, while the tears started
in her fine blue eyes. "And was she kind to you?" said the lady. I repeated the
circumstance of the preceding night. "Good girl," said she, "have you any
friends?" addressing Peggy.

"Oh! no Madam," I am a poor, guilty, forlorn creature: lost to every thing but
a sense of my own misery."

"So young, and yet accuse yourself of guilt." "Alas Madam, I was involved in
guilt before I knew the value of virtue."

The lady answered not; but giving her a card, bade her call on her in the
afternoon, and she would do something for her.

"And now," said she, as she seated herself in her carriage, "tell me where you
wish to go."

"To the Kings bench prison, madam." "To a prison, good heavens! have you
friends there?"

"My husband, madam, is confined there."

"Have you any children?

"I had, madam, one, a sweet girl: -- but" -- I could not proceed. I turned my
face from her, and we both remained silent for several minutes. --

"I too," said the lady, starting as it were from a deep reverie. "I too, once
had a child -- a girl -- nay, perhaps have still; but for many! many! years,
she has been lost to me."

When we drew near to the end of our little journey, she told me she felt
inclined to be my friend, and if I would do her the favor to call at her house
and point out the means, she would readily exert her utmost abilities to
alleviate the afflictions, which seemed to press so heavily upon me. She then
told me her name was Harcourt and wished me a good morning.

Weak, oppressed, dejected my trembling limbs being scarce able to support me,
I slowly ascended the stairs, which led to the apartment occupied by Rooksby.
The door was opened. I was just entering, but a sight met my eyes that almost
annihilated me. It was Rooksby seated beside his infamous Clara, with tea and
coffee on the table before them. From their own dishabille and the appearance
of the room, I perceived they were but just risen. I know not what I said in
the first moment of surprise, but I remember clasping my forehead hard with
both my hands and exclaiming, "grant me patience heaven." As I ran down stairs,
my brain seemed whirling in perpetual motion and had I not been detained by one
of the keepers of the prison I fear I should have rushed into the street in a
state little short of insanity.

The recollection of what I then suffered is too much for my weak spirits. I
cannot proceed in my narrative. Adieu, my friendly Celia, I am now in a place
of safety and will, when I am able, inform you of every occurrence down to the
present time. Heaven bless you.

MERIEL.

LETTER LXII. FREDERIC KINGLY, ESQUIRE. to COL. ONSLOW.
March 7 th, 1789.
I HARDLY dare take up my pen to write to the worthy Onslow: for I have
rendered myself totally unworty of his friendship. Will you and your amiable
Amelia believe it? No you will think it impossible, that I -- I, who so often
have sworn to protect her, should act in so thoughtless a manner as to drive
the lovely Meriel from my house. Yes, Onslow, she left my house in the night,
unattended and rushed into dangers, of which her delicate mind could form no
idea; and my folly was the cause. I forgot what was due to her honor and my
own, and dared to solicit her to quit her husband and remain with me. Oh! fool,
madman that I was, when I knew the dignity of her mind, to think she would
suffer such a thought to harbor in her bosom for a moment. She once loved me;
-- yes, and with a voice soft as harmony, yet with looks and manners chaste as
Diana, has she lately confessed she still does and ever shall love me. But did
I not know the heart of Meriel Howard. Was I not sensible, that with all her
sexes softness she possessed the firmness and intrepidity of a Spartan matron?
But I am tormenting you with suspense while I am writing an eulogium on her,
with whose virtues you are already well acquainted.

The dear creature had recovered so far as to be able to leave her apartment,
when the conversation passed between (...) which frightened her from the
protection I had vainly hoped would have henceforth sheltered her from all the
ills of life. She had supped with me, and on retiring, wished me a good night
with a look and voice so full of tenderness, that I longed to press her to my
heart: but I forbore and only kissed her hand. Early the next morning, I was
awakened by poor Deborah, who asked me if I knew where her lady was -- for she
was not in her apartment, nor had the servant who slept in her room seen her.
Terrified, least her unfortunate malady should have returned, I hastily arose
and inquired of every person in the house if they had seen her; but to no
purpose. The street door was found unlocked and on searching her apartment her
hat and cloak with a few necessaries were missing. It then rushed into my mind
that her own sensibility and strict sense of rectitude had driven her from my
protection. Where could she go? Her friends or rather those who had once styled
themelves so, had all forsaken her in her misfortunes -- to whom then could she
go? Distracting as the thought was, I concluded she was gone to her base
treacherous husband. Impressed with this idea, I went immediately to the
prison; but she had not been there. I did not attempt to see Rooksby, I could
not have spoken to him with calmness. I returned home almost deprived of
reason, nor had I any tidings of the dear fugitive, till late in the afternoon,
when I received the following note.

MRS. ROOKSBY. to F. KINGLY, ESQUIRE.
YOU are no doubt uneasy; let this calm your fears, I am safe. Reason told me I
must not remain any longer with you. I came to my husband; but something has
occurred, which I cannot now explain, and which makes it impossible for me to
remain with him. We have parted, I believe, forever. -- But I charge you,
Kingly, endeavor not to find me out, -- I wish not to see you again. It is a
meddling world. They have been already too busy with our names. -- Think me not
ungrateful for your friendship: it will never be obliterated from my mind while
I have life; but it is fit, it is proper we should meet no more. -- I know my
faithful Deborah will wish to come to me. Bid her come with the bearer of this,
who waits. But oh! Kingly, unless you wish to add another weight to my already
insupportable afflictions, make no attempt to see me. -- Heaven bless you,
forever bless you, I cannot express all I wish; perhaps did I feel less, I
could write with more eloquence. -- As my last request I entreat you not to
withdraw your bounty from the children of Clara. They are innocent, whatever
are the crimes of their parents. Oh Kingly, if you could see my heart, you
would see it bleed with real anguish, while I tell you we must not cannot meet
again. Once more, God bless you, and reward you for your kindness to the
wretched

MERIEL.


Though I earnestly desired to see the suffering angel, her commands, her
pathetic entreaties to me were sacred; I sent for Deborah and giving her ten
guineas bade her hasten to her mistress and to let me know when she wanted more
cash. The faithful old woman sobbed with joy when I told her that her lady was
safe; and left the room almost with the alacrity of a girl, when she was told
to follow the messenger who brought the letter.

The next morning, the money was returned in a small parcel, which I received
and opened without knowing from whence it came. On the inner paper were these
words. "Dear generous Kingly, I am already overwhelmed with obligations from
you. Pardon me, I can receive no more." There was no name annexed; but I knew
the dear characters had been traced by the hand of Meriel. -- Resolved, if
possible, still to serve her, even against her inclination, I went to my agent
and desired him to go to the bench, make inquiry for Deborah and pretend to pay
some money that was owing to old Mr. Howard. But here I failed; for when my
agent returned, he informed me that Mrs. Rooksby had been with her husband that
she remained only a short time and where she was gone no one could tell. He
also informed me that Rooksby had a woman in the apartment with him, who had
been thrown into prison about three weeks before by a Mercer, to whom she was
indebted upwards of a hundred pounds, and that both of them expected soon to be
released. From his description of the woman's person, I should suppose it to be
the infamous Clara; but think it almost impossible, as I was informed she was
living at Brussels only a short time since in great splendour with a man of the
first rank and fortune. Should it prove so, I shall pronounce him a blacker
villain than I ever thought him: and how like an angel will the villainy of the
one and the ingratitude of the other make Meriel appear, who in the very moment
that she was so cruelly treated by them could recommend their children to my
care. I will obey her, Onslow. They shall share the education of my own boys,
and I make no doubt of being able to provide for them either in the army or
navy. --

Every inquiry after Meriel is vain She has hid herself so effectually as to
elude the strictest search, I can no longer stay in England I have solicited
employment in the West Indies and shall soon sail. I have commissioned my agent
to continue his search for Mrs. Rooksby and should he discover the place of her
retreat to supply her with cash, without suffering her even to suspect from
whom it comes. I am certain wherever she is, she is in necessity. Good heavens,
that I should live to say, while I am in possession of all the superfluities of
life, Meriel Howard, the first choice of my heart, the woman I love and revere
above all her sex, is perhaps languishing for want of the means to support
existence. I will write no more I am almost devoid of reason when I think for a
moment on the subject.

I hardly dare desire my remembrance to your Amelia. I know how she loved and
esteemed Meriel, and I have some faint hope that she will hear from the dear
sufferer's own hand how she has disposed of herself; for certain I am, that
while life warms the heart of Meriel Howard, it will glow with grateful
affection for Amelia Sidney. And while I live, I shall remain yours in
friendship.

F. KINGLY.

LETTER LXIII. MERIEL to CELIA.
May 20 th, 1789.
I BROKE off abruptly in my last, for I found my spirits were unequal to the
task of retracing scenes which had given me so much uneasiness. I informed you
of my discovery of Clara in the prison with Rooksby; but I am yet to inform you
that when, by the humanity of one of the keepers, I was prevailed on to go into
a room and endeavor to compose myself, I received a verbal message from my
cruel tyrant, desiring me to leave him to his fate and return to my favorite
Kingly, with whom he knew I had publicly lived for several weeks in defiance of
shame. A message so injurious, so unjust, roused my resentment, and I demanded
to see the cruel man, who could thus dare to insult me.

I once more ascended the stairs to his apartment, and knocking at the door,
entered with as much resolution, as I could assume.

He received me with a mixture of confusion and contempt, and Clara, without
deigning to rise from her seat; gave a slight inclination of the head: but at
that moment I felt myself a wife, an innocent injured wife! and resentment
conquered every other feeling! --

"Rooksby!" said I, seating myself opposite to him, and regarding him with a
fixed attention, "I come to inquire by what action of my life, I have incurred
the unjust censures you have thrown upon me, or in what I have forfeited my
claim to your regard, since I have been your wife."

"By your vile connection with Belger, before you were my wife -- and your
still more infamous intrigue with Kingly since!" said he, in a kind of hurried
accent, as though conscious he did not himself believe what he asserted.

"By all my hopes of future felicity, Rooksby," I replied, "I am innocent of
what you accuse me, as was the infant I bore -- and who, I trust, is now an
angel in the mansions of the blessed!" -- At the recollection of my child, tears,
in spite of my efforts to suppress them, ^urst from my eyes. -- Rooksby was
affected.

"Poor Clementina," said he, rising and coming toward me, I should have liked
to have seen her once more, before she was gone forever."

Clara, saw she was losing ground; so rising in great haste, she told him that
when he had settled the difference that had been between us, perhaps, she might
look in and congratulate us; that content was a great blessing, and a forgiving
temper, a sure sign of a good christian; that for her part, she had good reason
to suppose both Mrs. Belger and Mrs. Kingly fell victims to my art, for their
hearts were broken by their husbands, whose affections I had exerted myself to
obtain, and had effectually drawn from them."

"If," said I with more firmness than I believed myself capable of, "if every
woman in the world was as free from the crime of seducing the affection of a
husband from his wife as I am, it would be well for many. But, be not mistaken,
Clara, I come not to sue to my husband, or endeavor to regain his heart, I am
at length convinced I never possessed it, and as it would have been happy for
us, had we never met; I am determined that we will here part forever!!!"

"Forever, Meriel," said Rooksby, "leave me forever?" --

Clara's countenance brightened, and she resumed her seat.

"I am well convinced, Rooksby," I replied, "that so far from having it in my
power to serve or oblige you, my presence is painful to you, and I am
considered a burden. -- The pain, the burden shall therefore be removed."

"And you will return to Kingly?"

"No! Rooksby. -- Here in the awful face of Heaven, I swear, I never have, nor
ever will dishonor the name of your revered mother: a name, which at her
request I received from you. And, that Heaven is my witness, was the cheerful
discharge of my duty a source of happiness to you, as no power on earth should
separate me from you! -- I would remain with you in the most abject distress --
comfort you -- nay, even labor for your support! but -- as it is -- we must
part!!! -- I forgive you from my soul, every injury -- not only you! but, those
who have been the cause of your errors! -- I will pray for your happiness --
and forget, if possible -- how cruelly and how often you have wronged me!" --

"I am villain!" said he, rising and striking his forehead with vehemence.

"Before we part Rooksby," cried I, laying my hand on his arm, " I solemnly
conjure you as the last and only request I shall ever make, seek not to
palliate your own faults by taxing me with guilt. I am conscious of my own
innocence, and feel not the sharpness of the accusation; but it increases your
own offenses in the sight of Heaven! -- I forgive every thing that has past --
only, throw not an odium on my character, and I will bless you forever!" --

"You are, you must be innocent," said he, "I believe you are pure as an angel.
You are a treasure too great for me to possess. I have voluntarily thrown you
from me, and though I know your worth, some strange fatality ever pursues me,
and the weakness of my nature hurries me to actions which I know are wrong."

"Farewell!" said I, turning to leave the room.

"But whither are you going, Meriel, I fear you are in want. My affairs begin
to wear a better aspect. I have had a few thousands left me by a relation. Let
me know where to send to you that you may share in my fortune, though I can
never hope again to possess a place in your heart. -- His voice faultered and
he actually shed tears. Celia, Rooksby is a man so weak so unstable in his
nature that the impulse of the moment ever hurries him away: and perhaps just
then he would have sued for a reconciliation and had he been master of the
world offered to divide it with me. And the first moment Clara had an
opportunity to exert her art, she would have revived all his suspicions and I
should again been ill treated, vilified, nay, perhaps thrust like an abandoned
wretch from his house.

Sensible of this versatility of temper I wished not to prolong our interview,
besides I was faint and exhausted. The spirits which resentment had roused were
now beginning to subside and when I considered his errors and the weakness of
his nature I only considered him as an object of compassion. The presence of
Clara too was insupportably painful, I, therefore, almost forcibly tore myself
from him and hurring down stairs immediately left the prison, and went to the
lodgings I had occupied before.

The woman of the house received me kindly. After I had taken some refreshment
I lay down and endeavored to procure a little rest; but the effort was
ineffectual. -- The scenes I had been engaged in the preceding night and day
entirely occupied my thoughts; the idea of Kingly's surprise and uneasiness
when he should discover my having left him; the sorrow of my affectionate
Deborah, my own forlorn situation, and dreary future prospect, all conspired to
banish from my eyes the balmy comfort of sleep. I arose, and procuring pens and
paper, wrote a few lines to my husband informing him where I was, that he might
not say I had prevented his assisting me by not letting him know where to send.
I also wrote to Kingly in a manner which I knew would effectually prevent his
endeavoring to see me; but desired him to send Deborah back with the person,
who brought the letter.

I passed the night in a very restless manner, and in the morning was unable to
rise. A fever, want of appetite, and great lassitude, hung upon me for above
ten days. -- Indeed, I thought I was going into a rapid dicline; but the care
of Deborah, who nursed me with incessant tenderness, and parted even with some
of her apparel to procure me proper and nourishing food, restored me to some
degree of my wonted strength. During this time, I heard nothing from Rooksby:
though perfectly satisfied, that his fickle disposition had operated as usual,
and that no longer seen, I was no longer remembered, yet something prompted me
to send to the bench and inquire after him. Deborah was my messenger; she
returned and told me he had been released above a week. I then sent to Le Sage;
but without letting him suspect who made the inquiry, and learned that my
husband, (Oh, Heavens! happy had I been, had he never borne that title!) had
left England in company with Clara; for I particularly desired the person who
inquired, to ask, wherever he was, if he was alone.

It was now time to think of some means of support, Gratitude also required
that I should call on the benevolent Mrs. Harcourt. I dressed myself as neat as
the scanty state of my wardrobe would allow and repaired to her house. At my
approach, I saw the shutters of the upper part were closed; my heart sunk; but
yet I ventured to knock at the door. A woman servant opened it. I inquired for
Mrs. Harcourt. "She is at "Bath," replied the woman. "Has she been ill then?"
-- "Yes, she caught cold on the night her house was robbed, which added to the
fright, brought on the gout in her stomach. She was taken ill the next evening
and for several days was thought in great danger; but she is now better, and
yesterday morning set off for Bath."

I thanked the woman for her information and was going from the door, when who
should I see cross the hall but Peggy. She saw and instantly recollected me: an
exclamation of joy and surprise escaped her and she ran to the door to speak to
me. She informed me that Mrs. Harcourt had taken her into the house as an
assistant to the housekeeper that the kind lady had mentioned me previous to
her departure, and desired if I called I would leave word where I might be
found. I told Peggy I was not settled in any place at present; but I would call
again in the course of a fortnight when I hoped to hear of Mrs Harcourt's
perfect recovery.

On my return, I consulted with Deborah, what we could possibly do to earn a
subsistence. The affectionate creature could think of nothing. She could only
weep that I was obliged to have recourse to work. After revolving many various
schemes in my mind, I at length fixed on one, that I thought was feasible -- It
was to send Deborah to the woman, who had formerly supplied me with millinery,
and to desire her to inquire in my name whether she could give employment to a
reputable young woman, who was in an ill state of health and only able to work
at her own apartment. Deborah executed the commission faithfully and on her
return told me she had procured employment for me at a great warehouse, where
she had been recommended by the person to whom I sent her.

"But dear madam," said she, the prices are so very small, you will never be
able to live on what you earn." -- This did not deter me. I removed to a room
near the warehouse for which I was to work; that our time might not be taken up
in going backwards and forwards. Deborah procured the work and I executed it. I
gave great satisfaction and had as much as myself and Deborah could possibly
do, yet with the most indefatigable industry, we could scarcely earn eighteen
or twenty shillings a week. The close application to my employment did not
agree with my health, and I was obliged to devote an hour every day to
exercise, nor did even this answer the desired end, and I was in a short time
so pale and thin that you would scarcely have believed me to have been the
Meriel Howard you once knew. Ill as I was, I still continued my employment as
well as I was able; but weakness and fatigue often overcame me and I was
obliged to give up hours to rest, and sometimes whole days

My weakness increased, and my income proportionally decreased. I saw famine
advancing with hasty strides, and to add to my affliction I knew the affection
of Deborah had involved her in my distresses. My lodging was in Oxford-street,
and I sometimes walked into the fields which are adjacent to the parish of
Bloomsbury. One day, as with slow uneven pace I took my accustomed walk, just
as I had reached Gowerstreet, I saw a splendid equipage pass me and stop at a
house which seemed newly fitted up. I cannot accouut for the curiosity that
seized me; but I inquired of a man who had the appearance of a Butler; to whom
the house and carriage belonged.

"To Mr. Howard" said the man -- Mr. Howard; what Howard?

"I don't know," he replied, "what his Christian name is, but he is lately
returned from India". --

Astonishment rendered me silent, and the man proceeded. --

"He came over about two months since, and took that house. I then lived the
next door and knew all that passed in the family. He brought a young lady over
with him, who is very pretty; but seems unhappy. She is very young indeed; and
he is going to marry her; but I think it is against her inclination: for though
I have heard the servants say she seemed to respect him, she often declares she
can never love him. --

I mused upon what the man had told me and was determined to inquire farther
about this Mr. Howard. It might be my brother, and the sums I had advanced it
might now be in his power to return; not that I intended to ask him for them
but, methought, natural affection would certainly operate in his bosom in
behalf of a sister who had shared all her property with him and was now bent to
the earth with sickness and sorrow. -- On farther inquiry I learned that his
name was Richard Howard. Determined to make at least a trial of him, I learned
at what hour it would be most likely to see him, for as he was become a great
man, I readily conceived my only being his sister and in distress would but
poorly plead my excuse for going at an unseasonable time. Far be it from me, my
dear Celia, to say this is the case with all, there are some glorious ornaments
of the creation who never turn from the cry of affliction, and who never
consider it intrusive; whose hearts are ever open and whose hands are ever
ready to dispense to those who are in want, a part of those blessings which a
bounteous Providence has showerd on themselves: -- but the thorough knowledge I
have of the human heart led me to reflect, that when a person has unexpectedly
risen to opulence from obscurity, his feelings grow callous he forgets and
totally neglects those branches of his family who, though perhaps they have
been equally industrious with himself, have not been equally the favorites of
fortune.

At ten o'clock one morning, I knocked at Mr. Howard's door; and was requested
by the servant to send up my name, I did so, adding that I had particular
business with him. After waiting about ten minutes (for I suppose my dress had
not prepossessed the man in my favor.) I was told I might come up. -- My limbs
trembled as I entered the room. The first glance convinced me it was my
brother, though he is greatly increased in bulk, being now a very stout man,
and when we parted he was but a slender lad, yet his features were the same. He
was sitting at breakfast with a very young lady, who appeared dejected and
unhappy. I imagined this to be the person of whom the servant spoke.

He gave a slight inclination of the head as I entered, the servant brought
forward a chair and left the room.

"Now madam," said the haughty master of the house, "what is your pleasure?"

"Is it possible," said I, looking earnestly at him, "that you can have no
recollection of me? --

"Not the least, I do not recollect that I ever saw you before."

"You had once a sister, sir. --

"Yes I had, but she was always a strange eccentric girl; she ran through a
very good fortune, and I understand has disgraced her family in the most
shocking manner."

"Brother," said I, emphatically, "and I felt my eyes gush out with tears. --

He sat down the cup, which he was raising to his lips, and with a look of
mingled anger and astonishment, cried, "why surely you can never be Meriel
Howard." --

"I am your sister, I am all that remains of Meriel Howard, but I no longer
bear that name." --

"I was told you had assumed the name of a gentleman with whom you lived some
years, but he has left you through your own folly." --

"And who could assert such a falsehood, brother?" --

"My Aunt Mossop told me, and so did Hester, who is well married. Susan wrote
them word that you behaved in such a manner some few years since upon the
continent, as occasioned the person you lived with to fight a duel on your
account: that you separated then and had never lived together since."

The slight, the cutting indifference of my brother, wounded me to the soul. I
was debilitated in mind and body, yet I could hardly restrain the fullness of my
heart; being unable to support the interview any longer, I arose to depart; for
he had neither asked me to eat or drink. The young lady looked at me, and I saw
the tear of compassion start in her eyes.

"I am very sorry, Meriel," said my brother, "that you are in such indifferent
circumstances as your appearance seems to bespeak, if a couple of guineas"

"No, sir!" said I, putting back the hand extended with the money, if I am
unworthy to be received as your sister, I am unworthy of your assistance:
besides, brother, I came in hopes to find an affectionate relative, a friend,
whose heart would compassionate my sufferings. Disappointed in that -- I am too
proud to accept a donation from your bounty!" -- "As you please, madam!" bowing
coldly, "had you conducted yourself in a manner becoming my sister" --

"Brother, had I come to your door in a splendid equipage, perhaps, you would
not have inquired so strictly into my conduct. In that case even the errors of
which I am now accused, would have been overlooked; but poverty is a fault the
opulent can seldom pardon. I am happy, brother, to see the advancement of your
fortune; but, should you ever experience a reverse, you will then discover,
that those who now caress and flatter you, nay, even would creep into your
favor by vilifying me, would be the first to turn from you; and blame you for
misfortunes you could neither avoid nor avert!"

"I see Meriel," said he, "with a sneer, "you at least retain one striking
trait in your character, you are as good a preacher as ever."

"I will take care to retain every trait," I replied, "for which I have been
respected. I have now lost the name of Howard, and can no longer disgrace it by
my poverty; and I hope my affluent brother will never let that name be
dishonored by him."

I then bade him good morning, without being requested to renew my visit. I was
now so accustomed to disappointment that I felt not this behavior of my
brother so severely as I should have done some few years since. Indeed, my dear
friend, I think my heart grows hard and insensible, and seems turning into
stone, for it is cold and inanimate. I can no longer exult in the happiness, or
sympathize in the miseries of my fellow creatures. The world appears one
universal blank, nay even when I think of you and my Amelia, it still beats but
languidly, its emotions are no longer exquisitely pleasant or painful, but like
the faint rays of an expiring taper now and then emits a flash of light that
for a moment chears the gloom of a solitary apartment, and after a few
struggles is entirely extinguished. So my heart, which feels a degree of kindly
warmth play round it, when I think of your affection, will perhaps a little
longer struggle to illumine this frail tenement; then sink to peace in the dark
mansion of the grave. -- But why should I infest you with my melancholy? I fear
I am an ungrateful wretch; for I have found a friend when I least expected it,
and one who exerts his power to preserve a life that is no longer of value to
me; because it is entirely useless to society. My poor Deborah too, she is
still faithful and affectionate. I have still much to be thankful for; but such
is the frailty of human nature, we remember our sorrows with a repining mind,
while we forget the benefits of which we we are unworthy partakers.

I have written this at various opportunities when my time and strength would
permit. I shall now dispatch it, as you are I am sure ever anxious to hear from
me, I will write again soon, and believe, till my heart is devoid of all
sensation, it will ever love you and pray for your happiness.

Adieu! MERIEL.

LETTER LXIV. MERIEL to CELIA.
August 19th, 1789.
MY dear friend, I have once more set down to address to you, to tell you I
every day draw nearer and nearer the goal, to which we are all hastening, where
I shall again embrace my dear Clementina, and be parted from her no more! -- I
told you, in my last, that I had unexpectedly found a friend, who had used his
utmost endeavors to serve me. It was Mr. Friendly, the gentleman to whose
care, my regretted benefactor, Mr. Weldon, so strenuously recommended me before
he left England. I was one morning at the warehouse, from whence I had
employment, when he came in and with him a woman extremely gay in her
appearance; but many years younger than himself. She was what might by many
have been called pretty; but to me there appeared nothing in her features that
could deserve that name. It was an unmeaning countenance, devoid of
sensibility, and if it had any character, it was that of pride and impetuosity.

She purchased some very expensive articles, for which he stopped to pay, and
she went off in the chariot, to make, as she said, some morning visits. From
what I saw, I feared the good old gentleman had entered the matrimonial pale
with a person no ways qualified to make him happy; and the event proved I was
not mistaken in my conjectures. As I was so greatly altered in person, as not
to be recollected by a brother, I could not suppose Mr. Friendly would know me;
but I was mistaken; for as I was speaking to the person who was giving me out
my work, he turned round hastily and looked at me as though endeavoring to
recollect my features.

"There are but small remains of the person," said he, coming toward me, "but I
could almost swear that was the voice of Miss Howard." You know, Celia, I have
often been remarked for the softness of my voice, and I believe many, who would
not otherwise recollect me, know me the moment I speak. I curtsyed,
acknowledged he was right, and left the shop. I had not proceeded many paces
before he overtook me, and offering me his arm, with the solicitude of a
father, inquired into my circumstances. He had heard I was well married, but
nothing more; my present appearance did not confirm the report; he wished to
know if he could serve me. Before I could satisfy his laudable curiosity, we
had reached the door of the house where I lived.

"I have an hour to spare, said he, "may I be admitted, "I cannot leave you
till I know how you are situated. I am perfectly acquainted with the goodness
of your heart; but I know with all your virtues, you have weaknesses more
prejudicial to your interest and happiness than some which are called vices.
You are credulous; and you let a sense of duty sometimes hurry you to actions
which are not strictly right. Let me know how you are situated; tell me
yourself what has separated you from your husband."

Shall I confess, my dear Celia, shame at the mean apartment I occupied, for a
moment crimsoned my cheek; and made me hesitate to admit him up stairs; but
gratitude for the kind solicitude he expressed, a reverential remembrance of
the noble spirited Weldon, whose friend he was: conspired to conquer this
unseasonable emotion of pride, and I led the way to my little garret, (for such
it literally is.) Deborah looked surprised at my introducing a man into an
apartment, which constituted our dining room, drawing room, bed chamber, and
kitchen. But when she heard me mention Mr. Weldon, whose name she knew I
respected, and whose friends I should ever consider as mine, she was perfectly
satisfied; and when she found the good old gentleman meant to prove his
friendship to Weldon, by his attention to me, I thought she would have gone
wild with joy. She drew a chair close to his, nor could all my endeavors to
the contrary, prevent her informing him of all she knew, concerning Rooksby;
and when she mentioned my drawing my subsistence from labor, and my evident
ill state of health; she took his hand and pressed it to her heart; while the
tears rolled in big drops down her aged face. I could not see her emotions
unmoved: I arose from my seat and pretended to look after the dinner, which
Deborah, from her friendly anxiety to promote my interest, had totally
neglected; and unseen, gave a loose to sensations which almost overpowered me.

Mr. Friendly would not leave me, till he had prevailed with me to give up my
employment, to leave the place I then inhabited, and go to apartments, which he
would provide a little way out of town. -- "You shall not be obliged," said he,
"for I know that is what would most afflict your proud spirit. You think you
are humble," (added he with a smile) "but I know you better. You ever was and
ever will be very proud: but I like you the better for it. It is the right sort
of pride; it is a pride, which shrinks from the weight of obligation which it
has not power to return. -- Now to obviate that, you have it in your power to
oblige me. I have taken a young creature under my protection, (for I am quite a
knight errant in the cause of the ladies,) she is, I believe, a girl of good
fortune, and strictly virtuous, but very unfortunate. Now if you will take her
for your companion and teach her, as I know you possess abilities, how to amuse
at once her time and enrich her mind, I will supply you with the means. Some
other time you may learn how I came to take her under my care. Perhaps, she
herself, when she perceives the gentleness of your nature, will confide more to
you, than from the difference of our sex she possibly could to me.

As to the means of your support, I have some connections, in the island of St.
John's in America, who send to me for thick cloaks, etc. fit for the climate;
now it strikes me that you might make those garments, at a good profit for
yourself, and yet leave a sufficient for me."

When I sound, he did not wish me to receive obligations from him, without some
means to repay them, I was willing to listen to his plan, and in less than ten
days from the time I first saw him, I was removed to apartments in Islington,
where he sent the young lady to me, whom he had taken under his protection. It
was evening when she arrived; I was ill, I was fatigued -- had retired to bed
and saw her not till the next morning. Oh! Celia, I am very ill now -- my head
is giddy -- I can proceed no farther -- perhaps I may never resume the pen. --
Let me tell you then, while I have power. This lovely girl is -- I can no more
-- all is dark -- and --

It was only a faintness. I am very subject to them lately, -- I am something
better today and will, while Deborah permits me, pursue my narrative.

The young lady entrusted to my care is the person whom I saw at my brother's;
and who, to avoid an union with him, has left his protection for that of a
stranger's. She tells me her name is Alton: that she was born in England, but
went over to India whilst an infant; that her mother being obliged to go with a
lady up into the (...) left her with a friend, who before (...) mother's return
was forced to retire (...) ravages of war: The friend to whose care she was
entrusted had no child of her own and at her death left her heiress to a very
handsome fortune; the gentleman, who was executor to the will, and guardian to
Miss Alton entrusted her to the care of my brother that she might be brought
home to finish her education. Struck with her person and the more powerful
charms of twenty thousand pounds, he has left no means untried, by which he
could hope to win her affection and draw her into a marriage; but she has ever
regarded him, as she says, with more horror than any other sensations, when she
has considered him as a man designed to be her husband. He was extremely kind
and attentive to her, and in return, she respected him and would do any thing
to promote his happiness, except sacrifice her own. She knew so little of the
world, that she had actually formed a scheme of working for her bread, and did
not even think she could oblige my brother to do her justice or place her at a
proper school, and pay the sum her guardian allowed both for her education and
pocket. She had not confided her real situation to Mr. Friendly, to whom I
found chance had introduced her. Poor innocent, (...) a place as London, how
soon might (...) have been decoyed, by seeming friends (...) and infamy.

This faintness again. I declare I am as weak as a child, every exertion
overcomes me. -- Deborah will let me write no longer. God bless you.

MERIEL.

LETTER LXV. DEBORAH ELLIS to MISS SHELBURNE.
Bristol, Oct. 9 th, 1789. MADAM,
SINCE my lady dispatched her last letter to you, she has been daily declining
and the faintings she mentioned increased in a most alarming manner. Mr.
Friendly did every thing in his power to make her comfortable, and the young
lady he placed with her was very affectionate and tender; at one time I was in
hopes she would recover. But a circumstance happened, that affected her spirits
so much as to make the physicians think it necessary to hurry her to this place
for the benefit of the waters. Mr. Friendly generally called on her about twice
a week, and though to prevail on my dear lady, to accept assistance from him,
he frequently talked and consulted her about work; yet he never sent any to do,
always making someexcuse about its not being ready. He was, however, fond of
talking to her and sometimes he would bring the newspaper and read to her, and
whenever he gave her money said it was for the board of Miss Alton. It was one
afternoon about six weeks ago, as he sat at tea with the two ladies, a chariot
stopped at the door, a very fine lady came out of it, and without any ceremony
threw open the dining room door, where they were all sitting: and flying at my
dear lady abused her in the grossest manner, accused her of being kept by her
husband; for I presently found, madam, that this dreadfully passionate lady was
Mrs. Friendly, who had traced her husband to the place where he so often
visited, and finding only two women there, she immediately thought one of them
must be her husband's mistress, and though my poor dear lady was so ill as
might, one would have thought, prevented any such suspicion from being
believed, yet did she insist upon it. Mr. Friendly, she said could maintain her
there for no other purpose. She called her every vile name, broke the china and
was only withheld by her husband from striking the innocent object of her
jealousy, who sat as it were stupefied with terror, her hands were clasped and
rested on her knees and her eyes were fixed on the floor; but she spoke not one
word. Mr. Friendly endeavored to prevail on his wife to go home; but she was
deaf to his entreaties, till he promised to accompany her. Just as she was
going out, she turned round and wished my lady might starve and die in prison,
if ever she encouraged her husband to come there again. "I should like to see
it," said she, "and if I saw you dying, I would not give you a farthing to save
you. You have had enough from my poor, credulous, foolish husband already and I
hope the next bit of bread you eat that is bought with his money will choke
you."

I do suppose, madam, she would have gone on much longer, if her husband had
not almost forced her into the carriage, which drove instantly away. When they
were gone, my dear lady raised her eyes and clasped hands to Heaven, "for what
new trials am I reserved!" said she, "Poor Miss Alton was crying ready to break
her heart, and I should have been very glad to see my poor mistress do the
same: but she did not shed a single tear. She looked the very picture of
uncomplaining sorrow. I was frightened to see her look so composed, and as I
feared, her faintings which had kept off for a few days before, now returned
with double violence.

The next day, a gentleman came from Mr. Friendly, saying, that for family
reasons, he could not visit her; but desired she might want for nothing. This
gentleman waited, till the Doctor visited my lady, and when he heard his
opinion, that Bristol might be of service to her, he desired me to make instant
preparations for the journey. I cheerfully complied, as I found not only the
people, who kept the house, where we lodged, but even the neighbors, had
learned something of the visit of Mrs. Friendly, and both my lady and Miss
Alton were considered as bad women.

We traveled here by easy stages, my lady was greatly fatigued, and for many
days I did not expect her to live. The place revived in her mind the loss of
her Godmother, who died here about sixteen years ago, when my lady first left
the convent. The physicians here, comfort me, by saying, they do not think she
is in a confirmed consumption; but that her disorder is chiefly on her spirits,
and could that depression under which she evidently labors be removed, she
might yet recover, and would undoubtedly, in a rapid manner. Though I fear,
madam, she will never lose that depression; yet I cannot but flatter myself
something may yet turn out to comfort her. Surely it were a great pity so good
a lady should be cut off in the very flower of her age, and that she, who never
wilfully gave pain to any person, should be dying of a broken heart. Indeed,
madam it almost breaks my old heart to think of it.

She is some days so well, as to be able to walk to the pump room; but she has
herself no idea, that she shall ever leave this place. She is perfectly
resigned. She desired me to write to you and to tell you, she thinks she shall
never be able to write herself again. She offers you every kind wish and bids
you pray for her everlasting peace. Those are her own words. One thing I was
desired not to mention; but I cannot conclude without doing it. I have written
twice to Mr. Friendly, since we have been here: but received no answer. Our
money is almost gone, and should he forsake us, what will become of my dear
lady and poor Miss Alton, God knows; as for myself, I am old, and could not
hope to live much longer; but for them, they have but just entered the world as
it were. Pardon me, madam, for writing so much; but I am very uneasy and have
no one to complain to or advise with. My lady said to me yesterday, "Deborah, I
think I am better: we will dismiss the physician tomorrow." Poor lady, I knew
her motive: she thinks her money will not last long, and that she cannot afford
to pay him* I wish to Heaven, Mrs. Onslow was in England or Mr. Kingly. Oh!
madam that my dear blessed lady had been the wife of such a man as Mr. Kingly,
how happy would she have been; and she might have lived years and years,
blessing and blessed by all. But now she is broken hearted, forsaken by the
world and with all her virtues will die unpitied and unlamented by all, except
a few, who know how good she is; and among which, none will grieve with more
sincerity than her and your humble friend and servant,

DEBORAH ELLIS.

LETTER LXVI. MERIEL to CELIA.
December 22 d, 1789.
STRANGE and inscrutable are the ways of Heaven. Once more, my dear Celia, I am
permitted to address you, and I have a tale of wonder to unfold, which even at
this moment, though I am sensible that I live, I breathe, that all around me is
reality, yet, my astonished senses can hardly credit! -- Celia, the heaviest
afflictions may lead to the most desirable events. We ought not to complain:
every trial, however painful to be borne is inflicted for some wise purpose.
Gracious Heaven! when I think, how I have nourished one secret sorrow; how even
in my happiest moments have I brooded over it? but it is now removed. That
horror, that inexpressible horror, which for so many years has laid upon my
mind, is no more. I have been afflicted it is true: but I trust I am now safe at
least from poverty. My health daily returns, and I can enjoy the heartfelt
pleasure of relieving the distressed. But how, you will say, how have these
changes taken place? My dear friend, when the tumult of my heart will permit
me, I will tell you that I am no longer the friendless, distressed creature, I
was not long since. I have a mother living! I have a father too! Blessed!
blessed words! and those whom I ever considered as my parents were only
relations. Mrs. Howard was sister to my mother. -- But let me tell my tale with
some coherence: for I think my Celia will imagine me wandering from reason, and
that I am writing her the effusions of a distempered fancy.

While I was at Bristol, as long as I was able, I went every morning to the
pump room. Miss Alton always accompanied me. I there had several times an
opportunity of seeing and conversing with Mrs. Harcourt, who was detained there
by the ill state of her husband's health, who I found was at Bath at the time I
first saw her, which was the occcasion of her attending the examination of the
persons suspected of robbing her house. She frequently made me offers of
friendship, at the same time entreating my confidence: but my spirits were not
at that time, in a state to permit me to relate the incidents of my life, most
of which had been so extremely painful, that I endeavored as much as was in my
power to banish them from my memory.

Mr. Friendly, from family reasons, I imagine was deterred from inquiring for
me, after I left London, and the allowance he had made me on account of Miss
Alton's being with me, till he could hear from her friends abroad, entirely
ceased when we had been about a month in Bristol, so that I became again in
very necessitous circumstances, which added to my having declined the
attendance of the physician, and omitted going to drink the waters, on account
of my slender finances, increased my disorder and I soon was confined to my
bed. Miss Alton is a tender and affectionate girl and would have confined
herself to my bedside, had I not insisted, that she should sometimes walk out.
In one of these walks she met Mrs. Harcourt, who inquired after me. -- The
friendly girl expecting every hour to lose me, burst into tears at the
question, described my situation to Mrs. Harcourt and entreated her to come and
see me. Her own humanity impelled her to comply, and that very afternoon she
came to my apartment. She seated herself by my bedside, took my hand, and was
beginning to speak; when Deborah entered the room with some toast and water
which she had been down stairs to procure. Mrs. Harcourt started. The glass
fell from Deborah's hand; for their eyes met in the same moment. "Good
gracious!" said Deborah, "am I awake -- are you! -- no, -- it cannot be! -- I
thought -- but it is impossible!"

Mrs. Harcourt had a little recovered herself. "Yes, Deborah, said she, "it is
possible. I am alive still, though so many years thought dead. -- But tell me
-- I almost fear to ask -- yet tell me, where is my child?

Deborah came near. She took my hand and put it into Mrs. Harcourt's, pressed
them together, but remained silent.

"Oh! gracious heaven!" she exclaimed, "and is it indeed so?" Then falling on
the bed, and throwing her arms round me, she cried, "my child! My darling
child! have I found you then, only to lose you?" -- Full of astonishment and
wonder, I could scarcely ask the meaning of what I heard and saw. "How madam,"
said I, "can I be your child? Alas! my dear mother has been many years in the
silent grave." -- "You have heard her mention a sister she once had?"

"Yes, but I always understood she was dead before I was born." -- "Dead to the
world I was," she replied, "for many years, and from a few weeks after your
birth, my sister never heard from me. Many vicissitudes have I experienced, far
from England, unable to hear from you, and above ten years in captivity. When I
again saw my native land and made inquiry for my child and sister, I was told
they were both dead: Nor did I ever think to have been so blessed as this; but I
must inquire my beloved Meriel, when you are able to answer me. I must know how
you have been so long hid from me, and why it was reported you were dead. Are
my brother and sister Howard both dead?" --

She might have proceeded in her questions uninterrupted; for astonishment had
deprived me of the power of speech. Yet perfectly conceiving in a moment the
extreme felicity of having a mother! a mother who loved me, my heart also felt
lightened of a load of anguish. He, who had attempted my seduction was not my
father, he was no relation, only by marriage. Celia, my beloved Celia, cannot
you perfectly comprehend the rapture that thought conveyed to my soul. Oh! my
friend -- I am certain, it is utterly impossible: for you are unacquainted with
guilt. The very idea of it inspires you with horror; then, what must have been
my feelings on the reflection, that I had kindled a guilty passion, from which
nature shrinks back aghast! -- But human nature, with all its frailties, could
never sink into such depravity. -- Unable to articulate a single word, I threw
my arms round her neck and overpowered by the pleasing sensations that rushed
over my heart, I sunk into insensibility. How long I remained so, I cannot even
conjecture; but when I recovered, I seemed as though awaking from a deep sleep,
and was full of the idea of a delightful dream. -- How charmingly was that
dream realized, when putting back the curtain I saw my mother! my kind
affectionate mother, sitting by my bedside. -- "How are you, my child," said
she, in an accent of the softest maternal kindness.

I was extremely faint, and could scarcely answer, but yet I felt better and I
told her so. From that hour I began to amend, and was in the course of a few
days able to be removed to my mother's house, where I was introduced to my
father. Oh! blessed thought, that I should live to say I have a father! -- a
noble! honorable! father! -- whose every action of his life, is an eulogium on
the goodness of his heart; reflects a credit on the nation of which he is a
native, and the religion of which he is not only a professor, but a strict
follower of its precepts.

When I was taken from the lodgings which I then occupied, to my dear mother's
house, a new source of astonishment presented itself. My mother had a person
with her, whom I had often heard her mention as an esteemed friend and
companion. The day after I was settled in her family, I was introduced to this
lady and discovered in her, though greatly altered the person of Mrs. Talbot,
whom you may remember Mr. Howard kept in a very unbecoming manner, even in the
house with his wife, my dear, though so rigid aunt.

She went abroad with a lady, who was following a husband, whom she loved, and
who, from necessity, being an officer in the army, had been separated from her.
When Mrs. Talbot left Woodbine-cott, she did not know her own situation; but
about six months after, she became the mother of a girl. This girl she left in
the care of a Mrs. Alton, while she herself accompanied her lady up the country
in search of her husband. A variety of incidents, unnecessary here to relate,
detained them several years from the place where she left her child. On her
return, neither friend nor child were to be found. Celia, do you not already
know that this child is the very Miss Alton, whom my brother, as I have been
accustomed to call him, would have married. My soul shudders, when I think of
the escape he has had. This Miss Alton, is his sister, the natural daughter of
his father. Good Heavens! to what sins are mortals led, as it were blindfold;
by the vices of their parents. The meeting between the mother and the daughter
was very affecting. Mrs. Talbot has retained those good resolutions, with which
she has been pleased to say I first inspired her. She lost the friend whom she
accompanied to India, when she had been there about six years, and was soon
after recommended to the notice of that excellent woman, whom I have now the
honor to call mother! with whom she has continued ever since, as a companion,
a friend, and the superintendent of her family.

When I am more composed, and my strength will better permit me, I will give
you a few particulars of the life of this dear, this new found parent; but at
present, I am not permitted to devote above an hour out of the four and twenty
to writing, and this letter has been the fruit of several efforts. I am called
away. -- Adieu!

Yours while I live. MERIEL.

LETTER LXVII. MERIEL to CELIA.
January 15 th, 1790.
IN my last, I promised a few of the particulars of my mother's life, and I
will now give them without further preface.

She was several years younger than Mrs. Howard; and when her sister was
married, was still at school. At the early age of sixteen, she became
acquainted with Mr. Harcourt, the only son of a wealthy East India merchant,
with whom she entered into the most sacred bonds before any part of either
family even suspected there was an intimacy subsisting between them. Her father
died soon after this union had taken place, died uninformed of it -- and her
mother followed him before she had an opportunity to disclose the secret of her
situation: for Mr. Harcourt dreaded the anger of his family, should they
discover that he had married a woman with so small a fortune as two thousand
pounds. My aunt Howard, whom I so long considered as my parent, was then
settled, and was the only friend my mother had, to whom she dared impart her
marriage, and to this disclosure she was driven by necessity; for she found
herself likely to become a mother. Mr. Howard was at that time on a visit to a
friend some hundred miles from Woodbine cott, and my aunt offered her sister an
asylum, there, till she should be released from her burden. It was there I was
born, and on the very day of my birth entrusted to the care of the faithful
Deborah, who had been brought up by my grandmother and married from her house.
She solemnly vowed never to divulge the secret of my birth; and when three
weeks after, my aunt Howard was delivered of a child, who expired in a few
days, it was determined that she should adopt me and ever take care of me as
her own, till it should be in the power of my parents to claim and acknowledge
me. -- Deborah alone, was privy to the imposture, and worthy has she proved
herself of the confidence placed in her. My father's friends having cause to
suspect he had formed some attachment, which did not altogether coincide with
the plans they had formed for his future establishment in life, had sent him
off on a commercial plan to Bengal, whilst my mother was lying in. Distracted
by this intelligence, as soon as her strength permitted, she resolved to follow
him; and leaving me in the care of Mrs. Howard, she embarked for India; but on
her arrival at Bengal learnt that her husband had executed his commissions at
that place, and was gone with some English factors up the country: impelled by
a pure and ardent affection, she followed the route he had taken, but in vain.
War began to advance with horrid strides, followed by devastation and famine,
and whilst searching for her husband, my mother fell into the hands of the
enemy. Lovely in her person, ornamented with all the charms of youth, she was
considered as a valuable prize among the captives, and was sold to a merchant,
who purchased slaves for the Grand Segnior. By long and tiresome journies she
reached Constantinople and was presented to the royal Turk, but fortunately her
person did not please him, and she was only purchased, merely to fill up the
number of his wives; without once receiving a visit from him, or being
solicited to entertain him in an improper manner. Ten years was she detained in
this place, where she says her time would have past pleasantly enough, had it
not been for the remembrance of my father and myself; but the thought of what
might have become of us, prevented her being happy or receiving the least
satisfaction from the various scenes of luxury and amusement that daily
surrounded her. In the summer season, the Grand Segnior sent his wives and all
the female part of his family in large parties to the different houses he had
in the country: and in one of these excursions my mother was struck with the
appearance of a slave, who used to walk on a terrace before the windows of the
apartments appointed for the women, apparently in a very ill state of health.
In the party of woman of which my mother made one was a beautiful tur^^ who was
sister to the Grand Signior, her name was Zayde. She had ever shown a visible
partiality to my mother, and cultivated her friendship with the utmost care.
She endeavored to attain from her instructions some knowledge of ^he English
language, and listened with attention, when she strove to instruct her in the
precepts of the Christian religion.

This young princess perceiving one day, that my mother regarded the sick slave
with fixed attention, took an opportunity to tell her, the slave was hers, that
he was a favorite, and had made an impression on her heart.

"I love him," said she, "but I have never told him so. I only endeavor to
make his servitude less painful by showing him every kindness in my power; but
whenever I tell him I am sorry to (...) him so unhappy, and wish I could remove
the cause of his affliction, he answers, that his sorrows can never be less,
till he is restored to liberty and the love of a beautiful Christian, who alone
can render either life or liberty desirable." "Thus much," continued she, I can
understand; but as I cannot fully comprehend his meaning, I wish you would see
and talk to him some evening, when, if you can learn from him, what will be
most conducive to his happiness, I will exert my utmost power to procure it for
him." -- My mother complied with the request of Zayde, and one evening in the
middle of July she accompanied her into the garden to give the Christian slave
the promised meeting.

The moon was at the full -- but the atmosphere was cloudy, and though it was
possible to distinguish objects, yet the light was not sufficient to permit a
discrimination of features.

She addressed the slave in English, told him how much Zayde was interested in
his behalf, and begged to learn from him, what could be done to comfort his
mind, and assist in the restoration of his health.

"I might say," replied the slave, "that liberty would restore me to all I so
feelingly regret -- but, alas! lady, I have lost what it is not (I greatly
fear) in the power of fate to restore. -- Married in early youth to a lovely
woman, who, to the charms of an engaging person, added all the fascinating
beauties of a pure and elevated mind, and separated from her in the very moment
when the delicacy of her situation most required a husband's tenderness and
fond solicitude, think what I must suffer from an absence of eleven years,
without having once heard whether either herself or child are living. Sent from
England by the cruel, pretended tenderness of parents, who valued wealth above
every other earthly consideration -- thrown by the chance of war into a
slavery, from whence I can never hope to escape; I am, I feel am, lost to the
world and dead to every thing but a remembrance of what I have been and what I
now am."

"Alas! it is very sad," replied my mother, bending forward to wipe off the
tears she felt trickling from her eyes.

Just then the moon broke from the cloud that had obscured her brightness and
shed her beams full on the face of the person with whom she was conversing. A
scream of mingled surprise and joy escaped her. -- It was her husband, who
under the same master, for the same term of years had endured slavery, and yet
no lucky chance had ever brought them together. Nay, even when she had observed
him on the terrace, his visage was ever bent toward the earth, and his hat
pulled over his eyes, and she had no opportunity to discover features, which
however altered by sickness and sorrow were still fresh in her memory, still
dear to her heart.

They heartily revealed their situation to the generous Zayde, who was
indefatigable till she had contrived the means for their escape. -- "And will
not you accompany us," said my mother, when she informed her of the plan she
had laid, and gave into their hands the means of putting it in execution.

"No," she replied, "you my dear friend have taught me the foundation of the
Christian religion; it teaches us to compassionate and relieve the distresses
of our fellow creatures; but it also teaches us never to forsake our parents. I
have a mother living, who is old. She says, I am her only comfort. -- It will
be wrong to leave her, to deprive her of what constitutes her whole felicity.
Go then, my friends, embrace this opportunity of emancipating yourselves from
slavery: leave me to the performance of my duty: and pray for me, that though I
do not, perhaps, pursue the right Christian mode of worship, yet, that the
offerings of a sincere and grateful heart may be accepted at the throne of
mercy." --

With eyes and hearts overflowing with gratitude and affection did my parents
take leave of this fair benevolent Mohammedan; but though they regained their
liberty, various incidents prevented their return to England, till within these
four years last past. They had frequently written to inquire after me; but
never received any answer; and when they arrived were informed from many people
that all Mr. Howard's family were dead, except the son, who was abroad. --

Mr. Harcourt found that his own family, except some distant branches, were
entirely extinct, and that a large fortune waited only his appearance and
proper claim. This he is now master of, and to this I am now the acknowledged
heiress. Caressed by my parents, respected once more by the world, who now
again behold me surrounded by affluence, my health and spirits daily returning,
what have I more to wish for? -- Alas! Celia, we are never content, and I most
ardently desire my poor Rooksby's reformation to complete my felicity. --
Kingly too, I could wish to hear that he was well and happy. But I will offer
the sacrifice of thanksgiving for the blessings I have received, and for
futurity trust entirely to a wise and bountiful Providence, who has never yet
forsaken me, and who I humbly hope never will.

I have been once to see Kingly's children; my mother went with me: they are
both well. Clara's children are at the same school and enjoy the same
advantages. Generous Kingly may heaven reward you for the disinterested
kindness you have shown these poor orphans, for indeed they are literally so,
being forsaken by both father and mother.

My dear Celia, pray for me, that I may support this unexpected, this wonderful
elevation of fortune as I ought, that while I share the pleasures of affluence
I may never forget the pangs of poverty or turn a deaf ear to the cry of
affliction.

Adieu! MERIEL.

LETTER LXVIII. FREDERIC KINGLY, ESQUIRE. to COL. ONSLOW.
April 16 th, 1790.
I AM returned to England once more; for my mind was so harassed by the
thoughts of what might be the fate of my beloved Meriel, that my health
declined, and I was advised to solicit an exchange and return to my native
place; where the air might restore me. I complied with the advice of my
friends, not from any opinion of my own that I was in danger, for the
complaints of the mind are so far superior to those of the body, that I was not
sensible of my own declining state. Meriel, in affliction, without friends,
without support, continually haunted my imagination.

On my arrival in England, I went immediately to my agent. He had heard no
tidings of her. His heart was not interested; he had therefore made only a few
inquiries and finding them fruitless, had given up the search. -- I determined
to remain a few days in London to rest after the fatigues of my voyage and then
visit my dear boys. -- My time hang heavy on my hands and I sauntered into a
coffee house toward the close of evening. A brother officer accosted me; we
chatted a few moments on indifferent subjects, and he proposed going to the
play. I accompanied him just to while away the time, rather than from any hope
of amusement. Just before the curtain rose, an elderly gentleman entered the
box opposite to that in which I was sitting, leading a lady, whom at the first
glance, I knew to be my adored, my lovely Meriel. Health again adorned her
countenance and sparkled in her eyes; yet there was impressed on her features a
sort of pensive shade, which seemed to say, she might be happier. Her dress
though, sweetly simple, and becoming, yet bespoke the wearer in affluent
circumstances, and the assidious attention of the gentleman, who accompanied
her, was evidently the effusions of tenderness. She received them with
complacency; nay, returned them with looks beaming expressive affection.

A young man in the box with me observed the emotions in my counteance, whilst
I regarded her. -- "Do you know that lady," said he, -- "I think I do sir, I
have some idea that her name is Rooksby." --

"I don't know her name," said he, "but she is a damned pretty creature, and
that old fellow deserves to be gibbetted for monopolizing her." --

A chill of horror ran through my heart, can Meriel Howard, said I, mentally,
be sunk from that eminence of virtue, which ever distinguished her, into so
low, so pitiable a character, as to exist on the wages of prostitution? "Does
she live with that gentleman?" said I, to my intelligencer.

"'It Is thought so," he replied, "she is quite a new face. I have seen her often
in public with him, and she seldom is accompanied by any one but an old woman,
who looks like a convenient."

"And is that all the reason you can give" said I fiercely, "for injuring the
character of a woman that ever was, and I trust ever will be free from blemish."

Oh! no," said he, "when I first saw her, it was at the opera; and I was told
she was a woman of that stamp; for she left her husband about a year and a half
ago and lived with a young officer of the name of Kingly."

I was going to answer with great warmth and inquire the name of the person,
who had thus dared to sport with my character; but my friend interposed and
obliged me to quit the playhouse without any farther information.

This transient glance of my dear Meriel, added to the villainous assertions of
the impertinent coxcomb, who vilified her name, had such an effect on my
spirits, that rest was a stranger to my eyes. I had not inquired the name of
the gentleman with whom I saw her: it was therefore impossible to trace her
out. For many evenings I frequented the theaters, the opera-house -- every
place of public amusement; but was still unsuccessful. She was not at any, or
if there, was effectually concealed from me. -- Unhappy, ill, disgusted with
every object that surrounded me, I determined one morning to visit my children,
who I had previously heard, were well, and endeavor to lose my chagrin in
their innocent caresses. The school they were at is about twenty-five miles
from town. I took a post chaise and arrived at the place about eleven o'clock.
An elegant carriage stood at the gate, which drew off to give me room to
alight. I asked the servant who opened the gate, for my boys. "They are in the
parlour," said he; I followed him, in fancy anticipating their dear embraces.
He threw open the parlour door. I advanced and saw, seated at the upper end of
the room, surrounded by the four boys, (for Clara's children are there)
distributing to them, toys and fruit, the interesting figure of Mrs. Rooksby.
Astonishment riveted me to the floor. She looked toward me; joy flashed from
her eyes. An exclamation of surprise escaped her, and before either of us had
time for reflection, I found I had seated myself beside her and clasped her in
my arms, while the dear children were climbing round, each striving to be the
first to share my caresses. However joy had for a moment made her forget
herself, she soon recovered her usual air of cautious timidity and disingaging
herself from my embrace, she presented me to an elderly lady, whom till then I
had not observed; and whom she addressed by the endearing title of mother. They
proposed taking the children home with them and dismissing my chaise to take a
seat in their coach and all return to town together. -- During our ride, she
unfolded to me a tale of wonder, unnecessary here to repeat; because she
informed me she has written your Amelia a full account of it.

I am a frequent visitor at Mr. Harcourt's, and enjoy her society undisturbed
by the fears of the world's censure; for under the shelter of paternal
protection, who shall dare to arraign her conduct? She informs me she has not
heard from her husband, since his release from the King's bench: but imagines
he is wandering abroad with the wild Clara. You will hardly believe it
possible, that young Howard, who refused to assist or even acknowledge the dear
Meriel, when she was in distress and he thought her his sister, has been to pay
his respects to her since he has discovered she is a wealthy relative. She
received him politely; but did not ask him to repeat his visit. He is
affluent," said she, "he does not want assistance, and I do not wish to be
pestered with his company."

Far different was her conduct to Hester Mossop, who is now a widow with three
children and in very indigent circumstances. She met Mrs. Mossop by accident at
a perfumer's shop, and judging from her appearance that she was no longer the
wealthy, haughty woman, who had never known distress, accosted her in a manner,
that encouraged her to make her a visit; nay, she entreated her to do so. From
her she learned Hester's necessities, and hesitated not a moment to exert her
benevolence to remove them. She inquired after Susan. Tears were the only
answer she received. -- Alas! poor Susan! seduced by Belger, led into all
manner of folly by Clara, she fell from one degree of vice to another, till
oppressed by the complicated evils of infamy, disease and a broken heart, she
sunk into an untimely grave, in her last hours in want of the common
necessaries of life. Meriel gave a tear to her memory and to sooth the
affliction of the mother immediately formed a plan for Hester's support. She
advanced money for her to take a shop furnished well with haberdashery and
hosiery; and by the many recommendations of Mrs. Harcourt, she is likely to
gain a very decent subsistence. Young Mossop is married to a rich heiress; but
they live in some town very distant from London, and he found it quite
inconvenient to write and inquire after his mother and sisters.

I hope, now, we shall soon see you in England: I feel uncommonly happy, and I
wish you to see and share my happiness. -- Methinks, the wheel of fortune has
gone its round: and we who have been thrown the very bottom, are now beginning
to rise. I see my dear Meriel enjoying all the comforts, all the elegances of
life -- caressed, beloved, esteemed by all, and I cannot help indulging the
flattering hope, (call it not chimerical) that I shall one day call her mine!
Oh! Onslow -- when that blessed hour arrives! (if such an hour Heaven has in
store for me) when I shall see the affection of her faithful heart beam from
her expressive eyes, unchecked by fear, I shall think myself at the very summit
of human felicity!

My kindest remembrances and best wishes attend your Amelia.

Ever yours, F. KINGLY.
P. S. Previous to Mrs. Rooksby's assisting Hester, the poor creature made the
humiliating confession, that it was her artifices, to which she was instigated
by her mother, that first separated me from my beloved Meriel; but that noble
minded woman frankly forgave her; never witheld her friendship from her, and
has never once since mentioned the circumstance.



LETTER LXIX. MRS. ONSLOW to MISS SHELBURNE.
November 10 th, 1790.
YOU will perhaps be surprised, my dear madam, to receive a letter from a
person to whom you are a stranger; but though I never was honored with the
acquaintance of Miss Shelburne, yet she has no doubt heard of Amelia Sidney,
who has been so highly honored by the friendship of our equally beloved Mrs
Rooksby. --

That lady from a variety of incidents has been prevented from writing to you
for several months past; and I am now desired by her to inform you that she is
in health; but totally inadequate to the task of relating to you the scenes in
which she has been lately engaged. -- I know her motive for thus declining a
task which she ever considered pleasureable, that of writing to her esteemed
Celia is delicacy: she cannot inform you of what has lately occurred, without
making mention of her own magnanimity. Her fortitude has ever been conspicuous,
it has sustained her under some of the heaviest trials to which the human heart
is incident; but in this last she has risen almost above humanity. Pardon the
expression; for I am fully sensible how much the human heart is capable of, it
is tempered by a great, an all wise Being, who will never inflict trials beyond
our power to support; -- but we daily see such instances of depravity that we
look with a kind of wonder on those who through life maintain that dignified
conduct, that purity of manner and universal benevolence which is the true
characteristic of Christianity. -- But I intrude on your patience, and defer
the interesting narrative. To proceed then.

On my arrival in England after an absence of six years I was both surprised
and pleased to see the alteration which had taken place in the circumstanes of
our friend. She had regained all that softness, that delicacy of countenance,
for which she has been universally admired; but which sickness and sorrow had
when I left her faded into langour. She was cheerful and apparently happy; but
still some hours of painful reflection would intrude; for she was totally
ignorant of the fate of her husband. He might return to England, he might
demand her from her father and mother, when he found her the affluent heiress
of a large fortune. -- These ideas continually haunted her, and sometimes
interrupted her most cheerful hours. Mrs. Harcourt had invited me to spend a
few weeks with them at a feat of their's situated on the banks of the Thames,
near Windsor. I accepted the invitation, and had been there near three weeks,
when Mrs. Rooksby entered my appartment one morning, pale and ready to faint.
She could not speak, but put a note into my hands, which she had just received.
It was from Clara -- and in a few incoherent lines, represented Rooksby in a
most wretched situation, dying and in the utmost distress. -- I had known so
many instances of Clara's art, that I endeavored to persuade Mrs. Rooksby from
the resolution, she had formed of going immediately to town and administering
relief to her husband: but all I could say, joined to the united entreaties of
her parents, could not prevail, and all I could do was to accompany her. She
ordered the coachman to set her down according to the direction contained in
Clara's billet. It was at a mean house in an obscure street in Westminster.. We
enquired for her husband by the name of Moreton, and was shown up two pair of
stairs into a small back room, where on a bed without hangings, lay all that
remained of the once elegant affluent Rooksby, worn to a skeleton, and in the
very last stage of a decline, (for he had never recovered the effects of the
wound) and riot and intemperance had hastened the period of his existence. --
Beside the bed, (supporting his head on her arm, the tears flowing from her
eyes) sat Clara: but I could never have conceived it to be the lovely Clara,
who had stolen the heart of Rooksby from our dear friend, for her appearance
was squallid and miserable. Sunk eyes, pale cheeks, every indication of disease
and poverty was marked upon her person. --

She turned her eyes toward us as we entered, but without changing her
attitude. She has very fine eyes and in spite of their languor still retained
sufficient expression, to inform us, that she was equally oppressed by the
situation of the poor sufferer on the bed, and shame at appearing in the
presence of the woman she had injured beyond reparation. Our excellent Meriel
advanced, (checking the powerful feelings of her heart) and as with one hand,
she took one of her dying husband's, she extended the other toward Clara: and
in accents scarcely audible, bade her be comforted. Struck by such an uncommon
proof of benevolence, the poor suffering criminal sunk on her knees. She
clasped the hand extended toward her, raised her streaming eyes; -- but could
not give vent to the fullness of her heart by words.

"Go," cried our magnanimous Meriel, "go, my poor penitent Clara, and compose
yourself: I will stay and attend my husband:" then turning to me, she
continued, "Shall I entreat you Amelia to return and inform my parents that you
have left me in the performance of my duty: that you have left me attending the
sick bed of a husband, who raised me from obscurity to an elevated fortune:
tell them, I remember not his errors -- they were the children of human nature:
-- but his benevolence will never be obliterated from my mind. -- That was the
offspring of Heaven. -- As she spoke, she waved her hand; I found it was
impossible to disobey her, and retired from the apartment -- but not from the
house. I dispatched a short note to Mrs. Harcourt and then exerted myself to
obtain for Rooksby, and my dear rigidly duteous friend, every assistance which
money could procure. -- It is a sad thing to acknowledge, but so it was, those
very people who had suffered Rooksby and Clara to want even the means to
support existence, whilst they thought them destitute of friends and money, no
sooner saw them visited by persons, who were supposed wealthy, and beheld the
contents of my purse, which fortunately was amply supplied, than they were
ready to run! to fly! to perform any dirty, or painful work for which they
expected to be well paid. But I mean not to make human nature despicable by
this observation. These people were poor. -- And God knows we may all yield to
temptations, when poverty is the strong incentive.

I heard from my friend every hour, though she herself imagined I was returned
to her father and mother. About midnight I heard an extraordinary bustle up
stairs, and on inquiring the cause, found that Rooksby who had never been able
to speak to his angelic wife more than monofylables, since her arrival, had
been seized with a kind of fit, and was expected every moment to expire. I
thought it improper for Mrs. Rooksby to be left in such a situation to the
entire care of strangers, and therefore sent up word that I was returned from
the country with a message from her mother, and if she pleased would come up.
She said, she would be happy to see me. When I went into the room I found her
seated on the bed, supporting her dying husband, who was at that time easy and
seemingly dozing. His right arm was encircling her waist, his head rested on
her bosom, she pointed to a chair by the bedside, but did not speak. On the
opposite side of the bed, stood a woman with volatiles which they had been
applying to the nose and temples of the expiring man; and at the foot was Clara
on her knees her eyes elevated, her hands, clasped, and her whole countenance
bearing testimony to the anguish that rent her soul. In my life, I never saw a
more interesting scene, nor never I hope shall I witness such another. -- I sat
down in silence, and in a few moments the Physician, whom Mrs. Rooksby had sent
for arrived. He pronounced the patient past all hope, and a few hours confirmed
the sentence. It was near seven o'clock, when starting as it were from sleep,
he gazed ardently on his wife.

"Oh Meriel," said he, "I dreamt I was in the realms of bliss and you conducted
me there. Blessed woman, if you forgive me, if you pray for my entrance into
that place of eternal peace; I shall, I know I shall, be received. -- "Oh!"
said she, with fervor, "May Heaven so forgive my offenses as I pardon every
offense of yours toward me. -- "But Clara," cried he, "poor guilty Clara!" --
"I will be her friend," replied Mrs. Rooksby. "Enough," said he, "may every
blessing crown you here, and everlasting joys" -- He could not finish the
sentence, but remained silent and almost inanimate for the space of half an
hour. He then moved and took a cordial which she offered him. I prevailed on
her to quit her painful situation at the head of the bed and let him lie down.
She did so, but he still retained her hand. -- Just before the final scene
closed, he raised himself a little, and looking earnestly in her face -- "My
children," he cried, "my dear boys." -- "Are they not mine," she replied in an
accent to which no words can do justice.

"Oh! what a wretch I have been!!!" -- said he. -- His head sunk on her
shoulder, he endeavored to throw his arms around her, but Death had arrested
their power. -- He groaned -- struggled for the power of utterance -- and in
that struggle expired.

I knew the extreme sensibility of the heart with which I had to deal. I
attempted not to console her, I rather encouraged her to give a loose to her
feelings, and in a few hours she became sufficiently composed to submit to my
direction, and suffer herself to be conveyed to her father and mother: but not
'till she had given proper directions for the future support of Clara. This
unhappy woman confessed in the anguish of her heart, that at the very moment
when our incomparable friend gave her assistance and countenance in Devonshire,
she was ploting her ruin, that the chief part of the letter she wrote to her,
and of which you have had a copy was the invention of her own brain, and that
from a very child she has been the offspring of folly. --

Mrs. Rooksby heard her confession without any emotion, save that of
compassion, and when she had finished, bade her not despair but resolve on a
new course of life, and trust in that bounteous Creator for pardon, who never
turned from the truly penitent. -- She has sent this unfortunate and I may say
guilty woman into Wales, were she has become responsible for her board, and
allows her ten pounds a year for her pocket and extra expenses. The children
she has taken entirely under her own care.

My dear Miss Shelburne, I cannot help now indulging the most sanguine hopes,
that I shall see this worthy woman rewarded for all her sufferings; shall see
her soon united to the man to whom for many years she has been sincerely
attached, and from whom only the most cruel treachery could have separated her;
-- for Hester Mossop has confessed that she was the author of those letters
which prevented her union with Rainsforth. We do not let Mr. Harcourt know that
Hester has made this confession, for he would never forgive her, and I much
fear would insist on Mrs. Rooksby's withdrawing her friendship entirely from
her.

Mrs. Rooksby bid me say she will write as soon as she is able, and in the mean
time desires you will believe she can never be otherwise than your friend, and
in the same rank begs leave to be placed,

Your obliged AMELIA ONSLOW.

LETTER LXX. MERIEL to CELIA. Several letters between this and the preceding,
are omitted.

Sept. 29 th, 1791.
I HAVE foreborn to write; because I knew my dear Amelia had informed you of
every material occurrence. I knew she had told you that I had promised after my
year of mourning was expired, to give my hand to the man, who first possessed
my heart. That year was ended on this very day, and I am now the wife of
Kingly. I could almost find it in my heart to renounce the name and say, I am
the wife of Rainsforth. --

My dear Celia, pray for me, that the tide of joy, which now rushes on my
heart, may not impair my gratitude, or lead me through my adoration of the
creature to forget the Creator, to whom only adoration is due.

Oh, Heavenly Providence! am I indeed thus happy -- yes, it is a blessed reality.
I can look up to a father to whom it is an honor to be allied. I can see the
sweet effusions of maternal tenderness beam on me from a beloved mother's eyes.
I am united to the man of my heart, I am the adopted mother of his children. --
Where! where! is there a human being as superlatively happy as myself? happier
they cannot be. I can lay my hand on my heart and fervently pray even for the
felicity of my enemies. Enemies did I say, I will forget I ever had any, past
scenes of sorrow shall be obliterated from my memory, and remembering only the
present happiness I will endeavor to deserve its continuation, by exerting the
abilities with which I am amply endowed to cheer the desponding heart, sooth
the afflicted spirits and soften the bed of pain! -- Whatever injuries I have
received, I will repay with kindness! and looking round the world with a smile
of tranquillity, wish every being as transcendently happy as myself!

Mrs. Onslow desires remembrances to you. My husband bids me say, should the
commotions which at present agitate the Gallic shore, disturb you in your
religious retreat; remember, you have a home, to which you can with confidence
repair -- a home, where you will be received with transport, and where you may
consider yourself in the mansion of a sister! Heaven bless and protect you, is
the ardent prayer of your friend in sincerity.

MERIEL KINGLY.

THE END.

