PLEASING INSTRUCTOR, OR ENTERTAINING MORALIST.

Consisting of Select Essays, Relations, Visions, and Allegories. Collected
from the most eminent English Authors.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, New Thoughts on Education.

A NEW EDITION.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY JOSEPH BUMSTEAD.

SOLD BY HIM, No 20, UNION-STREET; BY B. LARKIN, AND E. LARKIN, CORNHILL; AND
BY D. WEST, MARLBORO'-STREET.

1795.

PREFACE.
THE kind reception the Pleasing Instructor has met with in general, since its
first publication, merits the Editor's most sincere and hearty thanks. In this
edition, many additions and amendments are made, which, it is hoped, will meet
with approbation. Several original essays, by a friend, are inserted, which, in
the table of contents, are marked Anon. English mottos are prefixed to the
essays; and care has been taken to insert such only as are concise, apposite,
and striking, that they may have the better effect on the minds of youth.

The reader will be kind enough to observe, that the Pleasing Instructor was at
first chiefly undertaken, and since continued, with a view to exhibit a
connected plan of morality for the instruction of the youth of both sexes, and
free from that incoherent jumble so remarkable in all collections of this kind
which have hitherto been published. The Utile Dulci has been consulted, and
morality here appears smiling, and free from that unpleasing formality with
which she is too often disguised by partial, or mistaken pedants. The several
relations, Eastern stories, dreams, etc. will, it is to be hoped, be
recommended to young minds, whose attentions are thereby particularly engaged,
and, by the assistance of which, morality steals insensibly into their good
graces, and makes the most lasting impression: The most elegant writers have
been consulted by the Editor; so that the young reader, by being conversant
with the following essays, will, at the same time, acquire a true taste of an
case and elegance in his native tongue; an accomplishment too much neglected by
the teachers of youth, who seldom look on it as an improvement so absolutely
necessary as it really is. And though the entertainment and instruction of
youth, at an English school, were principally considered in the first
publication of this book, yet the Editor has had the pleasure to find it since
honored with the attention and approbation of those more advanced in years, and
selected by the polite and judicious through-out the kingdom, insomuch that it
has now acquired a place in almost every parlour window.

THOUGHTS ON EDUCATION, BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION.
THOUGH EDUCATION be a subject that almost all Authors, of all ages, have
written upon; yet many have attempted it who were strangers, perhaps, to the
most extensive definition of the WORD; others have laid down very plausible
rules and systems for it, which, upon experience, have been found
impracticable; while others have obliged the world with such valuable and plain
plans, that any thinking man must be apt to wonder how they should have been
missed or neglected; yet these able writers have, to ignorant and undiscerning
pretenders, planned and planned in vain: from which it may plainly he inferred,
that different passions and dispositions require different management and
application, to so endless a variety, that it is merely impossible to enumerate
methods for the proper correction of every enormity in every human mind, or to
lay down rules for the best incitements to, and encouragements of virtue and
science; so that the main point, after all their prescriptions, must
necessarily center in the tutors or governors of schools and seminaries. Much
learning and great abilities, (though material articles) are not the only
essentials; he who has the most learning does not always convey it in the best
and clearest manner to others: some cannot or will not be at the pains to find
out particular methods (where general ones fail) to render what they would
communicate intelligible to the various capacities of their (...); nor do
learning and knowledge always center in the same person. Useful knowledge, or
what I would have comprehended by the word politeness, "To define politeness,
we may say, it is all moral virtues in epitome: it is a combination of
discretion, civility, complaisance, and circumspection, to pay every one the
respect they have a right to demand of us; besides, an exact knowledge of
decorum, and of what every one owes to his respective quality, dule to maintain
his character as becomes him. And all this must be dressed and (...) off with
an agreeable, and insinuating air, diffused through all our Words and actions."
is the grand mark or summit of education we should aim at; learning, as a
famous author has expressed himself, "is but the vehicle that carries us to it."

An austere or learned pedant has sometimes whipped Latin, Greek, etc. into a
lad, whose very disgust to it increased perhaps with the acquisition thereof:
but it is a manifest absurdity to maintain or imagine that any one can be awed
into a love of learning and virtue. A boy is not at all cured of a fault, who
only avoids it for fear of punishment: he must be influenced by a love for
honor and credit, and with a laudable ambition to pursue them: any master, who
is himself a good and discerning man, will not be much at a loss how to confirm
and ratify him in his choice, being capacitated as a good man, to communicate
to him the secret impulses, the benign reflections of his own honest, and
therefore happy mind; as a discerning man, to observe and remark to him what
wild havoc and varied desolation, vice and folly never fail to bring on their
votaries; which may be clearly demonstrated, either by living examples among
their acquaintances, or from books, by similar relations, allegories, or
essays, (such as (...) inserted in this collection) applied at proper times on
proper occasions, judiciously explained, and wisely inculcated: But an ill man,
though ever so learned, can never be a good schoolmaster; it being impossible
he should, with a due sensibility, describe or enforce impulses of goodness he
does not feel, or demonstrate to others with clearness and impartiality the
effects of th^se vices and follies to which he himself is so particularly
blassed and attached; may, even the very best precepts and documents (could a
master of this stamp be capable of such) would fail of their due force and
influence from the mouth of one whose own manners and dispositions are
contradictions to them: Therefore a bad man, in the point of education, must
miscarry, and even a good man may; for as no man ought to be well bred (if a
man can be well bred) at the expense of religion and virtue; so neither ought
any man to practice them in so morose and surly a manner, as to deter others
from imitation. I shall endeavor to explain myself yet more clearly by the two
following characters, which I shall represent by the names of Candidus and
Denuncius.

Candidus is a man of extensive learning, has an exact knowledge of human
nature, a great experience of the world, and of those differences which result
from constitution, age, received opinions, external fortune, education, custom,
and conversation; manages the tempers of his pupils with undescribeable
artfulness, so consequently can adapt or address his admonitions or
instructions to the most salutary ends, be his scholars ever so numerous, By
numerous, is not meant here many scholars at once, but at various times; as
perhaps no man can to perfection teach more than twelve or fourteen at a time.
or their dispositions ever so various.

As for the qualities of his mind, he is mild, humane, affable, affectionate,
and even invitingly accessible; encouraging his pupils in the display of all
their little doubts, queries, and divided opinions; teaching them, at the same
time, not to persist in an opinion, etc. because they had once avowed it; but
to come frankly into conviction; and would frankly, with a condescending bow,
smile, etc. thank a scholar for any little officious services or intended
obligations; nay, frequently apologize, or ask pardon, for any omission,
mistake, misapprehension, or similar modes of behavior; such as frequently
occur among the best bred and polite; and thus by being treated as men, they
become emulous of being such. Familiarities in a tyrant are observed to beget
contempt; in him respect and gratitude; for as he has not even a thought that
is ambitious, wrong, or malicious, he never was or can be seen by them in a
little, mean, or ridiculous light; but his whole conduct is the living object
of their imitation. Thus, as his character is uniform, his temper serene and
steady, the influence acquired in his school is unlimited: he applauds with so
much pleasure, and reproves with so much tender concern and affection, that
they love him as a parent. So constantly devout and fervent in the duties of
religion and morality, that they reverence him as a saint, and consider him as
a Mentor: they are awed by his virtues, not by his severities; and by a
constant attention to his doctrine, exemplified in his own life, his pupils
frequently acquire "such a conviction of the consciousness of a Deity to all
their thoughts, that every inordinate wish becomes secretly suppressed by the
most scrupulous circumspection."

Such is the amiable Candidus, and such the engaging and successful methods he
makes use of, -- To rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instructions over the mind,
To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix
The generous purpose in the glowing breast.


Denuncius too is a man of learning, but not so remarkable for his learning as
the ostentation of it: therefore knowledge he cannot have much of, because if
he had, he would see so much weakness even in the perfection of human reason,
that he would in consequence despise, not be proud of, his own miserable
pittance: watching and assisting the openings of little minds, enlarging their
ideas, sowing the seeds of goodness, or weeding out enormities, though very
essential points, are yet such as he is equally ignorant and unconcerned about,
wanting that necessary discernment to deduce the actions of men to their
minutest sources, or to infer consequences from their manners or actions; but
his incapacity in this is not the least obstruction to his general acceptance,
which my wisest readers will, on first thoughts, wonder at; but then let them
consider, that there are hundreds of parents who can judge of a lad's
advancement in founds, syllables, words, or languages, who are utterly
incapable of discerning the enlargement of his mental faculties, and their
wonder will cease. I have observed before, that he is vain and ostentatious: I
should have added, passionate, pedantic, arrogant, morose, and ill-natured; the
natural produce of a narrow and ignorant mind. As passionate, he frequently
opposes commotion with commotion; so that his scholars look upon his severities
as revenge, or the gratification of his own contesting humor, not the
necessary correction of their faults. His passion too drives him to such
lengths, as often subjects him to undue concessions, so that he destroys the
authority and order of his school by his very endeavors to preserve them: in
short, as his behavior in school is exactly the reverse to that of Candidus,
so are its effects; for Denuncius is as heartily ridiculed and despised, as the
other is reverenced and beloved. While their boys, though perhaps with the
equal approbation of their several parents, leave their respective schools with
this difference, i. e. The instructions and example of Candidus having
dispelled from before his pupils the mist of ignorance, and enabled them to see
clearly and judge infallibly of the merits and demerits of good and evil, and
of the natural consequences thereof, his young men are thereby enabled to guard
against all incitements to the visionary pleasure of guilty life, and to steer
their course with security and credit through the world: whereas those of
Denuncius, not having had their senses and reasoning faculties exercised, or
their judgment cultivated, but tyrannized into implicit obedience, and perhaps
into an irreparable meanness, abjectness, and slavishness of spirit, sally
forth into action, and the wide world at random; ignorant of the roads that
lead to true honor and happiness, and unapprized of the latent dangers of vice
and error, till perhaps they are surprised, swallowed up, or otherwise undone
by their consequences.

Notwithstanding the reverseness of these two characters, they are almost
always miserably confounded by the undiscerning world, who are ever liable to
be deceived by false appearances. Narrow reserve, and pedantic moroseness have
passed for sound wisdom and profound discretion: Instructors of youth have
degenerated into the corruptors and depravers of it; authority into tyranny,
and submission into slavery: hence it is, that the most despicable and
worthless pretenders have put up for that veneration and esteem, only due to
men of ability and worth; and oftener men of ability and worth have been
obliged to share the contempt due to knaves and dunces by this means, the most
laudable and honorable profession in the world, i. e. the instructing of
youth, is esteemed mean, dependent, and servile; and thus, in far more
instances than immediately relate to my purpose, a nice observer may discern.
"That the boundaries of distinction between good and evil are almost lost in
the world."

Grammatical learning is at present, perhaps, too much out of fashion,
especially among the ladies. Most of our English Grammars are so dependent upon
the Latin, that they appear only translations of them, introducing many
needless perplexities; as superfluous cases, genders, moods, tenses, etc.
peculiarities which our language is exempt from: therefore it must proceed from
ignorance or parade in any schoolmaster, to teach or pretend much advantage
therefrom, to a mere English scholar; and it is owing to this ignorance or
unsuccessful pretense, that English Grammar is so much neglected, or so lightly
esteemed as it is, even amongst men of learning; though it is generally
allowed, that none can speak or write properly who are ignorant of Grammar:
therefore it becomes necessary that a practical English Grammar See Fisher's
English Grammar.
should be consistent with itself, and independent of the Latin, except in such
articles as are common to both.

People can never display their talents to much advantage, either in writing or
conversation, unless they have a taste for the beauty and propriety of their
mother tongue; and which they can never have, without learning it, so as to
know the nature and kinds of words, with their connections and dependencies
upon one another. That many women read much, and yet not to edification, is
chiefly because they are ignorant of these connections and dependencies, and
thereby apply relatives to wrong antecedents, verbs to wrong names,
particularly where there is a genitive case between a nominative word and the
verb; mistake things for persons, and persons for things, and are thereby
misled in the sense of what they are about to trace, especially in
circumstantial authors, or such as the generality call dark and obscure
writers, meaning those who, by transposition, etc. deviate from the general
order of the language: they feel an entanglement, though they know not what or
where, and are equally blind to the beauties and idioms of language. I could
easily exemplify this, but it would be tedious to demonstrate it to those who
know nothing of government or construction, and needless to those who do, and
have ever experienced the want of it in others.

Women being thus left lame in their learning, are in a great measure incapable
of further improving themselves in spite of all the pains that writers have
taken, or may take, till the obstacle be removed: and still to aggravate the
case, they are mostly put to sewing, or similar articles under the care of some
mistress, who is perhaps either utterly incapable of assisting them in the
pursuit of knowledge, or who, from a crowd of scholars, wants time to point
out, or explain to them, such places or subjects of books as are best adapted
to their several wants, or even to direct them in the choice of books. Others
there are who have not a book in their schools, or such only as are no way
suitable for youth. These impediments are very lamentable, especially as they
occur in the very nick of time a young lady should be taught to think, reflect,
and form a taste of life in.

I do not mean to recommend reading at the expense of sewing; but would only
make a principle of the former. There are several governesses, doubtless, who
are very capable of instructing young ladies in both, which would form an
agreeable variety, by relaxing or relieving them from one by the other.

Those who have no taste for intellectual amusements, will seize upon the next
thing at hand, be it of ever so light or fantastical a kind. "A love for
diversions, where it has once got footing, steals on persons insensibly, till
it engrosses their whole time: it therefore becomes necessary to get the start
of it, and prepossess them early with a love of books."

A. FISHER.

THE PLEASING INSTRUCTOR, OR ENTERTAINING MORALIST.
The Practice of VIRTUE recommended.
If Happiness (...) your Pursuit,
Plant Virtue -- and Content's the Fruit.
GAY.
WHEN Hercules, says the divine Prodicus, was in that part of his youth in
which it was natural for him to consider what course of life he ought to
pursue, he one day retired into a desert, where the silence and solitude of the
place very much favored his meditations. As he was musing on his present
condition, and very much perplexed in himself on the state of life he should
choose, he saw two women of a larger size than ordinary approaching toward him.
One of them had a very notable air, and graceful deportment; her beauty was
natural and easy; her person clean and unspotted; her eyes cast toward the
ground, with an agreeable reserve; her motion and behavior full of modesty;
and her raiment white as snow. -- The other had a great deal of health and
floridness in her countenance, which she had helped with an artificial white
and red, and endeavored to appear more graceful than ordinary in her mein, by
a mixture of affectation in all her gestures. She had a wonderful confidence
(...) in her looks, and all the variety of colors (...) dress, that she
thought were the most proper to show her complexion to advantage. She cast her
eyes on herself, then turned them on those that were present, to see how they
liked her, and often looked on the figure she made in her own shadow. Upon her
nearer approach to Hercules. she stepped before the other lady (who came
forward with a regular composed carriage) and running up to him, accosted him
in the following manner.

My dear Hercules, (say (...)) I find you are very much divided in your own
thoughts upon the way of life that you ought to choose: ^e my friend, and follow
me; I will lead you into (...) possession of pleasure, and out of the reach of
pain, and remove you from all the noise and disquietude of business. The
affairs of either war or peace shall have no power to disturb you. Your whole
employment shall be to make your life easy, and to entertain every sense with
its proper gratifications. Sumptuous tables, beds of roses, clouds of perfumes,
concerts of music, crowds of beauties, are all in readiness to receive you.
Come along with me into this region of delights, this world of pleasure, and
bid farewell for ever to care, to pain, and to business.

Hercules, hearing the lady talk after this manner, desired to know her name;
to which she answered, My friends, and those who are well acquainted with me,
call me Happiness; but my enemies, and those who would injure my reputation,
have given me the name of Pleasure.

By this time the other lady was come up, who addressed herself to the young
hero is a very different manner.

Hercules. (says she) I offer myself to you because I know you are descended
from the gods, and give proofs of that descent, by your love of virtue, and
application to the studies proper for your age. This makes me hope you will
gain both for yourself and me an immortal reputation. But before I invite you
into my society and friendship, I will be open and sincere with you; and must
lay down this as an established truth, that there is nothing truly valuable
which (...) purchased without pains and labor. The gods ^ave^ set a price upon
every real and noble pleasure. If you would gain the favor of the Deity, you
must be at the pains of worshipping him: if the friendship of good men, you
must study to oblige them; if you would be honored by your country, you must
take care to serve it. In short, if you would be eminent in war or peace, you
must become master of all the qualifications that can make you so. These are
the only terms and conditions upon which I can propose happiness. The goddess
of Pleasure here broke in upon her discourse: you see, (said she) Hercules, by
her own confession, the way to her pleasure is long and difficult, whereas that
which I propose is short and easy. Alas! (said the other lady, whose visage
glowed with a passion made up of scorn and pity) what are the pleasures you
propose? To eat before you are hungry, drink before you are thirsty, sleep
before you are tired, to gratify appetites before they are raised, and raise
such appetites as nature never planted. You never heard the most delicious
music, which is the praise of one's self; nor saw the most beautiful object,
which is the work of one's own hands. Your votaries pass away their youth in a
dream of mistaken pleasure, while they are hoarding up anguish, torment, and
remorse for old age.

As for me, I am the friend of the gods and of good men, an agreeable companion
of the artisan, an household guardian to the fathers of families, a patron and
protector of servants, and an associate in all true and generous friendship.
The banquets of my votaries are never costly, but always delicious; for none
eat and drink at them who are not invited by hunger and thirst. Their slumbers
are sound, and their wakings are cheerful. My young men have the pleasure of
hearing themselves praised by those who are in years, and those who are in
years, of being honored by those who are young. In a word, my followers are
favored by the gods, beloved by their acquaintances, esteemed by their
country, and (after the close of their labors) honored by posterity.

We know, by the life of this memorable hero, to which of these two ladies he
gave up his heart; and, I believe, every one who reads this, will do him the
justice to approve his choice.

I very much admire the speeches of these ladies, as containing in them the
chief arguments for a life of virtue, or a life of pleasure, that could enter
into the thoughts of an Heathen; but am particularly pleased with the different
figures he gives the two goddesses. Our modern authors have represented
pleasure and vice with an alluring face, but ending in snakes and monsters.
Here she appears in all the charms of beauty, though they are false and
borrowed; and by that means compose a vision entirely natural and pleasing.

I have translated this allegory for the benefit of youth; and particularly of
those who are still in the deplorable state of nonexistence, and whom I most
earnestly entreat to come into the world. Let my embrios show the least
inclination to any single virtue, and I shall allow it to be struggling toward
birth. I do not expect of them, that, like the hero in the foregoing story,
they should go about as soon as they are born, with a club in their hands, and
a lion's skin on their shoulders, to root out monsters, and destroy tyrants:
but as the finest author of all antiquity has said upon this very occasion,
Though a man has not the abilities to distinguish himself in the most shining
parts of a great character, he has certainly ^he capacity of being just,
faithful, modest, and temperate.

On IDLENESS.
He who defers his work from day to day,
Does on a river's brink expecting stay.
'Till the whole stream which stopped him should be gone,
Which, as it runs, for ever will run on.
Anon.
IDLENESS is so general a distemper, that I cannot but imagine a speculation on
this subject will be of universal use. There is hardly any one person without
some alloy of it; and thousands besides myself spend more time in an idle
uncertainty, whether of two affairs to begin first, than would have been
sufficient to have ended them both. The occasion of this seems to be the want
of some necessary employment to put the spirits in motion, and to awaken them
out of their lethargy. If I had less leisure, I should have more; for I should
then find time distinguished into portions, some for business, and others for
the indulging of pleasures: but now one face of indolence overspreads the
whole, and I have no land mark to direct myself by. Were one's time a little
straitened by business, like water enclosed in its banks, it would have some
determined course; but unless it be put into some channel, it has no current,
but becomes a deluge without either use or motion.

When Scanderberg, Prince of Epirus, was dead, the Turks, who had but too often
felt the force of his arm in the battles he had won from them, imagined, that
by wearing a piece of his bones near their hearts, they should be animated with
a vigor and force like that which inspired him when living. As I am like to be
but of little use while I live, I am resolved to do what good I can after my
decease; and have accordingly ordered my bones to be disposed of in this manner
for the good of my countrymen, who are troubled with too exorbitant a degree of
fire. All fox-hunters, upon wearing me, would in a short time be brought to
endure their bed in a morning, and perhaps even quit them with regret at ten:
instead of hurrying away to teaze a poor animal, and run away from their own
thoughts, a chair or a chariot would be thought the most desirable means of
performing a remove from one place to another. I should be a cure for the
unnatural desire of John (...) for dancing, and a specific to lessen the
inclination Mrs. Fidget has to motion, and cause her always to give her
approbation to the present place she is in. In fine, no Egyptian Mummy was ever
half so useful in physic, as I should be to those feverish constitutions, to
repress the violent follies of youth, and to give to each action its proper
weight and repose.

I can stifle any violent inclination, and oppose a torrent of anger, or the
solicitations of revenge, with success. But indolence is a stream which flows
slowly on, but yet undermines the foundation of every virtue. A vice of a more
lively nature were a more desirable tyrant than this rust of the mind, which
gives a tincture of its nature to every action of one's life. It were as little
hazard to be tossed in a storm, as to lie thus perpetually becalmed: and it is
to no purpose to have within one the seeds of a thousand good qualities, if we
want the vigor and resolution necessary for exerting them. Death brings all
persons back to an equality; and this image of it, this slumber of the mind,
leaves no difference between the greatest genius and the meanest understanding:
a faculty of doing things remarkably praise worthy thus concealed, is of no
more use to the owner than a heap of gold to a man who dares not use it.

Tomorrow is still the fatal time when all is to be rectified: tomorrow
comes, it goes, and still I please myself with the shadow whilst I lose the
reality; unmindful that the present time alone is ours, the future is yet
unborn, and the past is dead, and can only live (as parents in their children)
in the actions it has produced.

The time we live ought not to be computed by the number of years, but by the
use which has been made of it; thus, it is not the extent of ground, but the
yearly rent which gives the value to the estate. Wretched and thoughtless
creatures, in the only place where covetousness were a virtue, we turn
prodigals! Nothing lies upon our hands with such uneasiness; nor has there been
so many devices for any one thing, as to make it slide away imperceptibly and
to no purpose. A shilling shall be hoarded up with care, whilst that which is
above the price of an estate is flung away with disregard and contempt. There
is nothing now adays so much avoided as a solicitous improvement of every part
of time; it is a report that must be shunned as one tenders the name of a wit
and a fine genius, and as one fears the dreadful character of a laborious
prodder: but notwithstanding this, the greatest wits any age has produced
thought far otherwise; for who can think either Socrates or Demosthenes lost
any reputation, by their continual pains both in overcoming the defects and
improving the gifts of nature? All are acquainted with the labor and assiduity
with which Tully acquired his eloquence. Seneca, in his letters to Lucilius,
assures him, there was not a day in which he did not either write something, or
read and epitomize some good author; and I remember Pliny, in one of his
letters, where he gives an account of the various methods he used to fill up
every vacancy of time, after several employments which he enumerates;
sometimes, says he, I hunt; but even then I carry with me a pocket book, that
whilst my servants are busied in disposing of the nets and other matters, I may
be employed in something that may be useful to me in my studies; and that if I
miss of my game, I may at least bring home some of my own thoughts with me, and
not have the mortification of having caught nothing all day.

Thus, Sir, you see how many examples I recall to mind, and what arguments I use
with myself to regain my liberty; but as I am afraid it is no ordinary
persuasion that will be of service, I shall expect your thoughts on this
subject, with the greatest impatience, especially since the good will not be
confined to me alone, but will be of universal use. For there are no hopes of
amendment where men are pleased with their ruin, and whilst they think laziness
is a desirable character: whether it be that they like the state itself, or
that they think it gives them a new luster when they do exert themselves,
seemingly to be able to do that without labor and application which others
attain not to but by the greatest diligence.

SIMON SLOW.

On spending TIME.
Time in advance behind him hides his wings,
And seems to creep decr^pid with his age:
Behold him when past by, what then is seen,
But his broad pinions fleeter than the wind.
YOUNG.
WE all of us complain of the shortness of time, says Seneca, and yet have
much more than we know what to do with. Our lives, says he, are spent either in
doing nothing at all, or in doing nothing to the purpose, or in doing nothing
that we ought to do. We are always complaining our days are few, and acting as
though there would be no end of them. That noble philosopher has described our
inconsistency with ourselves in this particular, by all those various turns of
expression and thought which are peculiar to his writings.

I often consider mankind as wholly inconsistent with itself in a point that
bears some affinity to the former. Though we seem grieved at the shortness of
life in general, we are wishing every period of it at an end. The minor longs
to be at age, then to be a man of business, then to make up an estate, then to
arrive at honors, then to retire. Thus, although the whole of life is allowed
by every one to be short, the several divisions of it appear to be long and
tedious. We are for lengthening our span in general, but would fain contract
the parts of which it is composed. The usurer would be very well satisfied to
have all the time annihilated that lies between the present moment and next
quarter day. The politician would be content to lose three years in his life,
could he place things in the posture which he fancies they will stand in after
such a revolution of time. The lover would be glad to strike out of his
existence all the moments that are to pass away before the happy meeting. Thus,
as fast as our time runs, we should be very glad, in most part of our lives,
that it ran much faster than it does. Several hours of the day hang upon our
hands, nay, we wish away whole years, and travel through time as through a
country filled with many wild and empty wastes, which we would fain hurry over,
that we may arrive at those several little settlements, or imaginary points of
rest, which are dispersed up and down in it.

If we divide the life of most men into twenty parts, we shall find that at
least nineteen of them are mere gaps and chasms, which are neither filled with
pleasure nor business. I do not, however, include in this calculation the life
of those men who are in a perpetual hurry of affairs, but of those only who are
not always engaged in scenes of action; and I hope I shall not do an
unacceptable piece of service to those persons, if I point out to them certain
methods for the filling up their empty spaces of life. The methods I shall
propose to them are as follow:

The first is the exercise of virtue, in the most general acceptance of the
word. That particular scheme which comprehends the social virtues, may give
employment to the most industrious temper, and find a man more business than
the most active station of life. To advise the ignorant, relieve the needy,
comfort the afflicted, are duties that fall in our way almost every day of our
lives. A man has frequent opportunities of mitigating the fierceness of a
party; of doing justice to the character of a deserving man; of softening the
envious, quieting the angry, and rectifying the prejudiced; which are all of
them employments suited to a reasonable nature, and bring great satisfaction to
the person who can busy himself in them with discretion.

There is another kind of virtue that may find employment for those retired
hours in which we are altogether left to ourselves, and destitute of company
and conversation: I mean that intercourse and communication which every
reasonable creature ought to maintain with the great Author of his being. The
man who lives under an habitual sense of the Divine presence, keeps up a
perpetual cheerfulness of temper, and enjoys every moment the satisfaction of
thinking himself in company with his dearest and best of friends. The time
never lies heavy upon him: it is impossible for him to be alone. His thoughts
and passions are the most busied at such hours, when those of other men are the
most inactive. He no sooner steps out of the world, but his heart burns with
devotion, swells with hope, and triumphs in the consciousness of that presence
which every where surrounds him: or, on the contrary, pours out its fears, its
sorrows, its apprehensions, to the great Supporter of its existence.

I have here only considered the necessity of a man's being virtuous, that he
may have something to do; but if I consider further, that the exercise of
virtue is not only an amusement for the time it lasts, but that its influence
extends to those parts of our existence which lie beyond the grave; and that
our whole eternity is to take its color from those hours which we here employ
in virtue or in vice, the argument redoubles upon us, for putting in practice
this method of passing away our time.

When a man has but a little stock to improve, and has opportunities of turning
it all to good account, what shall we think of him if he suffers nineteen parts
of it to lie dead, and perhaps employs even the twentieth to his ruin or
disadvantage? But because the mind cannot be always in its fervours, nor
strained up to a pitch of virtue, it is necessary to find out proper
employments for it in its relaxations.

The next method therefore that I would propose to fill up our time, should be
useful and innocent diversion. I must confess I think it is below reasonable
creatures to be altogether conversant in such diversions as are merely
innocent, and have nothing else to recommend them; but that there is no hurt in
them. Whether any kind of gaming has even thus much to say for itself, I shall
not determine; but I think it is very wonderful to see persons of the best
sense passing away a dozen of hours together in shu^tling and dividing a pack
of cards, with no other conversation but what is made up of a few game phrases,
and no other ideas but those of black or red spots ranged together in different
figures. Would not a man laugh to hear any one of this species complaining that
life is short!

The stage might be made a perpetual source of the most noble and useful
entertainments, were it under proper regulations.

But the mind never unbends itself so agreeably as in the conversation of a
well-chosen friend. There is indeed no blessing in life that is any way
comparable to the enjoyment of a discreet and virtuous friend. It eases and
unloads the mind, clears and improves the understanding, engenders thought and
knowledge, animates virtue and good resolutions, sooths and allays the
passions, and finds employment for most of the vacant hours of life.

Next to such an intimacy with a particular person, one would endeavor after a
more general conversation with such as are capable of edifying and entertaining
those with whom they converse, which are qualities that seldom go asunder.

There are many other useful amusements of life which one would endeavor to
multiply, that one might, on all occasions, have recourse to something, rather
than suffer the mind to lie idle, or run adrift with any passion that chances
to arise in it.

A man that has a taste for music, painting, or architecture, is like one that
has another sense, when compared with such as have no relish of those arts. The
florist, the planter, the gardener, the husbandman, when they are only as
accomplishments to the man of fortune, are great reliefs to a country life, and
many ways useful to those who are possessed of them.

On the same SUBJECT.
Live well, and ther^ how soon soever you die,
Thou art of age to (...) Eternity.
RANDOLPH.
THE human species only, to the great reproach of our nature, are filled with
complaints, that the day hangs heavy on them, that they do not know what to do
with themselves, that they are at a loss how to pass away their time, with many
of the like shameful murmurs, which we often find in the mouths of those who
are styled reasonable beings. How monstrous are such expressions among
creatures who have the labors of the mind, as well as those of the body, to
furnish them with proper employment, who, besides the business of their
respective callings and professions, can apply themselves to the duties of
religion, to meditation, to the reading of useful books, and to discourse; i^ a
word, who may exercise themselves in the unbounded pursuits of knowledge and
virtue, and every hour of their lives make themselves wiser or better than they
were before.

After having for some time been taken up with this course of thought, I
diverted myself with a book, according to my usual custom, in order to unbend
my mind before I went to sleep. The book, I made use of on this occasion was
Lucian. where I amused my thoughts for about an hour among the dialogues of the
dead, which, in all probability, produced the following dream:

I was conveyed, methought, into the entrance of the infernal regions, where I
saw Rhadamanthus, one of the judges of the dead, seated in his tribunal. On his
left hand stood the keeper of Erebus, on his right hand the keeper of Elysium.
I was told he sat judge on women that day, there being several of the sex
lately arrived, who had not yet their mansions assigned them. I was surprised
to hear him ask every one of them the same question, What they had been doing?
Upon this question being proposed to the whole assembly, they stared upon one
another, as not knowing what to answer. He then interrogated each of them
separately. Madam, says he to the first of them, you have been upon the earth
about fifty years: what have you been doing there all this while? Doing! says
she, really I do not know what I have been doing: I desire I may have time
given me to recollect. After about half an hour's pause, she told him she had
been playing at crimp; upon which Rhadamanthus beckoned to the keeper on his
left hand to take her into custody. And you, Madam, says the judge, who look
with such a soft and languishing air, I think you set our for this place in
your nine and twentieth year, what have you been doing all this while? I had a
great deal of business on my hands, says she, being taken up the first twelve
years of my life in dressing a jointed baby, and the remaining part of it in
reading plays and romances. Very well, says he, you have employed your time to
good purpose: away with her. The next was a plain country woman: well,
mistress, says Rhadamanthus, and what have you been doing? If it please your
Worship, says she, I did not live quite forty years; and in that time brought
my husband seven daughters, made him nine thousand cheeses, and left my eldest
girl with him, to look after his house in my absence, and who I may venture to
say is as pretty a house-wife as any in the country. Rhadamanthus smiled at the
simplicity of the good woman, and ordered the keeper of Elysium to take her
into his care. And you, fair lady, says he, what have you been doing these five
and thirty years? I have been doing no hurt, I assure you, Sir, said she. That
is well, says he; but what good have you been doing? The lady was in great
confusion at this question, and not knowing what to answer, the two keepers
leaped out to seize her at the same time; the one took her by the hand to
convey her to Elysium, the other caught hold of her to carry her away to
Erebus. But Rhadamanthus observing an ingenuous modesty in her countenance and
behavior, bid them both let her loose, and set her aside for re-examination
when he was more at leisure. An old woman, of a proud and sour look, presented
herself next to the bar, and being asked what she had been doing? Truly, says
she, I lived threescore and ten years in a very wicked world, and was so angry
at the behavior of a parcel of young flirts, that I past most of my last years
in condemning the follies of the times: I was every day blaming the silly
conduct of the people about me, in order to deter those I conversed with from
falling into the like errors and miscarriages Very well, says Rhadamanthus, but
did you keep the same watchful eye over your own actions? Why, truly, says she,
I was so taken up with publishing the faults of others, that I had not time to
consider my own. Madam, says Rhadamanthus, be pleased to file off to the left,
and make room for the venerable matron that stands behinds you. Old
gentlewoman, says he, I think you are fourscore: you have heard the question,
what have you been doing so long in the world? Ah, Sir! says she, I have been
doing what I should not have done; but I had made a firm resolution to have
changed my life, if I had not been snatched off by an untimely end. Madam, says
he, you will please to follow your leader; and spying another of the same age,
interrogated her in the same form. To whom the matron replied, I have been the
wife of a husband, who was as dear to me in his old age as in his youth. I have
been a mother, and very happy in my children, whom I endeavored to bring up in
every thing that was good. My eldest son is blessed by the poor, and beloved by
every one that knows him. I lived within my own family, and left it much more
wealthy than I found it. Rhadamanthus who knew the value of the old lady,
smiled upon her in such a manner, that the keeper of Elysium, who knew his
office, reached out his hand to her. He no sooner touched her, but her wrinkles
vanished, her eyes sparkled, her cheeks glowed with blushes, and she appeared
in full beauty. A young woman observing, that this officer who conducted the
happy to Elysium, was so great a beautifier, longed to be in his hands; so that
pressing through the crowd, she was the next who appeared at ^he bar. And being
asked, what she had been doing the five and twenty years she had been in the
world. I have endeavored says she, ever since I came to years of discretion,
to make myself lovely, and gain admirers. In order to (...) my time in bottling
up May dew, inventing (...) washes, mixing colors, cutting out patches,
consisting my glass, suiting my complexion, tearing off my (...), sinking my
stays. -- Rhadamanthus, without hearing her out, gave the sign to take her off.
Upon the approach of the keeper of Erebus, her color faded, her face puckered
up with wrinkles, and her whole person was lost in deformity.

I was then surprised with a distant sound of a whole troop of females that
came forward laughing, singing, and dancing. I was very desirous to know the
reception they would meet with, and withal was very apprehensive that
Rhadamanthus would spoil their mirth: but at their nearer approach, the noise
grew so very great that it awakened me.

I lay some time, reflecting in myself on the oddness of this dream, and could
not forbear asking my own heart what I was doing? I answered myself, That I was
writing guardians. If my readers make as good a use of this work as I design
they should, I hope it will never be imputed to me as a work that is vain and
unprofitable.

I shall conclude with recommending to them the same short self-examination. If
every one of them frequently lays his hand upon his heart, and considers what
he is doing, it will check him in all the idle, or, what is worse, the vicious
moments of life; lift up his mind when it is running on in a series of
indifferent actions, and encourage him when he is engaged in those that are
virtuous and laudable. In a word, it will very much alleviate that guilt which
the best of men have reason to acknowledge in their daily confessions, of
leaving undone those things which they ought to have done, and of doing those
things which they ought not to have done.

On PRIDE.
If aught on earth the immortal powers deride,
It Is surely this -- the littleness of pride.
Anon.
IF there be any thing which makes human nature appear ridiculous to beings of
superior faculties, it must be Pride. They know so well the vanity of those
imaginary perfections that swell the heart of man, and of those little
supernumerary advantages, whether in birth, fortune, or title, which one man
enjoys above another, that it must certainly very much astonish, if it does not
very much divert them, when they see a mortal puffed up, and valuing himself
above his neighbors on any of these accounts, at the same time that he is
obnoxious to all the common calamities of the species.

To set this thought in its true light, we shall fancy, if you please, that
yonder molehill is inhabited by reasonable creatures, and that every pismire
(his shape and way of life only excepted) is endowed with human passions. How
should we smile to hear one give an account of the pedigrees, distinctions, and
titles that reign amongst them! Observe how the whole swarm divide, and make
way for the pismire that passes through them! You must understand he is an
emmet of quality, and has better blood in his veins than any pismire in the
molehill. Do you not see how sensible he is of it, how slow he marches
forward, how the whole rabble of ants keep their distance? Here you may observe
one placed upon a little eminence, and looking down on a long row of laborers.
He is the richest insect on this side the hillock: he has a walk of half a yard
in length, and a quarter of an inch in breadth; he keeps one hundred menial
servants, and has at least fifteen barley corns in his granary. He is now
chiding and enslaving the emmet that stands before him, and who, for all we can
discover, is as good an emmet as himself.

But here comes an insect of figure: do not you take notice of a little white
straw that he carries in his mouth? That straw, you must understand, he would
not part with for the longest tract about the molehill: did you but know what
he has undergone to purchase it! See how the ants of all qualities and
conditions swarm about him. Should this straw drop out of his mouth, you would
see all this numerous circle of attendants follow the next that took it up, and
leave the discarded insect, or run over his back to come at his successor.

If now you have a mind to see all the ladies of the molehill, observe first
the pismire that listens to the emmet on her left hand, at the same time she
seems to turn away her head from him. He tells this poor infect that she is a
goddess; that her eyes are brighter than the sun; that life and death are at
her disposal. She believes him, and gives herself a thousand little airs upon
it. Mark the vanity of the pismire on her left hand. She can scarce crawl with
age; but you must know she values herself upon her birth; and, if you mind,
spurns at every one that comes within her reach. The little nimble coquette
that is running along the side of her is a wit. She has broken many a pismire's
heart. Do but observe what a drove of lovers are running after her.

We will here finish this imaginary scene; but first of all, to draw the
parallel closer, will suppose, if you please, that death comes down upon the
molehill in the shape of a cock-sparrow, and picks up, without distinction,
the pismire of quality, and his flatterers, the pismire of substance and his
day-labourers, the white-straw officer and his sycophants, with all the
goddesses, wits, and beauties of the molehill.

May we not imagine that beings of superior natures and perfections regard all
the instances of pride and vanity among our own species in the same kind of
view, when they take a survey of those who inhabit this earth; or, in the
language of an ingenious French poet, of those pismires that people this heap
of dirt, which human vanity has divided into climates and regions.

The BASKET-MAKER. A Peruvian Tale.
The Pride of Blood, or high Birth decried.
Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow,
The rest is all but leather and prunello.
POPE.
IN the midst of that vast ocean, commonly called the South Sea, lie the
islands of Solomon. In the center of those lies one, not only distant from the
rest, which are immensely scattered round it, but also larger beyond
proportion. An ancestor of the Prince, who now reigns absolute in this central
island, has, through a long descent of ages, entailed the name of Solomon's
Islands on the whole, by the effect of that wisdom wherewith he had polished
the manners of his people.

A descendant of one of the great men of this happy island, becoming a
gentleman to so improved a degree as to despise the good qualities which had
originally ennobled his family, thought of nothing but how to support and
distinguish his dignity by the pride of an ignorant mind, and a disposition
abandoned to pleasure. He had a house on the sea side, where he spent great
part of his time in hunting and fishing but found himself at a loss in pursuit
of those important diversions, by means of a long slip of marsh land, over
grown with high reeds that lay between his house and the sea. Resolving, at
length, that it became not a man of his quality to submit to restraint in his
pleasures, for the ease and convenience of an obstinate mechanic; and having
often endeavored in vain to buy out the owner, who was an honest poor
basket-maker, and whose livelihood depended on working up the flags of those
reeds, in a manner peculiar to himself, the gentleman took advantage of a very
high wind, and commanded his servants to burn down the barrier.

The basket-maker, who saw himself undone, complained of the oppression in
terms more suited to his sense of the injury, than the respect due to the rank
of the offender: and the reward this imprudence procured him, was the
additional injustice of blows and reproaches, and all kinds of insult and
indignity.

There was but one way to a remedy, and he took it; for going to the capital
with the marks of his hard usage upon him, he threw himself at the sect of the
King, and procured a citation for his oppressor's appearance; who, confessing
the charge, proceeded to justify his behavior by the poor man's unmindfulness
of the submission due from the vulgar to gentlemen of rank and distinction.

But pray, replied the King, what distinction of rank had the grandfather of
your father; when, being a cleaver of wood in the palace of my ancestors, he
was raised from among those vulgar you speak of with such contempt, in reward
of an instance he gave of his courage and loyalty in defense of his master? Yet
his distinction was nobler than yours: it was the distinction of soul, not of
birth; the superiority of worth, not of fortune! I am sorry I have a gentleman
in my kingdom, who is base enough to be ignorant, that case and distinction of
fortune were bestowed on him but to this end, that, being at rest from all
cares of providing for himself, he might apply his heart, head, and hand for
the public advantage of others.

Here the king, discontinuing his speech, fixed an eye of indignation on a
sullen resentment of mein which he observed in the haughty offender, who
muttered out his dislike of the encouragement this way of thinking must give to
the commonalty, who, he said, were to be considered as persons of no
consequence, in comparison of men who were born to be honored. Where reflection
is wanting, replied the King, with a smile of disdain, men must find their
defects in the pain of their sufferings. Yarbuma, added he, turning to a
captain of his galleys, strip the injured and the injurer; and conveying them
to one of the most barbarous and remotest of the islands, set them ashore in
the night, and leave them both to their fortune.

The place in which they were landed was a marsh: under cover of those flags
the gentleman was in hopes to conceal himself, and give the slip to his
companion, with whom he thought it a disgrace to be found: but the lights in
the galley having given an alarm to the savages, a considerable body of them
came down, and discovered in the morning, the two strangers in their
hiding place. Setting up a dismal yell, they surrounded them; and advancing
nearer and nearer with a kind of clubs, seemed determined to dispatch them,
without sense of hospitality or mercy.

Here the gentleman began to discover, that the superiority of his blood was
imaginary: for, between the consciousness of shame and cold, under the
nakedness he had never been used to; a fear of the event from the fierceness of
the savages' approach; and the want of an idea whereby to soften or divert
their asperity, he fell behind the poor sharer of his calamity; and with an
unsinewed, apprehensive, unmanly sneakingness of mein, gave up the post of
honor, and made a leader of the (...) man whom he had thought it a disgrace to
consider as a companion.

The basket-maker, on the contrary, to whom the poverty of his condition had
made nakedness habitual; to whom a life of pain and mortification represented
death as not dreadful; and whose remembrance of his skill in arts, of which
these savages, were ignorant, gave him hopes of becoming safe, from
demonstrating that he could be useful, moved with bolder and more open freedom;
and, having plucked a handful of the flags, sat down without emotion, and
making signs that he would show them something worthy of their attention, fell
to work with smiles and noddings; while the savages drew near, and gazed with
expectation of the consequence.

It was not long before he had wreathed a kind of coronet, of pretty
workmanship; and rising with respect and fearfulness, approached the savage who
appeared the chief, and placed it gently on his head; whose figure under this
new ornament, so charmed and struck his followers, that they threw down all
their clubs, and formed a dance of welcome and congratulation round the author
of so prized a favor.

There was not one but showed the marks of his impatience to be made as fine as
his captain: so the poor basket-maker had his hands full of employment; and the
savages observing one quite idle, while the other was so busy in their service,
took up arms in behalf of natural justice, and began to lay on arguments in
favor of their purpose.

The basket-maker's pity now effaced the remembrance of his sufferings: so he
arose and rescued his oppressor, by making signs that he was ignorant of the
art; but might, if they thought fit, be usefully employed in waiting on the
work, and fetching flags to his supply as fast as he should want them.

This proposition luckily fell in with a desire the savages expressed to keep
themselves at leisure, that they might crowd round, and mark the progress of a
work they took such pleasure in. They left the gentleman, therefore, to his
duty in the basket-maker's service; and considered him, from that time forward,
as one who was, and ought to be treated as inferior to their benefactor.

Men, wives, and children, from all corners of the island, came in droves for
coronets; and, setting the gentleman to work to gather boughs and poles, made a
fine hut to lodge the basket-maker; and brought down daily from the country
such provisions as they lived upon themselves, taking care to offer the
imagined servant nothing till his master had done eating.

Three months reflection in this mortified condition, gave a new and just turn
to our gentleman's improved ideas; insomuch, that, lying weeping, and awake,
one night, he thus confessed his sentiments in favor of the basket-maker: I
have been to blame, and wanted judgment to distinguish between accident and
excellence. When I should have measured nature, I but looked to vanity. The
preference which fortune gives is empty and imaginary; and I perceive, too
late, that only things of use are naturally honorable. I am ashamed, when I
compare my malice, to remember your humanity: but if the gods should please to
call me to a^r possession of my rank and happiness, I would divide all with you
in atonement for my justly punished arrogance.

He promised, and performed his promise: for the King, soon after, sent the
Captain who had landed them, with presents to the savages; and ordered him to
bring both back again. And it continues to this day a custom in that island, to
degrade all gentlemen who cannot give a better reason for their pride, than
that they were born to do nothing; and the word for this due punishment is,
Send him to the basket-maker.

On TRUTH and SINCERITY.
I still shall hate that man as hell,
Who this can think, and that can tell.
FRANCIS.
TRUTH and reality have all the advantages of appearance, and many more. If the
show of any thing be good for any thing, I am sure sincerity is better (...)
for why does any man dissemble, or seem to be that which he is not, but because
he thinks it good to have such a quality as he pretends to? For to counterfeit
and dissemble, is to put on the appearance of some real excellency. Now, the
best way in the world for a man to seem to be any thing, is really to be what
he would seem to be. Besides, that it is many times as troublesome to ma^^ good
the pretense of a good quality, as to have it; and if a man has it not, it is
ten to one but he is discovered to want it, and then all his pains and labor
to seem to have it are lost. There is something unnatural in painting, which a
skilful eye will easily discern from native beauty and complexion.

It is hard to personate, and act a part long; for where truth is not at the
bottom, nature will always be endeavoring to return, and will peep out and
betray herself one time or another. Therefore, if any man think it convenient
to seem good, let him be so indeed, and then his goodness will appear to every
body's satisfaction; so that upon all accounts sincerity is true wisdom.
Particularly as to the affairs of this world, integrity has many advantages
over all the fine and artificial ways of dissimulation and deceit; it is much
the plainer and easier, much the safer and more secure way of dealing in the
world; it has less of trouble and difficulty, of entanglement and perplexity,
of danger and hazard in it; it is the shortest and nearest way to our end,
carrying us thither in a strait line, and will hold out and last longest. The
arts of deceit and cunning do continually grow weaker and less effectual and
serviceable to those that use them; whereas integrity gains strength by use,
and the more and longer any man practices it, the greater service it does him,
by confirming his reputation, and encouraging those with whom he has to do, to
repose the greatest trust and confidence in him, which is an unspeakable
advantage in the business and affairs of life.

Truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help it out; it
is always near at hand, and sits upon our lips, and is ready to drop out before
we are aware; whereas a lie is troublesome, and sets a man's invention upon the
rack, and one trick needs a great many more to make it good. It is like
building upon a false foundation, which continually stands in need of props to
shore it up, and proves at last to be more chargeable than to have raised a
substantial building at first upon a true and solid foundation; for sincerity
is firm and substantial, and there is nothing hollow and unsound in it, and
because it is plain and open, fears no discovery; of which the crafty man is
always in danger, and when he thinks he walks in the dark, all his pretenses
are so transparent, that he that runs may read them: he is the last man that
finds himself to be found out: and while he takes it for granted that he makes
fools of others, he renders himself ridiculous.

Add to all this, that sincerity is the most compendious wisdom, and an
excellent instrument for the speedy dispatch of business; it creates confidence
in those we have to deal with, saves the labor of many inquiries, and brings
things to an issue in a few words: it is like traveling in a plain beaten
road, that commonly brings men sooner to their journey's end, than by ways in
which they often lose themselves. In a word, whatsoever convenience may be
thought to be in falsehood and dissimulation, it is soon over; but the
inconvenience of it is perpetual, because it brings a man under an everlasting
jealousy and suspicion; so that he is not believed when he speaks the truth,
nor trusted when perhaps he means honestly. When a man has once forfeited the
reputation of his integrity, he is set fast, and nothing will then serve his
turn, neither truth nor falsehood.

I have often thought, that God has, in his great wisdom, hid from men of
false and dishonest minds, the wonderful advantages of truth and integrity, to
the prosperity even of their worldly affairs; those men are so blinded by their
covetousness and ambition, that they cannot look beyond a present advantage,
no^ forbear to seize upon it, though by ways never so indirect; they cannot see
so far as to the remotest consequences of a steady integrity, and the vast
benefit and advantage which it will bring a man at last. Were but this sort of
men wise and clear-sighted enough to discern this, they would be honest out of
very knavery, not out of any love to honesty and virtue, but with a crafty
design to promote and advance more effectually their own interests; and
therefore the justice of the divine Providence has hid this truest point of
wisdom from their eyes, that bad men might not be upon equal terms with the
just and upright, and serve their own wicked designs by honest and lawful means.

Indeed, if a man were only to deal in the world for a day, and should never
have occasion to converse more with mankind, never more need their good opinion
or good word, it were then no great matter (speaking as to the concernments of
this world) if a man spent his reputation all at once, and ventured it at one
throw: but if he be to continue in the world, and would have the advantage of
conversation whilst he is in it, let him make use of truth and sincerity in all
his words and actions; for nothing but this will last and hold out to the end:
all other arts will fail; but truth and integrity will carry a man through, and
bear him out to the last.

On DEFAMATION.
All seems infected that the infected spy,
As all looks yellow to the jaundic'd eye.
POPE
IT is a certain sign of an ill heart to be inclined to defamation. They who
are harmless and innocent, can have no gratification that way; but it ever
arises from (...) neglect of what is laudable in a man's self, and an
impatience of seeing it in another. Else why should virtue provoke? Why should
beauty displease in such a degree that a man given to scandal never lets the
mention of either pass by him, without offering something to the diminution of
it? A lady the other day at a visit, being attacked somewhat rudely by one,
whose own character had been very roughly treated, answered a great deal of
heat and intemperance very calmly, Good madam, spare me, who am none of your
match; I speak ill of nobody, and it is a new thing for me to be spoken ill of.
Little minds think fame consists in the number of votes they have on their side
among the multitude; whereas it is really the inseparable follower of good and
worthy actions. Fame is as natural a follower of merit, as a shadow is of a
body, it is true, when crowds press upon you, this shadow cannot be seen; but
when they separate from around you, it will appear again. The lazy, the idle,
and froward, are the persons who are most pleased with the little tales which
pass about the town, to the disadvantage of the rest of the world. Were it not
for a pleasure of speaking ill, there are numbers of people who are too lazy to
go out of their own houses, and too ill-natured to open their lips in
conversation. It was not a little diverting, the other day, to observe a lady
reading a post-letter, and at these words, After all her airs, he has heard
some story or other, and the match is broken off, give orders in the midst of
her reading, Put to the horses. That a young woman of merit had missed an
advantageous settlement, was news not to be delayed, lest some body else should
have given her malicious acquaintance that satisfaction before her. The
unwillingness to receive good tidings is a quality as inseparable from a
scandal-bearer, as the readiness to divulge bad. But, alas! how wretchedly low
and contemptible is that state of mind, that cannot be pleased but by what is
the subject of lamentation. This temper has ever been in the highest degree
odious to gallant spirits. The Persian soldier who was heard reviling Alexander
the Great, was well admonished by his officer; "Sir, you are paid to fight
against Alexander, and not to rail at him."

Cicero, in one of his pleadings, defended his client from general scandal,
says very handsomely, and with much reason, There are many who have particular
engagements to the prosecutor: there are many who are known to have ill will to
him for whom I appear: there are many who are naturally addicted to defamation,
and envious of any good to any man, who may have contributed to spread reports
of this kind: for nothing is so swift as scandal, nothing is more easily sent
abroad, nothing received with more welcome, nothing diffuses itself so
universally. I shall not desire, that if any report to our disadvantage has any
ground for it, you will overlook, or extenuate it: but if there be any thing
advanced by a person, who cannot say whence he had it; or which is attested by
one who forgot who told him it; or who had it from one of so little
consideration, that ^e did not then think it worth his notice; all such
testimonies as these, I know you will think too slight to have any credit
against the innocence and honor of your fellow citizen. When an ill report is
traced, it very seldom vanishes among such as the orator has here recited. And
how despicable a creature must that be, who is in pain for what passes among so
frivolous a people.

There is a town in Warwickshire of good note, and formerly pretty famous for
much animosity and dissension, the chief families of which have now turned all
their whispers, back bitings, envy, and private malice into mirth and
entertainment, by means of a peevish old gentlewoman, known by the title of
Lady Bluemantle. This heroine has for many years together out done the whole
sisterhood of gossips in invention, quick utterance, and unprovoked malice.
This good body is of a lasting constitution, though extremely decayed in her
eyes, and decrepid in her feet. The two circumstances of being always at home
from her lameness, and very attentive from her blindness, make her lodgings the
receptacle of all that passes in town, good or bad; but for the latter, she
seems to have the better memory. There is another thing to be noted of her,
which is, that as it is usual with old people, she has a livelier memory of
things which passed when she was very young, than of late years. Add to all
this, that she not only does not love any body, but she hates every body. The
statue in Rome does not serve to vent malice half so well, as this old lady
does to disappoint it. She does not know the author of any thing that is told
her; but can readily repeat the matter itself; therefore, though she exposes
the whole town, she offends no body in it. She is so exquisitely restless and
peevish, that she quarrels with all about her, and sometimes, in a freak, will
instantly change her habitation. To indulge this humor, she is led about the
grounds belonging to the same house she is in, and the persons to whom she is
to remove, being in the plot, are ready to receive her at her own chamber
again. At stated times the gentle woman at whose house she supposes she is at
the time, is sent for to quarrel with, according to her common custom. When
they have a mind to drive the jest, she is immediately urged to that degree,
that she will board in a family with which she has never yet been; and away she
will go this instant, and tell them all that the rest have been saying of them.
By this means she has been an inhabitant of every house in the place; without
stirring from the same habitation; and the many stories which every body
furnish her with to favor that deceit, make her the general intelligencer of
the town of all that can be said by one woman against another. Thus, groundless
stories die away, and sometimes truths are smothered under the general word;
when they have a mind to discountenance a thing, "Oh! that is in my Lady
Bluemantle's memoirs."

Whoever receives impressions to the disadvantage of others without
examination, is to be had in no other credit for intelligence than this good
Lady Bluemantle, who is subjected to have her ears imposed upon for want of
other helps to better information. Add to this, that other scandal-bearers
suspend the use of those faculties which she has lost, rather than apply them
to do justice to their neighbors; and I think, for the service of my fair
readers, to acquaint them, that there is a voluntary Lady Bluemantle at every
visit in town.

On CALUMNY and REPROACH.
Who steals my purse, steals trash; it is something, nothing;
'Twas mine, it is his, and has been slave to thousands:
But he who filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that Which not enriches him,
But makes me poor indeed. --
SHAKESPEARE.
WERE all the vexations of life put together, we should find, that a great part
of them proceed from those calumnies and reproaches which we spread abroad
concerning one another.

There is scarce a man living who is not, in some degree, guilty of this
offense; though, at the same time, however we treat one another, it must be
confessed, that we all consent in speaking ill of the persons who are notorious
in this practice. It generally takes its rise either from an ill will to
mankind, a private inclination to make ourselves esteemed, an ostentation of
wit, a vanity of being thought in the secrets of the world, or from a desire of
gratifying any of these dispositions of mind in those persons with whom we
converse.

The publisher of scandal is more or less odious to mankind, and criminal in
himself, as he is influenced by any one or more of the foregoing motives. But
whatever may be the occasion of spreading these false reports, he ought to
consider, that the effect of them is equally prejudicial and pernicious to the
person at whom they are aimed. The injury is the same, though the principle
from whence it proceeds may be different.

As every one looks upon himself with too much indulgence when he passes a
judgment on his own thoughts of actions; and as very few would be thought
guilty of this abominable proceeding, which is so universally practiced, and,
at the same time, so universally blamed, I shall lay down three rules, by which
I would have a man examine and search into his own heart, before he stands
acquitted to himself of that evil disposition of mind which I am here
mentioning.

First, Let him consider whether he does not take delight in hearing the faults
of others.

Secondly, Whether he is not too apt to believe such little blackening
accounts, and more inclined to be credulous on the uncharitable than on the
good natured side.

Thirdly, Whether he is not ready to spread and propagate such reports as tend
to the disreputation of another.

These are the several steps by which this vice proceeds, and grows up into
slander and defamation.

In the first place, a man who takes delight in hearing the faults of others,
shows sufficiently that he has a true relish of scandal, and consequently the
seeds of this vice within him. If his mind is gratified with hearing the
reproaches which are cast on others, he will find the same pleasure in relating
them, and be the more apt to do it, as he will naturally imagine every one he
converses with is delighted in the same manner with himself. A man should
endeavor therefore to wear out of his mind this criminal curiosity, which is
perpetually heightened and inflamed by listening to such stories as tend to the
disreputation of others.

In the second place, a man should consult his own heart, whether he is not apt
to believe such little blackening accounts; and more inclined to be credulous
on the uncharitable, than on the good-natured side.

Such a credulity is very vicious in itself, and generally arises from a man's
consciousness of his own secret corruptions. It is a pretty saying of Thales,
Falsehood is just as far distant from truth, as the ears are from the eyes. By
which he would intimate, that a wise man should not easily give credit to the
reports of actions which he has not seen. I shall, under this head, mention two
or three remarkable rules to be observed by the members of the celebrated Abbe
de la Trappe, as they are published in a little French book.

The fathers are there ordered, never to give an ear to any accounts of base or
criminal actions; to turn off all such discourse if possible; but in case they
hear any thing of this nature so well attested that they cannot disbelieve it,
they are then to suppose that the criminal actions may have proceeded from a
good intention in him who is guilty of it. This is perhaps carrying charity to
an extravagance; but it is certainly much more laudable, than to suppose, as
the ill-natured part of the world does, that indifferent and even good actions
proceed from bad principles and wrong intentions.

In the third place, a man should examine his heart, whether he does not find
in it a secret inclination to propagate such reports as tend to the
disrepuation of another.

When the disease of the mind, which I have hitherto been speaking of, arises
to this degree of malignity, it discovers itself in its worst symptoms, and is
in danger of becoming incurable. I need not therefore insist upon the guilt in
this last particular, which every one cannot but disapprove, who is not void of
humanity, or even common discretion; I shall only add, whatever pleasure any
man may take in spreading whispers of this nature, he will find an infinitely
greater satisfaction in conquering the temptation he is under, by letting the
secret die within his own breast.

On CHEERFULNESS.
-- I look on cheerfulness,
As on the health of virtue.
YOUNG.
I HAVE always preferred cheerfulness to mirth. The latter I consider as an
act, the former as an habit of the mind. Mirth is short and transient;
cheerfulness fixed and permanent. Those are often raised into the greatest
transports of mirth, who are subject to the greatest depressions of melancholy.
On the contrary, cheerfulness, though it does not give the mind such an
exquisite gladness, prevents us from falling into any depths of sorrow. Mirth
is like a flash of lightning, that breaks through a gloom of clouds, and
glitters for a moment; cheerfulness keeps up a kind of daylight in the mind,
and fills it with a steady and perpetual serenity.

Men of austere principles look upon mirth as too wanton and dissolute for a
state of probation, and as filled with a certain triumph and insolence of heart
that is inconsistent with a life which is every moment obnoxious to the
greatest dangers. Writers of this complexion have observed, that the sacred
Person, who was the great pattern of perfection, was never seen to laugh.

Cheerfulness of mind is not liable to any of these exceptions: it is of a
serious and composed nature, it does not throw the mind into a condition
improper for the present state of humanity, and is very conspicuous in the
character of those who are looked upon as the greatest philosophers among the
heathens, as well as among those who have been deservedly esteemed as saints
and holy men among Christians.

If we consider cheerfulness in three lights, with regard to ourselves, to
those we converse with, and to the great Author of our being, it will not a
little recommend itself on each of those accounts. The man who is possessed of
this excellent frame of mind, is not only easy in his thoughts, but a perfect
master of all the powers and faculties of his soul: his imagination is always
clear, and his judgment undisturbed: his temper is even and unruffled, whether
in action or solitude: He comes with a relish of all those goods which nature
has provided for him, tastes all the pleasures of the creation which are poured
about him, and does not feel the full weight of those accidental evils which
may befall him.

If we consider him in relation to the persons whom he converses with, it
naturally produces love and good will toward him. A cheerful mind is not only
disposed to be affable and obliging, but raises the same good humor in those
who come within its influence. A man finds himself pleased, he does not know
why, with the cheerfulness of his companions: it is like a sudden sunshine
that awakens a secret delight in the mind without attending to it. The heart
rejoices of its own accord, and naturally flows out into friendship and
benevolence toward the person who has so kindly an effect upon it.

When I consider this cheerful state of mind in its third relation, I cannot
but look upon it as a constant habitual gratitude to the great Author of
nature. An inward cheerfulness is an implicit praise and thanksgiving to
Providence under its dispensations. It is a kind of acquiescence in the state
wherein we are placed, and a secret approbation of the divine will in his
conduct toward man.

There are but two things, which, in my opinion, can reasonably deprive us of
this cheerfulness of heart. The first of these is the sense of guilt. A man who
lives in a state of vice and impenitence, can have no title to that evenness
and tranquillity of mind, which is the health of the soul, and the natural
effect of virtue and innocence. Cheerfulness in an ill man deserves a harder
name than language can furnish us with, and as many degrees beyond what we
commonly call folly and madness.

Atheism, by which I mean a disbelief of the supreme Being, and consequently of
a future state, under whatsoever title it shelters itself, may likewise very
reasonably deprive a man of his cheerfulness of temper. There is something so
particularly gloomy and offensive to human nature in the prospect of
nonexistence, that I cannot but wonder, with many excellent writers, how it is
possible for a man to outlive the expectation of it. For my own part, I think
the being of a God is so little to be doubted, that it is almost the only truth
we are sure of, and such a truth as we meet with in every object, in every
occurrence, and in every thought. If we look into the character of this tribe
of infidels, we generally find, they are made up of pride, spleen, and cavil.
It is indeed no wonder, that men, who are uneasy to themselves, should be so to
the rest of the world; and how is it possible for a man to be otherwise than
uneasy in himself, when he is in danger every moment of losing his entire
existence, and dropping into nothing!

The vicious man and Atheist have therefore no pretense to cheerfulness, and
would act very unreasonably, should they endeavor at it. It is impossible for
any one to live in good humor, and enjoy his present existence, who is
apprehensive either of torment, or annihilation; of being miserable, or of not
being at all.

After having mentioned these two great principles which are destructive of
cheerfulness in their own nature, as well as in right reason, I cannot think of
any other that ought to banish this happy temper from a virtuous mind. Pain and
sickness, shame and reproach, poverty and old age, nay death itself,
considering the shortness of their duration, and the advantage we may (...)
from them, do not deserve the name of evils. A good mind may bear up under them
with fortitude, with patience, and with cheerfulness of heart. The tossing of a
tempest, does not discompose him, who is sure it will bring him to a joyful
harbor.

A man who uses his best endeavors to live according to the dictates of virtue
and right reason, has two perpetual sources of cheerfulness; in the
consideration of his own nature, and of that Being on whom he has a dependence.
If he look into himself, he cannot but rejoice in that existence, which is so
lately bestowed upon him, and which, after millions of ages, will be still new,
and still in its beginning. How many self-congratulations naturally arise in
the mind when it reflects on this its entrance into eternity, when it takes a
view of those improveable faculties, which in a few years, and even at his
first setting out, have made so considerable a progress and which will be still
receiving an increase of perfection, and consequently an increase of happiness!
The consciousness of such a Being spreads a perpetual diffusion of joy through
the soul of a virtuous man, and makes him look upon himself every moment as
more happy than he knows how to conceive.

The second source of cheerfulness to a good mind, is its consideration of that
Being on whom we have our dependence, and in whom, though we behold him, as yet
but in the first faint discoveries of his perfections, we see every thing that
we can imagine as great, glorious, or amiable. We find ourselves every where
upheld by his goodness, and surrounded with an immensity of love and mercy. In
short, we depend upon a Being, whose power qualifies him to make us happy by an
infinity of means, whose goodness and truth engage him to make tho (...) happy
who desire it of him, and whose unchangeableness will secure us in this
happiness to all eternity.

Such considerations, which every one should perpetually cherish in his
thoughts, will banish from us all that secret heaviness of heart, which
unthinking men are subject to when they lie under no real affliction; all that
anguish which we may feel from any evil that actually oppresses us, to which I
may likewise add, those little cracklings of mirth and folly that are apter to
betray virtue than support it; and establish in us such an even and cheerful
temper, as will make us pleasing to ourselves, to those with whom we converse,
and to him whom we were made to please.

The advantage of CHEERFULNESS.
Nor fell despair, nor noise invades the ear;
But all serene and placid does appear.
Anon.
CHEERFULNESS is, in the first place, the best promoter of health. Repinings,
and secret murmurs of heart, give imperceptible strokes to those delicate
fibers of which the vital parts are composed, and wear out the machine
insensibly; not to mention those violent ferments which they stir up in the
blood, and those irregular, disturbed motions which they raise in the animal
spirits. I scarce remember; in my own observations, to have met with many old
men, or with such who, (to use our English phrase) wear ^well, that had not at
least a certain indolence in their humor, if not a more than ordinary gaiety
and cheerfulness of heart. The truth of it is, health and cheerfulness mutually
beget each other; with this difference, that we seldom meet with a great degree
of health which is not attended with a certain cheerfulness, but very often see
cheerfulness where there is no great degree of health.

Cheerfulness bears the same friendly regard to the mind as to the body: it
banishes all anxious care and discontent, soothes and composes the passions,
and keeps the soul in a perpetual calm. But having already touched on this last
consideration, I shall here take notice, that the world in which we are placed
is filled with innumerable objects, that are proper to raise and keep alive
this happy temper of mind.

If we consider the world in its subserviency to man, one would think it was
made for our use; but if we consider it in its natural beauty and harmony, one
would be apt to conclude it was made for our pleasure. The sun, which is as the
great soul of the universe, and produces all the necessaries of life, has a
particular influence in cheering the mind of man, and making the heart glad.

Those several living creatures which are made for our service or sustenance,
at the same time either fill the woods with their music, furnish us with game,
or raise pleasing ideas in us by the delightfulness of their appearance.
Fountains, lakes, and rivers, are as refreshing to the imagination, as to the
soil through which they pass.

There are writers of great distinction, who have made it an argument for
Providence, that the whole earth is covered with green, rather than with any
other color, as being such a right mixture of light and shade, that it
comforts and strengthens the eye, instead of weakening or grieving it. For this
reason, several painters have a green cloth hanging near them, to ease the eye
upon, after too great an application to their coloring. A famous modern
philosopher accounts for it in the following manner: all colors that are more
luminous, overpower and dissipate the animal spirits which are employed in
sight; on the contrary, those that are more obscure, do not give the animal
spirits a sufficient exercise; whereas the rays that produce in us the idea of
green, ^all upon the eye in such a due proportion, that they give the animal
spirits their proper play, and by keeping up the struggle in a just balance,
excite a very pleasing and agreeable sensation. Let the cause be what it will,
the effect is certain; for which reason the poets ascribe to this particular
color the epithet of cheerful.

To consider farther this double end in the works of nature, and how they are
at the same time both useful and entertaining, we find that the most important
parts in the vegetable world are those which are the most beautiful. These are
the seeds by which the several races of plants are propagated and continued,
and which are always lodged in flowers or blossoms. Nature seems to hide her
principal design, and to be industrious in ma^ing the earth gay and delightful,
while she is carrying (...) her great work, and intent upon her own
preservation. The husbandman, after the same manner, is employed in laying out
the whole country into a kind of garden or landscape, and making every thing
smile about him, whilst, in reality, he thinks of nothing but of the harvest
and increase which is to arise from it.

We may further observe, how Providence has taken care to keep up this
cheerfulness in the mind of man, by having formed it after such a manner as to
make it capable of conceiving delight from several objects which seem to have
very little use in them; as from the wildness of rocks and deserts, and the
like grotesque parts of nature. Those who are versed in philosophy may still
carry this consideration higher, by observing, that if matter had appeared to
us endowed only with those real qualities which it actually possesses, it would
have made but a very joyless and uncomfortable figure; and why has Providence
given it a power of producing in us impressions of such imaginary qualities as
tastes and colors, sounds and smells, heat and cold; but that man, while he is
conversant in the lower stations of nature, might have his mind cheered and
delighted with agreeable sensations? In short, the whole universe is a kind of
theater, filled with objects that either raise in us pleasure, amusement, or
admiration.

The reader's own thoughts will suggest to him the vicissitude of day and
night, the change of seasons, with all that variety of scenes which diversify
the face of nature, and fill the mind with a perpetual succession of beautiful
and pleasing images.

I shall not here mention the several entertainments of art, with the pleasures
of friendship, books, conversation, and other accidental diversions of life,
because I would only take notice of such incitements to a cheerful temper as
offer themselves to persons of all ranks and conditions, and which may
sufficiently show us, that Providence did not design this world should be
filled with murmurs and repinings, or that the heart of man should be involved
in gloom and melancholy.

I the more inculcate this cheerfulness of temper, as it is a virtue in which
our countrymen are observed to be more deficient than any other nation.
Melancholy is a Kind of demon that haunts our island, and often conveys itself
to us in an easterly wind. A celebrated French Novelist, in opposition to those
who begin their romances with the flowery season of the year enters on his
story, thus: In the gloomy month of November, when the people of England hang
and drown themselves, a disconsolate lover walked out into the fields, etc.

Every one ought to fence against the temper of his climate or constitution,
and frequently to indulge in himself those considerations which may give him a
serenity of mind, and enable him to bear up cheerfully against those little
evils and misfortunes which are common to human nature, and which, by a right
improvement of them, will produce a satiety of joy, and an uninterrupted
happiness.

At the same time that I would engage my reader to consider the world in its
most agreeable lights, I must own there are many evils which naturally spring
up amidst the entertainments that are provided for us; but these if rightly
considered, should be far from overcasting the mind with sorrow, or destroying
that cheerfulness of temper, which I have been recommending. This interspersion
of evil with good, and pain with pleasure, in the works of nature, is very
truly ascribed by Mr. Lock, in his Essay on Human Understanding, to a moral
reason, in the following words:

Beyond all this, we may find another reason why God has scattered up and down
several degrees of pleasure and pain, in all the things that environ and affect
us, and blended them together, in almost all that our thoughts and senses have
to do with; that we, finding imperfection, dissatisfaction, and went of
complete happiness in all the enjoyments which the creatures can afford us,
might be led to seek it in the enjoyment of Him, with whom there is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

On HAPPINESS.
Know then this truth -- enough for man to know,
Virtue alone is happiness below.
POPE.
I OUGHT hourly to be looking up with gratitude and praise to the Creator of my
being, for having formed me of a disposition that throws off every particle of
spleen, and either directs my attention to objects of cheerfulness and joy, or
enables me to look upon their contraries as I do on shades in a picture, which
add force to the lights, and beauty to the whole. With this happiness of
constitution I can behold the luxury of the times, as giving food and clothing
to the hungry and the naked; extending our commerce, and promoting and
encouraging the liberal arts. I can look upon the horrors of war, as productive
of the blessings and enjoyments of peace; and upon the miseries of mankind,
which I cannot relieve, with a thankful heart that my own lot has been more
favorable.

There is a passage in that truly original poem, called the Spleen, which
pleases me more than almost any thing I have read. The passage is this: Happy
the man who innocent,
Grieves not at ills be cannot prevent;
His skiff does with the current glide,
Nor puffing pulled against the tide:
He, paddling by the scuffling crowd,
Sees unconcerned life's wager rowed;
And when he cannot prevent foul play,
Enjoys the follies of the fray.


The laughing philosopher has always appeared to me a more eligible character
than the weeping one: but before I sit down either to laugh or to cry at the
follies of mankind, as I have publicly enlisted myself in their service, it
becomes me to administer every thing in my power to relieve or cure them. For
this purpose I shall here lay before my readers some loose hints on a subject,
which will, I hope, excite their attention, and contribute toward the
expelling from the heart those malignant and sullen humors, which destroy the
harmony of social life.

If we make observations on human nature, either from what we feel in
ourselves, or see in others, we shall perceive that almost all the uneasinesses
of mankind owe their rise to inactivity or idleness of body or mind. A free and
brisk circulation of the blood is absolutely necessary toward the creating
easiness and good humor; and is the only means of securing us from a restless
train of idle thoughts, which cannot fail to make us burdensome to ourselves,
and dissatisfied with all about us.

Providence has therefore wisely provided for the generality of mankind, by
compelling them to use that labor which not only procures them the necessaries
of life, but peace and health to enjoy them with delight. Nay farther, we find
how essentially necessary it is that the greatest part of mankind should be
obliged to earn their bread by labor, from the ill use that is almost
universally made of those riches which exempt men from it. Even the advantages
of the best education are generally found to be insufficient to keep us within
the limits of reason and moderation. How hard do the very best of men find it,
to force upon themselves that abstinence or labor which the narrowness of
their circumstances does not immediately compel them to? Is there really one in
ten, who, by all the advantages of wealth and leisure, is made more happy in
respect to himself, or more useful to mankind? What numbers do we daily see of
such persons, either rioting in luxury, or sleeping in sloth, for one who makes
a proper use of the advantages which riches give for the improvement of
himself, or the happiness of others! And how many do we meet with, who, for
their abuse of the blessings of life, are given up to perpetual uneasiness of
mind, and to the greatest agonies of bodily pain?

Whoever seriously considers this point, will discover, that riches are by no
means such certain blessings as the poor imagine them to be: on the contrary,
he will perceive, that the common labors and employments of life are much
better suited to the majority of mankind, than prosperity and abundance would
be without them.

It was a merciful sentence which the Creator passed on man for his
disobedience, By the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread; for to the
punishment itself he stands indebted for health, strength, and all the
enjoyments of life. Though the first paradise was forfeited for his
transgression, yet by the penalty inflicted for that transgression the earth is
made into a paradise again, in the beautiful fields and gardens which we see
daily produced by the labor of man.

And though the ground was pronounced cursed for his disobedience, yet is that
curse so ordered, as to be the punishment, chiefly and almost solely of th^se,
who, by intemperance or sloth, inflict it upon themselves.

Even from the wants and weaknesses of mankind are the bonds of mutual support
and affection derived. The necessities of each, which no man himself can
sufficiently supply, compel him to contribute toward the benefit of others;
and while he labors only for his own advantage, he is promoting the universal
good of all around him.

Health is the blessing that every one wishes to enjoy; but the multitude are
so unreasonable, as to desire to purchase it at a cheaper rate than it is to be
obtained. The continuance of it is only to be secured by exercise or labor.
But the misfortune is, that the poor are too apt to overlook their own
enjoyments, and to view with envy the ease and affluence of their superiors,
not considering that the usual attendants upon great fortunes are anxiety and
disease.

If it be true, that those persons are the happiest who have the fewest wants,
the rich man is more the object of compassion than envy. However moderate his
inclinations may be, the custom of the world lays him under a kind of necessity
of living up to his fortune. He must be surrounded by an useless train of
servants: his appetite must be palled with plenty, and his peace invaded by
crowds. He must give up the pleasures and endearments of domestic life, to be
the slave and party of faction. Or, if the goodness of his heart should incline
him to acts of humanity and benevolence, he will have the frequent
mortification of seeing his charities ill bestowed; and by his inability to
relieve all, the constant one of making more enemies by his refusals, than
friends by his benefactions. If we add to these considerations a truth, which I
believe few persons will dispute, namely, that the greatest fortunes, by adding
to the wants of their possessors, usually render them the most necessitous of
men, we shall find greatness and happiness to be at a wide distance from one
another. If we carry our inquiries still higher; if we examine into the state
of a King, and even enthrone him, like our own, in the hearts of his people; if
the life of a father be a life of care and anxiety, to be the father of a
people is a pre-eminence to be honored, but not envied.

This happiness of life is, I believe, generally to be found in those stations,
which neither totally subject men to labor, nor absolutely exempt them from
it. Power is the parent of disquietude, ambition of disappointment, and riches
of disease.

I will conclude these reflections with the following fable:

Labor, the offspring of want, and the mother of Health and Contentment, lived
with her two daughters in a little cottage by the side of a hill, at a great
distance from town. They were totally unacquainted with the great, and had kept
no better company than the neighboring villagers: but having a desire of
seeing the world, they forsook their companions and habitation, and determined
to travel. Labor went soberly along the road, with Health on her right hand,
who, by the sprightliness of her conversation, and songs of cheerfulness and
joy, softened the toils of the way; while Contentment went smiling on the left,
supporting the steps of her mother, and, by her perpetual good humor,
increasing the vivacity of her sister.

In this manner they traveled over forests, and through towns and villages,
till at last they arrived at the capital of the kingdom. At their entrance into
the great city, the mother conjured her daughters never to lose fight of her;
for it was the will of Jupiter, she said, that their separation should be
attended with the utter ruin of all three; but Health was of too gay a
disposition to regard the counsels of Labor: she suffered herself to be
debauched by Intemperance, and at last died in childbed of Disease.
Contentment, in the absence of her sister, gave herself up to the enticements
of Sloth, and was never heard of after: while Labor, who could have no
enjoyment without her daughters, went every where in search of them, till she
was at last seized by a lassitude in her way, and died in misery.

The Art of HAPPINESS.
Love, hope, and joy -- fair pleasure's smiling train;
Hate, fear, and grief -- the family of pain.
POPE.
A GOOD temper is one of the principal ingredients of happiness. This, it will
be said, is the work of nature, and must be born with us: and so in a good
measure it is; yet oftentimes it may be acquired with art, and always improved
by culture. Almost every object that attracts our notice, has its bright and
its dark side: he that habituates himself to look at the displeasing side, will
^our his disposition, and consequently impart his happiness; while he who
constantly beholds it on the bright side, insensibly meliorates his temper, and
in consequence of it, improves his own happiness, and the happiness of all
about him.

Arachne and Melissa are two friends. They are both of them women in years, and
alike in birth, fortune, education, and accomplishments. They were originally
alike in temper too; but by different management are grown the reverse of each
other. Arachne has accustomed herself to look only on the dark side of every
object. If a new play or poem makes its appearance, with a thousand
brilliancies, and but one or two blemishes, she slightly skims, over the
passages that should give her pleasure, and dwells upon those only that fill
her with dislike. If you show her a very excellent portrait, she looks at some
part of the drapery that has been neglected, or to a hand or finger which has
been left unfinished. Her garden is a very beautiful one, and kept with great
neatness and elegance; but if you take a walk with her into it, she talks to
you of nothing but blights and storms, of snails and catterpillars, and how
impossible it is to keep it from the litter of falling leaves, and worm casts.
If you sit down in one of her temples, to enjoy a delightful prospect, she
observes to you, that there is too much wood, or too little water; that the day
is too sunny, or too gloomy; that it is sultry or windy; and finishes with a
long harangue upon the wretchedness of our climate. When you return with her to
the company, in hopes of a cheerful conversation, she casts a gloom over all,
by giving you the history of her own bad health, or of some melancholy accident
that has befallen one of her daughter's children. Thus, she insensibly sinks
her own spirits, and the spirits of all around her, and at last discovers, she
knows not why, that her friends are grave.

Melissa is the reverse of all this. By constantly habituating herself to look
only on the bright side of objects, she preserves a perpetual cheerfulness in
herself, which, by a kind of happy contagion, she communicates to all about
her. If any misfortune has befallen her, she considers it might have been
worse, and is thankful to Providence for an escape. She rejoices in solitude,
as it gives her an opportunity of knowing herself; and in society, because she
can communicate the happiness she enjoys. She opposes every man's virtues to
his failings, and can find out something to cherish and applaud in the very
worst of her acquaintance. She opens every book with a desire to be entertained
or instructed, and therefore seldom misses what she looks for. Walk with her,
though it he but on a heath or a common, and she will discover numberless
beauties unobserved before in the hills, the dales, the brooks, brakes, and the
variegated flowers of weeds and poppies. She enjoys every change of weather and
of season, as bringing with it something of health or convenience. In
conversation, it is a rule with her, never to start a subject that leads to any
thing gloomy o^ disagreeable; you therefore never hear her repeating her own
grievances, or those of her neighbors, or (what is worst of all) their faults
and imperfections. If any thing of the latter kind be mentioned in her hearing,
she has the address to turn it into entertainment, by changing the most odious
railing into pleasant raillery. Thus Melissa like the be, gathers honey from
every weed; while Arachne, like the spider, sucks poison from the fairest
flowers. The consequence is, that of two tempers, once very nearly allied, the
one is for ever sour and dissatisfied, the other always gay and cheerful: the
one spreads an universal gloom; the other a continual sunshine.

There is nothing more worthy of our attention th^^ this art of happiness. In
conversation as well as life, happiness very often depends upon the slightest
incidents. The taking notice of the badness of the weather, a north-east wind,
the approach of winter or any trifling circumstance of the disagreeable kind,
shall insensibly rob a whole company of its good humor, and fling every member
of it into the vapors. If, therefore, we would be happy in ourselves, and are
desirous of communicating that happiness to all about us, these minutiae of
conversation ought carefully to be attended to. The brightness of the sky, the
lengthening of the days, the increasing verdure of the spring, the arrival of
any little piece of good news, or whatever carries with it the most distant
glimpse of joy, shall frequently be the parent of a social and happy
conversation. Good manners exact from us this regard for our company. The clown
may repine at the sunshine that ripens his harvest, because his turnips are
burnt up by it; but the man of refinement will extract pleasure from the
thunder storm to which he is exposed, by remarking on the plenty and
refreshment which may be expected from such a shower.

That does good manners, as well as good sense, direct us to look at every
object on the bright side; and by thus acting, we cherish and improve both the
one and the other. By this practice it is that Melissa is become the wisest and
the best-bred woman living; and by this practice may every man and woman arrive
at that easy benevolence of temper, which the world calls Good Nature, and the
scripture Charity, whose natural and never-Failing fruit is Happiness.

On the INFLUENCE of INNOCENCE and HONOR.
When innocence and beauty both combine,
What soul but melts? -- Their force is all divine.
Anon.
A FRENCH author, giving an account of a very agreeable man, in whose character
he mingles good qualities and infirmities, rather than vices and virtues, tells
the following story:

"Our author, says he, was pretty much addicted to the most fashionable of all
faults. He had a loose rogue for a lacquey, not a little in his favor, though
he had (...) other name for him when he spoke of him but the (...), or to him
but Sirrah. One morning when he was dressing, Sirrah, says he, be sure you
bring home this evening a pretty wench. The fellow was a person of diligence
and capacity, and had for some time addressed himself to a decayed old
gentlewoman, who had a young maiden to her daughter, beauteous as an angel, not
sixteen years of age. The mother's extreme poverty, and the insinuations of
this artful lacquey, concerning the soft disposition, and generosity of his
master, made her consent to deliver up her daughter. But many were the
entreaties and representations of the mother to gain the child's consent^^^ an
action, which she said, she abhorred, at the same time she exhorted her to it*
but, child, says she, can you see your mother die for hunger? The virgin argued
no longer, but bursting into tears, (...) she would go any where. The lacquey
conveyed her with great obsequiousness and secrecy (...) his master's lodging,
and placed her in a commodious apartment till he came home. The Knight, who
knew his man never failed of bringing in his prey, indulged his genius at a
banquet, and was in high humor at (...) entertainment with ladies, expecting
to be, received in the evening by one as agreeable as the best of them. When he
came home, his lacquey met him with a saucy and joyful familiarity, crying out.
She is as handsome as an angel, (for there is no other simile on these
occasions) but the tender fool has wept till her eyes are swelled and bloated;
for she is a maid and a gentlewoman. With that he conducted his master to the
room where she was, and retired. The Knight, when he saw her bathed in tears,
said in some surprise, Do you not know, young woman, why you are brought
hither? The unhappy maid fell on her knees, and with many interruptions of
sighs and tears said to him, I know, alas! too well, why I am brought hither:
my mother, to get bread for her and myself, has sent me to do what you pleased;
but I wish it would please Heaven I could die, before I am added to the number
of those miserable wretches who live without honor! With this reflection she
wept anew, and beat her bosom. The Knight, stepping back from her, said, I am
not so abandoned as to hurt your innocence against your will.

"The novelty of this accident surprised him into virtue; and covering the
young maid with a cloak, he led her to a relation's house, to whose care he
recommended her for that night. The next morning he sent for her mother, and
asked her if her daughter was a maid? The mother assured him, that when she
delivered her to his servant, she was a stranger to man. Are you not then,
replied the Knight, a wicked woman, to contrive the debauchery of your own
child? She held down her face with fear and shame, and in her confusion uttered
some broken words concerning her poverty. To your shame be it, said the
gentleman, that you should relieve yourself from want by a much greater evil:
your daughter is a fine young creature; do you know of none that ever spoke of
her for a wife? The mother answered, There is an honest man in the
neighborhood that loves her, who has often said he would marry her with two
hundred pounds. The Knight ordered his man to reckon out that sum, with an
addition of fifty to buy the bride clothes, and fifty more as an help to her
mother."

I appeal to all the gallants in town, whether possessing all the beauties in
Great Britain could give half the pleasure that this young gentleman had in the
reflection of having relieved a miserable parent from guilt and poverty, an
innocent virgin from public shame, and bestowing a virtuous wife upon an honest
man.

INGRATITUDE punished. An Eastern Tale.
He that is ungrateful has no fault but one,
All other crimes may pass for virtues in him.
YOUNG.
A DERVISE, venerable by his age, fell ill in the house of a woman who had been
long a widow, and lived in extreme poverty in the suburbs of Balsora. He was so
touched with the care and zeal with which she assisted him, that at his
departure he said to her, I have remarked that you have wherewith to subsist
alone, but that you have not subsistence enough to share it with your only son
the young Abdallah. If you will trust him to my care, I will endeavor to
acknowledge, in his person, the obligations. I have to you for your care of me.
The good woman received this proposal with joy; and the Dervise departed with
the young man, advertising her, that they must perform a journey which would
last near two years. As they traveled, he kept him in affluence, gave him
excellent instructions, cured him of a dangerous disease with which he was
attacked; in fine, he took the same care of him as if he had been his own son.
Abdallah a hundred times testified his gratitude to him for all his bounties;
but the old man always answered, My son, it is by actions that gratitude is
proved; we shall see, in a proper time and place, whether you are so grateful
as you pretend.

One day, as they continued their travels, they found themselves in a solitary
place, and the Dervise said to Abdallah, My son, we are now at the end of our
journey; I shall employ my prayers to obtain from heaven, that the earth may
open and make an entrance wide enough to permit thee to descend into a place,
where thou will find one of the greatest treasures that the earth incloses in
her bowels. Have thou courage to descend into this subterraneous vault?
continued he, Abdallah swore to him, he might depend upon his obedience and
zeal. Then the Dervise lighted a small fire. into which he cast a perfume: he
read and prayed for some moments, after which the earth opened, and the Dervise
said to him, Thou may now enter, my dear Abdallah; remember that it is in
thy power to do me a great service; and that this is, perhaps, the only
opportunity tha^ can ever have of testifying to me that thou art not
ungrateful: do not let thyself be dazzled by all the riches thou will find
there; think only of seizing upon an iron candlestick with twelve branches,
which thou will find close to a door, that is absolutely necessary to me; come
up immediately, and bring it to me. -- Abdallah promised every thing, and
descended boldly into the vault. But forgetting what had been expressly
recommended to him, whilst he was filling his vest and his bosom with gold and
jewels, which this subterraneous vault enclosed in prodigious heaps, the
opening by which he entered closed of itself. He had, however, presence of mind
enough to seize upon the iron candlestick, which the Dervise had so strongly
recommended to him; and though the situation he was in was very terrible, he
did not abandon himself to despair; and thinking only in what manner he should
get out of a place which might become his grave, he thought that the vault had
closed only because he had not followed the order of the Dervise; he recalled
to his memory the care and goodness he had loaded him with; reproached himself
with his ingratitude, and finished his meditation by humbling himself before
God. At length, after much pains and inquietude, he was fortunate enough to
find a narrow passage which led him out of this obscure cave^ though it was not
till he had followed it a considerable way, that ^e perceived a small opening
covered with briars and thorns, through which he returned to the light of the
sun. He looked on all sides, to see if he could perceive the Dervise, but in
vain; he designed to deliver to him the iron candlestick he so much wished for,
and formed a design of quitting him, being rich enough with what he had taken
out of the cavern, to live in affluence without his assistance.

Not perceiving the Dervise, nor remembering any of the places through which he
had passed, he went on as fortune had directed him, and was extremely
astonished to find himself opposite to his mother's house, which he imagined he
was at a great distance from. She immediately inquired after the holy Dervise.
Abdallah told her frankly what had happened to him, and the danger he had run
to satisfy his unrea^onable desires; he afterward showed her the riches with
which he was loaded. His mother concluded, upon the sight of them, that the
Dervise only designed to make trial of his courage and obedience, and that they
ought to make use of the happiness which fortune had presented to them; adding,
that doubtless such was the intention of the holy Dervise. While they
contemplated upon these treasures with avidity; while they were dazzled with
the luster of them, and formed a thousand projects in consequence of them, they
all vanished away before their eyes. It was then that Abdallah sincerely
reproached himself for his ingratitude and disobedience; and perceiving that
the iron candlestick had resisted the enchantment, or rather the just
punishment which those deserve who do not execute what they promise, he said,
prostrating himself -- What has happened to me is just; I have lost what I had
no design to restore, and the candlestick which I intended to deliver to the
Dervise remains with me: it is a proof that it rightly belongs to him, and that
the rest was unjustly acquired. As he finished these words, he placed the
candlestick in the midst of their little house.

When the night was come, without reflecting upon it, he placed the light in
the candlestick. Immediately they saw a Dervise appear, who turned round for an
hour, and disappeared, after having thrown them an asper. The candlestick had
twelve branches. Abdallah, who was meditating all the day upon what he had seen
the night before, was willing to know what would happen the next night, if he
put a light in each of them; he did so, and twelve Dervises appeared that
instant; they turned round also for an hour, and each of them threw an asper as
they disappeared. He repeated every day the same ceremony, which had always the
same success, but he never could make it succeed more than once in twenty four
hours. This trifling sum was enough to make his mother and himself subsist
tolerably: there was a time when they would have desired no more to be happy;
but it was not considerable enough to change their fortune. It is always
dangerous for the imagination ^o be fixed upon the idea of riches. The sight of
what he believed he should possess; the projects he had formed for the
employment of it; all these things had left such profound traces in the mind of
Abdallah, that nothing could efface them. Therefore, seeing the small advantage
he drew from the candlestick, he resolved to carry it back to the Dervise, in
hopes that he might obtain of him the treasure he had seen, or at least find
again the riches which had vanished from their sight, by restoring to him a
thing for which he testified so earnest a desire. He was so fortunate as to
remember his name, and that of the city where he inhabited. He departed
therefore immediately for Magrebi, carrying with him his candlestick, which he
lighted every night, and by that means furnished himself with what was
necessary on the road, without being obliged to implore the assistance and
compassion of the faithful.

When Abdallah arrived at Magrebi, his first care was (...) inquire in what
house, or in what convent, Abounadar lodged; he was so well known that every
body told him his habitation. He repaired thither directly, and found fifty
porters who kept the gate of his house, having each a staff with a head of gold
in their hands: the court of his palace was filled with slaves and domestics;
in (...), the residence of a prince could not expose to view greater
magnificence. Abdallah, struck with astonishment and admiration, feared to
proceed. Certainly, thought he, I either explained myself wrong, or those to
whom I addressed myself designed to make a ^est of me, because I was a
stranger: this is not the habitation of a Dervise, it is that of a King. He was
in this embarrassment, when a man approached him, and said to him, Abdallah,
thou art welcome; my master Abounadar has long expected the. He then conducted
him to an agreeable and magnificent pavillion, where the Dervise was seated.
Abdallah, struck with the riches which he beheld on all sides, would have
prostrated himself at his feet, but Abounadar prevented him, and interrupted
him when he would have made a merit of the candlestick, which he presented to
him. Thou art but an ungrateful wretch, said he to him do thou imagine thou
can impose upon me? I am not ignorant of any one of thy thoughts; and if thou
ha^^t known the value of this candlestick, thou would never have brought it
to me; I will make thee sensible of (...) true use. Immediately he placed a
light in each of its branches; and when the twelve Dervises had turned round
for some time, Abounadar gave each of them a blow with a cane, and in a moment
they were converted into twelve heaps of sequins, diamonds, and other precious
stones. This, said he, is the proper use to be made of this mavelous
candlestick. As to me, I never desired it, but to place it in my chamber, as a
talisman composed by a sage whom I revere, and am pleased to expose it
sometimes to those who come to visit me; and to prove to thee, added he, that
curiosity was the only occasion of my search for it, here are the keys of my
magazines, open them, and thou shall judge of my riches; thou shall tell me
whether the most insatiable miser would not be satisfied with them. Abdallah
obeyed him, and examined twelve magazines of great extent, so full of all
manner of riches, that he could not distinguish what merited his admiration
most; they all deserved it, and produced new desires. The regret of having
restored the candlestick, and that of not having found out the use of it,
pierced the heart of Abdallah. Abounadar seemed not to perceive it: on the
contrary, he loaded him with caresses, kept him some days in his house, and
commanded him to be treated as himself. When he was at the eve of the day which
he had fixed for his departure, he said to him, Abdallah, my son, I believed,
by what has happened to thee, thou art corrected of the frightful vice of
ingratitude; however, I owe thee a mark of my affection, for having undertaken
so long a journey, with a view of bringing me the thing I had desired; thou
may depart, I shall detain thee no longer. Thou shall find tomorrow, at the
gate of my palace, one of my horses to carry thee; I make thee a present of it,
as well as of a slave who shall conduct thee to thy house; and two camels
loaded with gold and jewels, which thou shall choose thyself out of my
treasures. Abdallah said to him all that a heart sensible to avarice could
express, when its passion was satisfied, and went to lie down till the morning
arrived which was fixed for his departure.

During the night he was still agitated, without being able to think of any
thing but the candlestick, and what it had produced. I had it, said he, so long
in my power; Abounadar, without me, had never been the possessor of it: what
risks did I not run in the subterraneous vault? Why does he now possess this
treasure of treasures? Because I had the probity, or rather the folly, to bring
it back to him. He profits by my labor, and the danger I have incurred in so
long a journey: and what does he give me in return? Two camels loaded with gold
and jewels; in one moment the candlestick will furnish him with ten times as
much. It is Abounadar who is ungrateful: what wrong shall I do him in taking
this candlestick? None certainly; for he is rich: and what do I possess? These
ideas determined him, at length, to make all possible attempts to seize upon
the candlestick. The thing was not difficult, Abounadar having trusted him with
the keys of his magazines. He knew where the candlestick was placed; he seized
upon it, hid it in the bottom of one of the sacks, which he filled with pieces
of gold and other riches that he was allowed to take, and loaded it, as well as
the rest, upon his camels. He had no other eagerness now than for his
departure; and after having hastily bid adieu to the generous Abounadar, he
delivered him his keys, and departed with his horse, and slave, and two camels.

When he was some days journey from Balsora, he sold his slave, resolving not
to have a witness of his former poverty, nor of the source of his present
riches. He bought another, and arrived without any obstacle, at his mother's,
whom he would scarce look upon, so much was he taken up with his treasure. His
first care was to place the loads of his camels, and the candlestick, in the
most private room of the house; and, in his impatience to feed his eyes with
his great opulence, he placed lights immediately in the candlestick: the twelve
Dervises appearing, he gave each of them a blow with a cane with all his
strength, lest he should be failing in the laws of the talisman: but he had not
remarked that Abounadar, when he struck them, had the cane in his left hand.
Abdallah, by a natural motion, made use of his right; and the Dervises, instead
of becoming heaps of riches, immediately drew from beneath their robes each a
formidable club, with which they struck him so hard and so long, that they left
him almost dead, and disappeared, carrying with them all his treasure, the
camels, the horse, the slave, and the candlestick.

Thus was Abdallah punished by poverty, and almost by death; for his
unreasonable ambition, which perhaps might have been pardonable, if it had not
been accompanied by an ingratitude as wicked as it was audacious; since he had
not so much as the resource of being able to conceal his perfidies from the too
piercing eyes of his benefactor.

The FORCE of HABIT.
Ill habits gather by unseen degrees;
As brooks run rivers, rivers run to seas.
DRYDEN.
THERE is not a common saying which has a better turn of sense in it, than what
we often hear in the mouths of the vulgar, that custom is a second nature. It
is indeed able to form the man a new, and give him inclinations and capacities
altogether different from those he was born with. Dr. Plot, in his history of
Staffordshire, tells us of an idiot that chanced to live within the sound of a
clock, and always amused himself with counting the hour of the day whenever the
clock struck; the clock being spoiled by some accident, the idiot continued to
strike and count the hour without the help of it, in the same manner as he had
done when it was entire. Though I dare not vouch for the truth of this story,
it is very certain, that custom has a mechanical effect upon the body, at the
same time that it has a very extraordinary influence upon the mind.

I shall in this paper consider one very remarkable effect which custom has
upon human nature; and which, if rightly observed, may lead us into very useful
rules of life. What I shall here take notice of in custom, is its wonderful
efficacy in making every thing pleasant to us. A person who is addicted to play
or gaming, though he took but little delight in it at first, by degrees
contracts so strong an inclination toward it, and gives himself up so entirely
to it, that it seems the only end of his being. The love of a retired or busy
life will grow upon a man insensibly, as he is conversant in the one or the
other, till he is utterly unqualified for relishing that to which he has been
for some time disused. Nay, a man may smoke, or drink, or take snuff, till he
is unable to pass away his time without it, not to mention how our delight in
any particular study, art, or science, rises and improves in proportion to the
application which we bestow upon it. Thus, what was at first an exercise,
becomes at length an entertainment. Our employments are changed into our
diversions. The mind grows fond of those actions she is accustomed to; and is
drawn with reluctance from those paths in which she has been used to walk.

Not only such actions as were at first indifferent to us, but even such as
were painful, will, by custom and practice, become pleasant. Sir Francis Bacon
observes in his Natural Philosophy, that our taste is never pleased better than
with those things which at first created a disgust in it. He gives particular
instances of claret, coffee, and other liquors, which the palate seldom
approves upon the first taste; but when it has once got a relish of them,
generally retains it for life. The mind is constituted after the same manner,
and after having habituated herself to any particular exercise or employment,
not only loses her first aversion toward it, but conceives a certain fondness
and affection for it. I have heard one of the greatest geniuses this age has
produced, who had been trained up in all the polite studies of antiquity,
assure me, upon his being obliged to search into several rolls and records,
that notwithstanding such an employment was at first very dry and irksome to
him, he at last took an incredible pleasure in it, and preferred it even to the
reading of Virgil or Cicero. The reader will observe, that I have not here
considered custom as it makes things easy, but as it renders them delightful;
and though others have often made the same reflection, it is possible they may
not have drawn those uses from it, with which I intend to fill the remaining
part of this paper.

If we consider attentively this property of human nature, it may instruct us
in very fine morality.

In the first place, I would have no man discouraged with that kind of life or
series of action, in which the choice of others, or his own necessities, may
have engaged him. It may, perhaps, be very disagreeable to him at first; but
use and application will certainly render it not only less painful, but
pleasing and satisfactory.

In the second place, I would recommend to every one that admirable percept
which Pythagoras is said to have given to his disciples; and which that
philosopher must have dr^wn from the observation I have enlarged upon: Optimum
vitae genus eligiro; na^^ consuetude f^cier jucundiffi^^rm: "Pitch upon that
course of life which is the most excellent, and custom will render it the most
delightful." Men, whose circumstances will permit them to choose their own way
of life, are inexcusable if they do not pursue that which their judgment tells
them is the most laudable. The voice of reason is more to be regarded (...) the
bent of any present inclination; since, by the rules above mentioned,
inclination will at length come over to reason though we can never force reason
to comply with inclination.

In the third place, this observation may teach the most sensual and
irreligious man to overlook those hardships and difficulties, which are apt to
discourage him fro^^ the prosecution of a virtuous life. The gods, said Hesied,
have placed Labor before Virtue: the way to her is at first rough and
difficult, but grows more smooth and easy the farther you advance in it. The
man who proceeds in it with steadiness and resolution, will in a little time
find, that her ways are Ways (...) of pleasantness, and all her paths are (...).

To enforce the consideration, we may further observe, that the practice of
religion will not only be attended with that pleasure which naturally
accompanies those actions to which we are habituated, but with those
supernumerary joys of heart that arise from the consciousness of such a
pleasure, from the satisfaction of acting up to the dictates of reason, and
from the prospect of an happy immortality.

In the fourth place, we may learn from this observation which we have made on
the mind of man, to take particular care when we are once settled in a regular
course of life, how we too frequently indulge ourselves in any of the most
innocent diversions and entertainments, since the mind may insensibly f^ll off
from the relish of virtuous actions, and, by degrees, exchange that pleasure
which it takes in the performance of its duty, for delights of a much more
inferior and unprofitable nature.

The last use which I shall make of this remarkable property in human nature,
of being delighted with those actions to which it is accustomed, is to show how
absolutely necessary it is for us to gain habits of virtue in this life, if we
would enjoy the pleasures of the next. The state (...) we call Heaven, will not
be capable of affecting (...) which are not thus qualified for it; we must in
this world gain a relish of truth and virtue, if we would be able to taste that
knowledge and perfection which are to make us happy in the next. The seeds of
those spiritual joys and raptures, which are to rise up and flourish in the
soul to all eternity, must ^e planted in her during this her present state of
probation. In short, Heaven is not to be looked upon only as the reward, but as
the natural effect of a religious life.

On the other hand, those evil spirits who by long custom, have contracted in
the body habits of lust and sensuality, makes and revenge an aversion to every
thing that is good, just, or laudable are naturally seasons and prepared for
pain and misery. Their torments have already taken roo^ in them, they cannot be
happy when divested of the body, unless we may suppose that Providence will, in
a manner, create them anew, and work (...) miracle in the rectification of
their faculties. They may indeed, taste a kind of malignant pleasure in those
actions to which they are accustomed while in this life; but when they are
removed from all those objects which are here apt to gratify them, they will
naturally become their own tormentors, and cherish in themselves those painful
habits of mind which are called, i^ scripture phrase, the worm which never
dies. This notion of Heaven and Hell is so very conformable to the light of
nature that it was discovered by several of the most exalted Heathens. It has
been finely improved by many eminent! divines of the last age, as in particular
by Archbishop Tillotson, and Dr. Sherlock; but there is none who has raised
such noble speculations upon it as Dr. Scots, in the first book of his
Christian Life; which is one of the fine^^ and most rational schemes of
divinity that is written in our tongue or any other. That excellent author
(...) shown how every particular custom and habit of virtue will, in its own
nature, produce the heaven, or a state of happiness, in him who shall hereafter
practice it: as, on the contrary, how every custom, or habit of vice, will be
the natural hell of him in whom it subsists.

The ABSURDITY of EXTREMES.
It Is education forms the youthful mind:
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined.
POPE.
I AM an humble cousin to two sisters, who, though they are good-humoured, good
sort of people, and (all things considered) behave to me tolerably well; yet
their manners and dispositions are so extremely opposite, that the task of
pleasing them is rendered very difficult and troublesome. The elder of my
cousins is a very jolly, free hearted girl, and so great an enemy to all kinds
of form, that you seldom see her with so much as a pin in her gown; while the
younger, who thinks in her heart that her sister is no better than a slattern,
runs into ^he contrary extreme* and is in every thing she does, an absolute fid
fad. She takes up almost as much time in putting on her gown, as her sister
does to dirty one. The elder is too thoughtless to remember what she is to do;
and the other so redious in doing it, that the time is always elapsed in which
it was necessary for it to be done. If you lend any thing to the elder, you are
sure of having it lost; or if you would borrow any thing of the younger, it is
odds but she refuses it, from an opinion that you will be less careful of (...)
^^^an herself. Whatever work is done by one sister, is too slight to hang
together for an hour's wear; and whatever is undertaken by the other, is
generally too nice and curious to be finished.

As they are constantly bed-fellows, the first sleep of the elder is sure to be
broken by the younger, whose usual time of undressing and folding up her
clothes is at least an hour and an half, allowing a third part of that time for
hindrance, occasioned by her eldest sister's things, which lie scattered every
where in her way.

If they had lovers, I know exactly how it would be the elder would lose here is
by saying Yes too soon, and the younger by saying No too often. If they were
wives, the one would be too hasty to do any thing right, and the other too
tedious to do any thing pleasing: or were they mothers, the daughters of the
elder would be playing at taw with the boys, and the sons of the younger
dressing dolls with the (...).

I wish, Sir, you would be so kind to these cousins of mine, as to favor them
with your advice. I have said already that they are both good humoured; and if
you could prevail upon the elder to borrow from the younger a little thought
and neatness, and upon the younger to add to her exactness a little of the
careless freedom of the elder, you would make them very amiable women, and me
the happiest of all humble cousins.

On BEAUTY and FLATTERY.
Beauties, like Princes, from their very youth,
Are perfect strangers to the voice of truth.
POPE.
A FRIEND of mine has two daughters, whom I will call Laetitia and Daphne; the
former is one of the greatest beauties of the age in which she lives, the
latter no way remarkable for any charms in her person. Upon this one
circumstance of their outward form, the good and ill of their lives seemed to
turn. Laetitia has not, from her very childhood, heard any thing else but
commendations of her features and complexion, by which means she is no other
than nature made her; a very beautiful outside. The consciousness of her charms
has rendered her insupportably vain and insolent toward all who have to do
with her. Daphne, who was (...) before one civil thing had ever been said to
her, found herself obliged to acquire some accomplishments to make up for the
want of those attractions which she saw in her sister. Poor Daphne was seldom
submitted to in a a debate wherein she was concerned; her discourse had nothing
to recommend it but the good sense of it; and she was always under a necessity
to have very well considered what she was to say, before she uttered it; while
Laetitia was listened to with partiality, and approbation sat on the
countenances of those she conversed with, before she communicated what she had
to say.

These causes have produced suitable ^ffects, and Laetitia is as insipid a
companion as Daphne is an agreeable one. Laetitia^ confident of favor, has
studied no arts to please. Daphne, despairing of any inclination toward her
person, has depended only on her merit. Laetitia, has always something in her
air that is sullen, grave, and disconsolate. Daphne has a countenance that
appears cheerful, open, and unconcerned.

A young gentleman saw Laetitia this winter at a play, and became her captive.
His fortune was such, that he wanted very little introduction to speak his
sentiments to her father. The lover was admitted with the utmost freedom into
the family, where a constrained behavior, severe looks, and distant
civilities, were the highest favors he could obtain of Laetitia; while Daphne
used him with the good humor, familiarity, and innocence of a sister:
insomuch, that he would often say to her, dear Daphne, were thou but as
handsome as Laetitia! -- She received such language with that ingenuous and
pleasing mirth which is natural to a woman without design. He still sighed in
vain for Laetitia, but found certain relief in the agreeable conversation of
Daphne. At length, heartily tired with the haughty impertinence of Laetitia,
and channel with the repeated instances of good humor he (...) observed in
Daphne, he one day told the latter, that he had something to say to her he
hoped she would be pleased with -- Faith, Daphne, continued he, I am in love
with thee, and despise thy sister sincerely. -- The manner of his declaring
himself ^ave his mistress occasion for a very hearty laughter. -- Way, says he,
I knew you would laugh at (...), but I will ask your father. He did so: the
father received his intelligence with no less joy than surprise, and was very
glad he had now no care left but for his beauty, which he thought he could
carry to market a^ leisure.

I do not know any thing that has pleased me so much a great while, as the
conquest of my friend Daphne's. All her acquaintances congratulate her upon her
chance medley, and laugh at that premeditating murderer, her sister. As it is
an argument of a light mind, to think the worst of ourselves for the
imperfections of our persons, it is equally below us to value ourselves upon
the advantages of them. The female world seem to be almost incorrigibly gone
astray in this particular; for which reason I shall recommend the following
extract out of a friend's letter to the Professed Beauties, who are a people
almost as insufferable as the Professed Wits.

"Monsieur St. Ev^emont has concluded one of his essays with affirming, that
the last sighs of a handsome woman are not so much for the loss of her life as
of her beauty. Perhaps this raillery is pursued too for, yet it is turned upon
a very obvious remark, that a woman's strongest passion is for her own beauty,
and that she values it as her favorite distinction. From hence it is, that all
arts, which pretend to improve or preserve it, meet with so general a reception
among the sex. To say nothing of many false helps, and contraband wares of
beauty, which are daily vended in this great market, there is not a maiden
gentlewoman, of a good family, in any county of South Britain, who has not
heard of the virtue of May dew, or is unfurnished with some receipt or other in
favor of her complexion: and I have known a physician of learning and sense,
after eight years study in the university, and a course of travels into most
countries in Europe, owe the first rising of his fortune to a cosmetic wash.

This has given me occasion to consider, how so universal a disposition in
womankind, which springs from a laudable motive, the desire of pleasing, and
proceeds from an opinion not altogether groundless, that nature, helped by art,
may be turned to their advantage. And, methinks, is would be an acceptable
service to take them out of the hands of quacks and pretenders, and to prevent
their imposing upon themselves, by discovering to them the true secret and art
of improving beauty.

In order to do this, before I touch upon it directly, it will be necessary to
lay down a few preliminary maxims, viz.

That no woman can be handsome by the force of features alone, any more than
she can be witty only by the help of speech.

That pride destroys all symmetry and grace, and affectation is a more terrible
enemy to fine faces than the smallpox.

That no woman is capable of being beautiful who is not incap^ble of being
false.

And, that what would be odious in a friend, is deformity in a mistress.

From these few principles, thus laid down, it will be easy to prove, that the
true art of assisting beauty, consists in embellishing the whole person, by the
proper ornaments of virtuous and commendable qualities. By this help alone it
is, that those who are the favorite work of nature, or, as Mr. Dryden
expresses it, the porcelain clay of human kind, become animated, and are in a
capacity of exerting their charms; and those who seem to have been neglected by
her, like models wrought in haste, are capable, in a great measure, of
finishing what she has left imperfect.

It is, methinks, a low and degrading idea of that sex, which was created to
refine the joys, and soften the cares of humanity, by the most agreeable
participation, to consider them merely as objects of sight. This is abridging
them of their natural extent of power, to put them upon a level with their
pictures at Knellers's. How much nobler is the contemplation of beauty
heightened by virtue, and commanding our esteem and love, while it draws our
observation! how faint and spiritless are the charms of a coquette, when
compared with the real loveliness of Sophronia's innocence, piety, good humor,
and truth; virtues which add a new softness to her sex, and even beautify her
beauty! that agreeableness, which must otherwise have appeared no longer in the
modest virgin, is now preserved in the tender mother, the prudent friend, and
the faithful wife. Colors artfully spread upon canvas, may entertain the eye,
but not affect the heart; and she who takes no care to add to the natural
graces of her person any excellent qualities, may be allowed still to amuse as
a picture, but not to triumph as a beauty.

When Adam is introduced by Milton, describing Eve in Paradise, and relating to
the Angel the Impressions he felt upon seeing her at her first creation, he
does not represent her like a Grecian Venus, by her shape or features, but by
the luster of her mind which shone in them, and gave them their power of
charming: Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.


Without this irradiating power, the proudest fair one ought (...) know,
whatever her glass may tell her to the contrary, that her most perfect features
are uninformed and dead.

I cannot better close this moral, than by a short epitaph written by Ben
Johnson, with a spirit which nothing could inspire but such an object as I have
been describing."

Underneath this stone does lie
As much Virtue as could die:
Which, when alive, did vigor give
To as much beauty as could live.
On AFFECTATION.
But one admirer has the affected lass;
Nor meets that one -- but in her locking-glass.
YOUNG.
A LATE conversation which I fell into, gave me an opportunity of observing a
great deal of beauty in a very handsome woman, and as much wit in an ingenious
man, turned into deformity in the one, and absurdity in the other, by the mere
force of affectation. The fair one had something in her person upon which her
thoughts were fixed, that she attempted to show to advantage in every lo^k,
word, and gesture. The gentleman was as diligent to do justice to his fine
parts as the lady to her beauteous form. You might see his imagination on the
stretch to find out something uncommon, and what they call bright, to entertain
her; while she writhed herself into as many different postures to engage him.
When she laughed, her lips were to sever at a greater distance than ordinary to
show her teeth: her fan was to point to something at a distance, that in the
reach she might discover the roundness of her arm; then she is utterly mistaken
in what she saw, falls back, smiles at her own folly, and is so wholly
discomposed, that her tucker is to be adjusted, her bosom exposed, and the
whole woman put into new airs and graces. While she was doing this, the gallant
had time to think of something very pleasant to say next to her, or make some
unkind observation on some other lady to feed her vanity. These unhappy effects
of affectation, naturally led me to look into that strange state of mind which
so generally discolours the behavior of most people we meet with.

The learned Dr. Burnet, in his theory of the earth, takes occasion to observe,
that every thought is attended with consciousness and representativeness. The
mind has nothing presented to it, but what is immediately followed by a
reflection or conscience, which tells you whether that which was so presented
is graceful or unbecoming. This act of the mind discovers itself in the gesture
by a proper behavior in those whose consciousness goes no further than to
direct them in the just progress of their present thought or action; but
betrays an interruption in every second thought, when the consciousness is
employed in too fondly approving a man's own conceptions; which sort of
consciousness is what we call Affectation.

As the love of praise is implanted in our bosom as a strong incentive to
worthy actions, it is a very difficult task to get above a desire of it for
things that should be wholly indifferent. Women, whose hearts are fixed upon
the pleasures they have in the consciousness that they are the objects of love
and admiration, are ever changing the air of their countenances, and altering
the attitude of their bodies, to strike the hearts of their beholders with new
sense of their beauty. The dressing part of our sex, whose minds are the same
with the sillier part of the other, are exactly in the like uneasy condition to
be regarded for a well tied cravat, a hat cocked with an unusual briskness, a
very well chosen coat, or other instances of merit, which they are impatient to
see unobserved.

But this apparent affectation, arising from an ill-governed consciousness, is
not so much to be wondered at, in such loose and trivial minds as these: but
when you see it reign in characters of worth and distinction, it is what you
cannot but lament, nor without some indignation. It creeps into the heart of
the wise man, as well as that of the coxcomb. When you see a man of sense look
about for applause, and discover an it^^^ing inclination to be commended, lay
traps for a little increase, even from those whose opinion he values in nothing
but his own favor; who is safe against this weakness? Or who knows whether he
is guilty of it or not? The best way to get clear of such a light fondness for
applause, is, to take all possible care to throw off the love of it upon
occasions that are not in themselves laudable; but, as it appears, we hope for
no praise from them. Of this nature are all graces in men's p^^^ons, dress, and
bodily deportments; which will naturally be winning and attractive if men think
not of them, but lose their force in proportion to our endeavors to make them
such.

When our consciousness turns upon the main design of life, and our thoughts
are employed upon the chief purpose, either in business or pleasure, we shall
never betray an affectation, for we cannot be guilty of it; but when we give
the passion for praise an unbridled liberty, our pleasure, in little
perfections, robs us of what is due to us for great virtues and worthy
qualities. How many excellent speeches and honest actions are lost for want of
being indifferent where we ought! Men are oppressed with regard to their way of
speaking and acting, instead of having their thoughts bent upon what they
should do or say; and by that means bury a capacity for great things by their
fear of failing in indifferent things. This, perhaps, cannot be called
Affectation; but it, has some tincture of it, at least, so far, as that their
fear of erring in a thing of consequence argues they would be too much pleased
in performing it.

It is only from a thorough disregard to himself in such particulars, that man
can act with a laudable sufficiency; his heart is fixed upon one point in view;
and he commits no error, because he thinks nothing an error but what deviates
from that intention.

The wild havoc affectation makes in that part of the world which should be
most polite, is visible wherever we turn our eyes: it pushes men not only into
impertinence in conversation, but also in their premeditated speeches. At the
bar it torments the bench, whose business it is to cut off all superfluities in
what is spoken before it by the practitioner; as well as several little pieces
of injustice which arise from the law itself. (...) have seen it make a man run
from the purpose before (...) Judge, who was, when at the bar himself, so close
and logical a pleader, that, with all the pomp of eloquence in his power, he
never spoke a word too much.

It might be borne even here, but it often ascends th^^ pulpit itself; and the
declaimer, in that sacred place, i^ frequently so impertinently witty, speaks
of the last day itself with so many quaint phrases, that there is no man who
understands raillery, but must resolve to sin no more: nay, you may behold him
sometimes in prayer for a proper delivery of the great truth he is to utter,
humble himself with so well-turned a phrase, and mention his own unworthiness
in a way so every becoming, that the air of the pretty gentleman is preserved
under the lowliness of the preacher.

I shall end this with a short letter I writ the other day to a very witty man,
overrun with the fault I am speaking of.

Dear Sir,
I spent some time with you the other day, and must take the liberty of a
friend to tell you of the unsufferable affectation you are guilty of in all you
say or do. When I gave you a hint of it, you asked me whether a man is to be
cold to what his friends think of him? No; but praise is not to be the
entertainment of every moment: he that hopes for it, must be able to suspend
the possession of it until proper periods of life, or death itself. If you
would not rather be commended than be praiseworthy, contemn little merit; and
allow no man to be so free with you as to praise you to your face. Your vanity
by this means will want its food. At the same time, your passion for esteem
will be more fully gratified. Men will praise you in their actions: where you
now receive one compliment, you will then receive twenty civilities. Until
then, you will never have of either, further than,

SIR, Yours, etc.


On MODESTY.
True modesty is ashamed of every thing that is criminal:
False modesty of every thing that is unfashionable.
ADD.
MODESTY is not only an ornament, but also a guard to virtue. It is a kind of
quick and delicate feeling in the soul, which makes her shrink and withdraw
herself from every thing that has danger in it. It is such an exquisite
sensibility, as warns her to shun the first appearance of every thing that is
hurtful.

I cannot at present recollect either the place or time of what I am going to
mention; but I have read somewhere in the history of ancient Greece, that the
women of the country were seized with an unaccountable melancholy, which
disposed several of them to make away with themselves. The Senate, after having
tried many expedients to prevent this self-murder, which was so frequent among
them, published an edict, that if any women whomsoever should lay violent hands
upon herself, her corpse should be exposed naked in the street, and dragged
about the city in the most public manner. This edict immediately put a stop to
the practice which was before so common. We may see in this instance the
strength of female modesty, which was able to overcome the violence even of
madness and despair. The fear of shame, in the fair sex, was, in those days,
more prevalent than that of death.

If modesty has so great an influence over our actions, and is in many cases,
so impregnable a fence to virtue, what can more undermine morality than that
politeness which reigns among the unthinking part of mankind, and treats as
unfashionable the most ingenious part of our behavior; which recommends
impudence as good-breeding, and keeps a man always in countenance, not because
he is innocent, but because he is shameless?

Seneca thought modesty so great a check to vice, that he prescribed to us the
practice of it in secret, and advises us to raise it in ourselves upon
imaginary occasions, when such as are real do not offer themselves: for this is
the meaning of his precept, that when we are by ourselves, and in our greatest
solitudes, we should fancy that Can stands before us, and sees every thing we
do. In short, if you banish modesty out of the world, she carries away with her
half the virtues that are in it.

After those reflections on modesty, as it is a virtue, I must observe, that
there is a vicious modesty, which justly deserves to be ridiculed, and which
those persons very often discover who value themselves most upon a well-bre^
confidence. This happens when a man is ashamed to act up to his reason, and
would not, upon any consideration, be surprised in the practice of those
duties, for the performance of which he was sent into the world. Many a^^
impudent libertine would blush to be caught in a serious discourse, and would
scarce be able to show his head, after having disclosed a religious thought.
Decency of behavior, all outward show of virtue, and abhorrence of vice, are
carefully avoided by this set of shame faced people, as what would disparage
their gaiety of temper, and infallibly bring them to dishonor. This is such a
poorness of spirit, such a despicable cowardice, such a degenerate, abject
state of mind, as ou^ would think human nature incapable of, did we not meet
with frequent instances of it in ordinary conversation.

There is another kind of vicious modesty, which makes a man ashamed of his
person, his birth, his profession, his poverty, or the like misfortunes, which
it was not his choice to prevent, and is not in his power to rectify. If a man
appears ridiculous by any of the aforementioned circumstances, he becomes much
more so by being out of countenance for them. They should rather give him
occasion to exert a noble spirit, and to palliate those imperfections which are
not in his power, by those perfections which are (...), to use a very witty
allusion of an eminent author, he should imitate Caesar, who, because his head
was bald, covered that defect with laurels.

VIRTUE under AFFLICTION, represented in the (...) of AMANDA.
For blessings (...) ^^^ait ^n virtuous deeds;
And though a (...) -- a sure reward succeeds.
CONGREVE.
I HAVE more than once had occasion to mention a (...) noble saying (...)
Seneca the philosopher, that a virtu^^s was person struggling with misfortunes,
and rising above them, is an object on which the gods themselves may ^cok down
with delight. I shall therefore set before my readers a scene of this kind of
distress in private life for the speculation of this day.

An eminent citizen, who had lived in good fashion and credit, was, by a train
of accidents, and by an unavoidable perplexity in his affairs, reduced to a low
condition. There is a modesty usually attending faultless poverty, which made
him rather choose to reduce his manner of living to his present circumstances,
than solicit his friends in order to support the show of an estate when the
substance was gone. His wife, who was a woman of sense and virtue, behaved
herself on this occasion with uncommon decency, and never appeared so amiable
in his eyes as now. Instead of upbraiding him with the ample fortune she had
brought, or the many great offers she had refused for his sake, she redoubled
all the instances of her affection, while her husband was continually pouring
out his heart to her in complaints that he had ruined the best woman in the
world. He sometimes came home at a time she did not expect him, and surprised
her in tears, which she endeavored to conceal, and always put on an air of
cheerfulness to receive him. To lessen their expenses, their eldest daughter,
(whom I shall call Amanda) was sent into the country, to the house of an honest
farmer, who had married a servant of the family. This young woman was
apprehensive of the ruin which was approaching, and had privately engaged a
friend in the neighborhood, to give her an account of what passed from time to
time of her father's affairs. Amanda was in the bloom of her youth and beauty,
when the lord of the manor, who often called in at the farmer's house as he
followed his country sports, fell passionately in love with her. He was a man
of great generosity; but from a loose education, had contracted an hearty
aversion to marriage. He therefore entertained a design upon Amanda's virtue,
which at present he thought fit to keep private. The innocent creature, who
never suspected his intentions, was pleased with his person; and having
observed his growing passion for her, hoped, by so advantageous a match, she
might quickly be in a capacity of supporting her impoverished relations. (...)
day as he called to see her, he found her in tears over a letter she had just
received from her friend, which gave an account that her father had lately been
stripped of every thing by an execution. The lover, who with some difficulty
found out the cause of her grief, took this occasion to make her a proposal. It
is impossible to express Amanda's confusion, when she found his pretensions
were not honorable. She was now deserted of all her hopes, and had no power to
speak: but rushing from him in the utmost disturbance, locked herself up in a
chamber. He immediately dispatched a messenger to her father with the following
letter:

SIR,
I have heard of your misfortunes, and have offered your daughter, if she will
live with me, to settle on her four hundred pounds a year, and to lay down the
sum for which you are now distressed. I will be so ingenuous as to tell you,
that I do not intend marriage: but if you are wise, you will use your authority
with her not to be too nice, when she has an opportunity of saving you and your
family, and of making herself happy.

I am, etc.


This letter came to the hands of Amanda's mother; she opened and read it with
great surprise and concern. She did not think it proper to explain herself to
the messenger; but desiring him to call again the next morning, she wrote to
her daughter as follows:

Dearest Child,
Your father and I have just now received a letter from a gentleman who
pretends love to you, with a proposal that insults our misfortunes, and would
throw us to a lower degree of misery than any thing which is come upon us. How
could this barbarous man think, that the tenderest of parents would be tempted
to supply their wants, by giving up the best of children to infamy and ruin? It
is a mean and cruel artifice, to make this proposal at a time when he thinks
our necessities must compel us to any thing; but we will not eat the bread of
shame; and therefore we charge thee not to think of us, but to avoid the ^nare
which is laid for thy virtue. Beware of pitying us; it is not so bad as you
have perhaps been told. All things will yet be well, and I shall write my child
better news.

I have been interrupted: I know not how I was moved to say things would mend.
As I was going on, I was startled by a noise of one that knocked at the door,
and has brought us an unexpected supply of a debt which had long been owing.
Oh! I will now tell thee all. It is some days I have lived almost without
support, having conveyed what little money I could raise to your poor father.
Thou will weep to think where he is; yet be assured he will be soon at liberty.
That cruel letter would have broken his heart; but I have concealed it from
him. I have no companion at present beside little Fanny, who stands watching my
looks as I write, and is crying for her sister: she says she is sure you are
not well, having discovered that my present trouble is about you. But do not
think that I would thus repeat my sorrows to grieve thee: no, it is to entreat
thee not to make them insupportable, by adding what would be worse than all.
Let us bear cheerfully an affliction, which we have not brought upon ourselves;
and remember there is a power who can better deliver us out of it, than by the
loss of thy innocence.

-- Heaven preserve my child! Thy affectionate mother, --


The messenger, notwithstanding he promised to deliver this letter to Amanda,
carried it first to his master, who, he imagined, would be glad to have an
opportunity of giving it into her hands himself. His master was impatient to
know the success of his proposal, and therefore broke open the letter privately
to see the contents. He was not a little moved at so true a picture of virtue
in distress; but, at the same time, was infinitely surprised to find his offers
rejected. However, he resolved not to suppress the letter, but carefully sealed
it up again, and carried it to Amanda. All his endeavors to see her were in
vain, till she was assured he brought a letter from her mother. He would not
part with it, but upon condition that she would read it without leaving the
room. While she was perusing it, he fixed his eyes on her face with the deepest
attention: her concern gave a new softness to her beauty; and when she burst
into tears, he could no longer refrain from bearing a part in her sorrow, and
telling her, that he too had read the letter, and was resolved to make
reparation for having been the occasion of it. My readers will not be
displeased to see the second epistle, which he now wrote to Amanda's mother.

MADAM,
I am full of shame, and will never forgive myself, if I have not your pardon
for what I lately wrote. It was far from my intention to add trouble to the
afflicted; nor could any thing but my being a stranger to you, have betrayed me
into a fault, for which, if I live, I shall endeavor to make you amends as a
son. You cannot be unhappy while Amanda is your daughter; nor shall be, if any
thing can prevent it which is in the power of,

MADAM, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, --."


This letter he sent by his steward, and soon after went up to town himself, to
complete the generous act he had no^ resolved on. By his friendship and
assistance Amanda's father was quickly in a condition of retrieving his
perplexed affairs. To conclude, he married Amanda, and enjoyed the double
satisfaction of having restored a worthy family to their former prosperity, and
of making himself happy by an alliance to their virtues.

Preliminary Address prefixed to the Pennsylvania Almanac for 1758.
On ECONOMY and FRUGALITY.
Spare not, nor spend too much; be this thy care,
Spare but to spend, and only spend to spare.
RANDOLPH.
Courteous Reader,
I HAVE heard that nothing gives an author so great pleasure as to find his
works respectfully quoted by many learned authors. This pleasure I have seldom
enjoyed; for though I have been, if I may say it without vanity, an eminent
author (of Almanacks) annually, now a full quarter of a century, my brother
authors in the same way, for what reason I know not, have ever been very
sparing in their applauses, and no other author has taken the least notice, of
me; so that did not my writings produce me some solid pudding, the great
deficiency of praise would have quite discouraged me.

I concluded at length, that the people were the best judges of my merit, for
they buy my works; and besides, in my rambles, where I am not personally known,
I have frequently heard one or other of my adages repeated* with, as poor
Richard says, at the end of it; this gave me some satisfaction, as it showed
not only that my instructions were regarded, but discovered likewise some
respect for my authority; and I own, that to encourage the practice of
remembering and repeating those wise sentences, I have sometimes quoted myself
with great gravity.

Judge then how much I must have been gratified by an accident I am going to
relate to you. I stopped my horse lately, where a great number of people were
collected at a vendue^^ merchant goods. The hour of sale not being come, they
were conversing on the badness of the times, and one of the company called to a
plain clean old man, with white locks, "Pray, father Abraham, what think you of
the times? Will not these heavy taxes quite ruin the country? How shall we be
ever able to pay them? What would you advise us to?" Father Abraham stood up,
and replied, "If you would have my advice, I will give it you in short; for a
word to the wise is enough, and many words will not fill a bushel, as poor
Richard says." They joined in desiring him to speak his mind, and gathering
round him, he proceeded as follows:

"Friends, says he, and neighbors, the taxes are indeed very heavy, and if
those laid on by government were the only ones we had to pay, we might more
easily discharge them; but we have many others, and much more grievous to some
of us. We are taxed twice as much by our idleness, three times as much by our
pride, and four times as much by our folly; and from these taxes the
commissioners cannot ease or deliver us by allowing any abatement. However, let
us hearken to good advice, and something may be done for us. "God helps them
that help themselves," as poor Richard says, in his Almanac for 1733.

"It would be thought a hard government that should tax its people one tenth
part of their time, to be employed in its service: but idleness taxes many of
us much more, if we reckon all that is spent in absolute ^loth, or in doing of
nothing, with that which is spent in idle employments or amusements, that
amount to nothing. Sloth, by bringing on diseases absolutely shortens life.
"Sloth, like rust, consumes faster than labor wears, while the used key is
always bright," as poor Richard says. But do thou love life, then do not
squander time, for this is the stuff life, is made of, as poor Richard says.
How much more than is necessary do we spend in sleep! forgetting that, "the
sleeping fox catches no poultry, and that there will be sleeping enough in the
grave," as poor Richard says. "If time be of all things the most precious,
wasting time must be, as poor Richard says, the greatest prodigality; since, as
he elsewhere tells us, "Lost time is never found again; and what we call time
enough, always proves little enough;" let us then up and be doing, and doing to
the purpose; so by diligence shall we do more with less perplexity. "Sloth
makes all things difficult, but industry easy, as poor Richard says; and he
that rises late must trot all day, and shall scarce overtake his business at
night. While laziness travels so slowly, that poverty soon overtakes him," as
we read in poor Richard, who adds, "drive thy business, let not that drive
thee; and early to bed, and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and
wise."

So that what signifies wishing and hoping for better times? We may make these
times better if we bestir ourselves. "Industry needs not wish, as poor Richard
says; and he that lives upon hope, will die fasting." There are no gains
without pains; "then help hands, for I have no lands," or if I have, they are
smartly taxed. And, as poor Richard likewise observes, "He that has a trade
has an estate; and he that has a calling has an office of profit and honor;
but then the trade must be worked at, and the calling well followed, or neither
the estate nor the office will enable us to pay our taxes. If we are
industrious we shall never starve; for, as poor Richard says, "At the working
man's house hunger looks in, but dares not enter." Nor will the bailiff or the
constable enter; for, "Industry pays debts, while Despair increases them,"
says poor Richard. What though you have found no treasure, nor has any rich
relation left you a legacy. "Diligence is the mother of Good luck, as poor
Richard says, and God gives all things to industry." "Then plough deep while
sluggards sleep, and you shall have corn to sell and to keep," says poor Dick.
"Work while it is called today, for you know not how much you may be hindered
tomorrow;" which makes poor Richard say, "One today is worth two to-morrows;"
-- and farther, "Have you somewhat to do tomorrow, do it today." If you were
a servant, would you not be ashamed a good master should catch you idle? Are
you then your own master, "and not ashamed to catch yourself idle?" as poor
Dick says. When there is so much to be done for yourself, your family, your
country, and your gracious king, be up by peep of day: "Let not the sun look
down and say, Inglorious here he lies." Handle your tools without mittens;
remember, "that the cat in gloves catches no mice," as poor Dick says. It Is
true, there is much to be done, and perhaps you are weak-handed, but stick to
it steadily, and you will see great effects; for, "constant dropping wears away
stones, and by diligence and patience the mouse eats into the cable; and little
strokes fell great oaks." as poor Richard says in his Almanac, the year I
cannot just now remember.

Methinks I hear some of you say, "Must a man afford himself no leisure?" I
will tell thee, my friend, what poor Richard says. "Employ thy time well, if
thou meanest to gain leisure; and since thou art not sure of a minute, throw
not away an hour." Leisure is time doing something useful; this leisure the
diligent man will obtain, but the lazy man never; so that as poor Richard
says," "A life of leisure, and a life of laziness are two things." Do you
imagine that sloth will afford you more comfort than labor? No, for, as poor
Richard says, "Trouble springs from idleness, and grievous toil from needless
ease. Many, without labor, would live by their wits only, but they break for
want of stock." Whereas industry gives comfort, and plenty, and respect: "Fly
pleasures, and they will follow you. The diligent spinner has a large shift;
and now I have a sheep and a cow, every body bids me good morrow;" all which is
well said by poor Richard.

But with our industry, we must likewise be steady, settled, and careful, and
oversee our own affairs with our own eyes, and not trust too much to others;
for, as poor Richard says, I never saw an often removed tree,
Nor yet an often removed family,
That throve so well as those that settled be.


And again, "three removes are as bad as a fire;" and again, "keep thy shop,
and thy shop will keep thee:" and again, "if you would have your business done,
go; if not, send;" and again, He that by the plough would thrive,
Himself must either hold or drive.


And again, "the eye of a master will do more work than both his hands;" and
again, "want of care does us more damage than want of knowledge;" and again,
"not to oversee workmen is to leave them your purse open." Trusting too much to
others care is the ruin of many; for, as the Almanac says, "In the affairs of
this world, men are saved, not by faith, but by the want of it; but a man's own
care is profitable; for, says poor Dick, "Learning is to the studious, and
riches to the careful, as well as power to the bold, and heaven to the
virtuous." And further, "If you would have a faithful servant, and one that you
like, serve yourself." And again, he advises to circumspection and care, even
in the smallest matters, because sometimes, "A little neglect may breed great
mischief; adding, for want of a nail the shoe was lost; and for want of a shoe
the horse was lost; for want of a horse the rider was lost; being overtaken and
slain by the enemy; all for want of care about a horse shoe nail."

So much for industry, my friends, and attention to one's own business; but to
these we must add frugality, if we would make our industry more certainly
successful. A man may, if he knows not how to save as he gets, keep his nose
all his life at the grindstone, and die not worth a groat at the last. "A fat
kitchen makes a lean will," as poor Richard says; and, Many estates are spent
in the getting,
Since women for tea forsook spinning and knitting,
And men for punch forsook hewing and splitting.


"If you would be wealthy, says he in another Almanach, think of saving as well
as getting: the Indies have not made Spain rich, because her outgoes are
greater than her incomes." Away then with your expensive follies, and you will
not have so much cause to complain of hard times, heavy taxes and chargeable
families: for, as poor Dick says, Women and wine, game and deceit,
Make the wealth small, and the wants great.


And farther, "What maintains one vice, would bring up two children." You may
think, perhaps, that a little tea, or a little punch now and then, diet a
little more costly, clothes a little finer, and a little entertainment now and
then, can be no great matter; but remember what poor Richard says, "Many a
little makes a mickle;" and farther, "Beware of little expenses; a small leak
will sink a great ship;" and again, "Who dainties love, shall beggars prove;"
and moreover, "Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them."

Here you are all got together, at this vendue of fineries and knicknacks. You
call them goods, but if you do not take care, they will prove evils to some of
you. You expect that they will be sold cheap, and perhaps they may for less
than they cost, but if you have no occasion for them, they must be dear to you.
Remember what poor Richard says, "Buy what thou have no need of, and ere long
thou shall sell thy necessaries." And again, "At a great pennyworth pause a
while:" he means, that perhaps the cheapness is apparently only, and not real;
or the bargain, by straitening thee in thy business, may do thee more harm than
good. For in another place he says, "many have been ruined by buying good
pennyworths." Again, poor Richard says, "'It Is foolish to lay out money in a
purchase of repentance;" and yet this folly is practiced every day at vendues,
for want of minding the Almanac. "Wise men, as poor Dick says, learn by others
harms, fools scarcely by their own; but felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum." Many a one, for the sake of finery on the back, have go^^ with a
hungry belly, and half-starved their families: "Silks and sattins, scarlets and
velvets, as poor Richard says, put out the kitchen fire." These are not the
necessaries of life; they can scarcely be called the conveniences, and yet
only because they look pretty, how many want to have them! The artificial wants
of mankind thus become more numerous than the natural; and, as poor Dick says,
"For one poor person, there are an hundred indigent." By these and other
extravagancies, the genteel are reduced to poverty, and forced to borrow of
those whom they formerly despised, but who through industry and frugality have
maintained their standing: in which case it appears plainly, that "a ploughman
on his legs is higher than a gentleman on his knees," as poor Richard says.
Perhaps they have had a small estate left them, which they knew not the getting
of; they think, "It is day, and will never be night; that a little to be spent
out of so much is not worth minding:" a child and a fool, as poor Richard says,
imagine twenty shillings and twenty years can never be spent; but, always
taking out of the meal tub, and never putting in, soon comes to the bottom;
then, as poor Dick says, "When the well is dry, they know the worth of water."
But this they might have known before, if they had taken his advice: "If you
would know the value of money, go and try to borrow some; for he that goes
a-borrowing goes a-sorrowing; and indeed so he does that lends to such people,
when he goes to get it again." Poor Dick, farther advises, and says, Fond pride
in dress is sure a very curse;
Ere fancy you consult -- consult your purse.


And again, "Pride is as loud a beggar as Want, and a great deal more saucy."
When you have bought one fine thing, you must buy ten more, that your
appearance may he all of a piece; but poor Dick says, "It is easier to suppress
the first desire, than to satisfy all that follow it. And that it is as truly
folly for the poor to ape the rich, as the frog to swell, in order to equal the
ox."

Great estates may venture more,
But little boats should keep near shore.
"It is however a folly soon punished; for pride that dines on vanity, sups on
content," as poor Richard says. And, in another place, "Pride breakfasted with
plenty, dined with poverty, and supped with infamy." And, after all, for what
use is the pride of appearance, for which so much is risked, so much is
suffered? It cannot promote health, or ease pain; it makes no increase of merit
in the person, it creates envy, it hastens misfortune.

" What is a butterfly? At best
" He Is but a caterpillar dressed;
" The gaudy fop's his picture just!"
But what madness must it be to run in debt for these superfluities! we are
offered, by the terms of this vendue, six months credit; and that perhaps has
induced some of us to attend it, because we cannot spare the ready money, and
hope now to be fine without it. But, ah! think what you do when you run in
debt; you give to another power over your liberty. If you cannot pay at the
time, you will be ashamed to see your creditor; you will be in fear when you
speak to him; you will make poor, pitiful, sneaking excuses, and by degrees
come to lose your veracity, and sink into base downright lying; for, as poor
Richard says, "the second vice is lying, the first is running into debt." And
again, to the same purpose, "lying rides upon debt's back." Whereas a freeborn
Englishman ought not to be ashamed or afraid to see or speak to any man living.
But poverty often deprives a man of all spirit and virtue; "It is hard for an
empty bag to stand upright," as poor Richard truly says. What would you think
of that prince, or that government, who would issue an edict forbidding you to
dress like a gentleman, or gentlewoman, on pain of imprisonment or servitude?
Would you not say, that you are free, have a right to dress as you please, and
that such an edict would be a breach of your privileges, and such a government
tyrannical? And yet you are about to put yourselves under that tyranny, when
you run in debt for such dress! your creditor has authority at his pleasure to
deprive you of your liberty, by confining you in a jail for life, or by selling
you for a servant, if you should not be able to pay him. When you have got your
bargain, you may, perhaps, think little of payment; but "Creditors," as poor
Dick tells us, "have better memories than debtors;" and, in another place,
says, "Creditors are a superstitious sect, great observers of set days and
times." The day comes round before you are aware, and the demand is made before
you are prepared to satisfy it. Or, if you bear your debt in mind, the term
which at first seemed so long, will, as it lessens, appear extremely short.
Time will seem to have added wings to his heels as well as his shoulders.
"Those have a short Lent, says poor Richard, who owe money to be paid at
Easter." Then since, as he says, "The borrower is a slave to the lender, and
the debtor to the creditor, disdain the chain; preserve your freedom, and
maintain your independency: be industrious and free; be frugal and free." At
present, perhaps, you may think yourself in thriving circumstances, and that
you can bear a little extravagance without injury; but, For age and want, save
while you may;
No morning sun lasts a whole day.
As poor Richard says. -- Gain may be temporary and uncertain, but ever while
you live, expense is continual and certain; and, "'it is easier to build two
chimnies, than to keep one in fuel, as poor Richard says: so rather go to bed
supperless than rise in debt." Get what you can, and what is got fairly, hold;
It Is the stone that will turn all your lead into gold?
As poor Richard says. -- And when you have got the philosopher's stone, sure
you will no longer complain of bad times, or the difficulty of paying taxes.

This doctrine, my friends, is reason and wisdom; but, after all, do not depend
too much upon your own industry, and frugality, and prudence, though excellent
things, for they may all be blasted without the blessing of heaven; and
therefore ask that blessing humbly, and be not uncharitable to those that at
present seem to want it, but comfort and help them. Remember Job suffered, and
was afterward prosperous.

And now to conclude, "Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in
no other, and scarce in that; for it is true, we may give advice, but we cannot
give conduct," as poor Richard says. However, remember this, "They that will
not be counseled, cannot be helped," as poor Richard says. And farther, "That
if you will not hear Reason, she will surely rap your knuckles."

Thus the old gentleman ended his harangue. The people heard it, and approved
the doctrine; but immediately practiced the contrary, just as if it had been a
common sermon; for the vendue opened, and they began to buy extravagantly,
notwithstanding all his cautions, and their own fear of taxes. I found the good
man had thoroughly studied my Almanacks, and digested all I had dropped on these
topics during the course of five-and-twenty years. The frequent mention he made
of me might have tired any one else, but my vanity was wonderfully delighted
with it, though I was conscious that not a tenth part of the wisdom was my own
which he ascribed to me, but rather the gleanings I had made of the sense of
all ages and nations. However, I resolved to be the better for the echo of it;
and though I had at first determined to buy stuff for a new coat, I went away
resolving to wear my old one a little longer. Reader, if thou will do the same,
thy profit will be as great as mine.

I am, as ever, Thine to serve thee, RICHARD SANDERS.
July 7, 1757.
On CLEANLINESS.
It Is beauty paints, but neatness guides the dart.
POPE.
I HAD occasion to go a few miles out of town, some days since, in a
stage-coach, where I had for my fellow-travellers, a dirty bean, and a pretty
young Quaker woman. Having no inclination to tal^^ much at that time, I placed
myself backward with a design to survey them, and to pick a speculation out of
my two companions. Their different figures were sufficient of themselves to
draw my attention. The gentleman was dressed in a suit, the ground whereof had
been black, as I perceived from some few spaces that had escaped the powder,
which was incorporated with the greatest part of his coat: his perriwig, which
cost no small sum, was after so slovenly a manner cast over his shoulders, that
it seemed not to have been combed since the year 1712; his linen, which was not
much concealed, was daubed with plain Spanish, from the chin to the lowest
button; and the diamond upon his finger (which naturally dreaded the water) put
me in mind how it sparkled amidst the rubbish of the mine, where it was first
discovered. On the other hand, the pretty Quaker appeared in all the elegance
of cleanliness. Not a speck was to be found upon her. A clear, clean, oval
face, just edged (...) with little thin plaits of the purest can bric, received
great advantages from the shade of her black hood; as did the whiteness of her
arms from that sober-coloured stuff, in which she had clothed herself. The
plainness of her dress was very well suited to the simplicity of her phrases;
all which put together, though they could not give me a great opinion of her
religion, they did of her innocence.

This adventure occasioned my throwing together a few hints upon cleanliness,
which I shall consider as one of the half-virtues, as Aristotle calls them, and
shall recommend it under the three following heads: as it is a mark of
politeness; as it produces love; and as it bears analogy to purity of mind.

First, It is a mark of politeness. It is universally agreed upon, that no one
unadorned with this virtue can go into company without giving a manifest
offense. The easier or higher any one's fortune is, this duty rise,
proportionally. The different nations of the world are as much distinguished by
their Cleanliness, as by their arts and sciences. The more any country is
civilized, the more they consult this part of politeness. We need but compare
our ideas of a female Hottentot and an English beauty, to be satisfied of the
truth of what has been advanced.

In the next place, cleanliness may be said to be the foster-mother of love.
Beauty indeed most commonly produces that passion in the mind, but cleanliness
preserves it. An indifferent face and person, kept in perpetual neatness, has
won many a heart from a pretty flattern. Age itself is not unamiable, while it
is preserved clean and unsullied: like a piece of metal constantly kept smooth
and bright, we look on it with more pleasure than on a new vessel that is
cankered with rust.

I might observe farther, that as cleanliness renders us agreeable to others,
so it makes us easy to ourselves; that it is an excellent preservative of
health; and that several vices destructive both to mind and body, are
inconsistent with the habit of it. But these reflections I shall leave to the
leisure of my readers, and shall observe in the third place, that it bears a
great analogy to purity of mind, and naturally inspires refined sentiments and
passions.

We find from experience, that through the prevalence of custom, the most
vicious actions lose their horror, by being made familiar to us. On the
contrary, those who live in the neighborhood of good examples, fly from the
first appearance of what is shocking. It fares with us much after the same
manner, as to our ideas. Our senses which are the inlets of all the images
conveyed to the mind, can only transmit the impressions of such things as
usually surround them. So that pure and unsullied thoughts are naturally
suggested to the mind, by those objects that perpetually encompass us, when
they are beautiful and elegant in their kind.

In the East, where the warmth of the climate makes cleanliness more
immediately necessary than in colder countries, it is made one part of their
religion: the Jewish law, (and the Mohammedan, which in some things copies after
it) is filled with bathings, purifications, and other rites of the like nature.
Though there is the abovenamed convenient reason to be assigned for their
ceremonies, the chief intention undoubtedly was to typify inward purity and
cleanliness of heart by those outward washings. We read several injunctions of
this kind in the book of Deuteronomy, which confirm this truth; and which are
but ill accounted for by saying, as some do, that they were only instituted for
convenience, in the desert, which otherwise could not have been habitable for
many years.

I shall conclude this essay, with a story which I have somewhere read in an
account of Mohammedan superstitions.

A Dervise of great sanctity, one morning had the misfortune, as he took up a
crystal cup which was consecrated to the prophet, to let it fall upon the
ground, and dash it to pieces. His son coming in, some time after, he stretched
out his hand to bless him, as his manner was every morning; but the youth going
out, stumbled over the threshold, and broke his arm. As the old man wondered at
these events, a caravan passed by in its way from Mecca. The Dervise approached
it to beg a blessing; but as he stroked one of the holy camels, he received a
kick from the beast that sorely bruised him. His sorrow and amazement increased
upon him, till he recollected, that through hurry and inadvertency, he had that
morning come abroad without washing his hands.

On CHOOSING COMPANY.
If, with a fool or knave I Carus see,
A knave or fool, Carus I Will sentence thee.
SANDYS.
TO be courteous to all, but familiar to few, is a maxim which I once despised,
as originally proceeding from a mean and contracted mind, the frigid caution of
weakness and timidity. A tame and indiscriminate civility I imputed to a dread
of the contempt or petulency of others, to fears from which the wit and the
gentleman are exempted by a consciousness of their own dignity, by their power
to depress insolence, and silence ridicule and a general shyness and reserve, I
considered as the reproach of our country, as the effect of an illiberal
education, by which neither a polite address, an easy confidence, nor a general
acquaintance with public life are to be acquired. This opinion, which continued
to flatter the levity and pride that produced it, was strengthened by the
example of those whose manner in the diffidence of youth I wished to imitate,
who entered a mixed, company with an air of serene familiarity, accosted every
man like an old acquaintance, and thought only of making sport of any of the
rest with whom their caprice should happen to be offended, without regard to
their age, character or condition.

But now I wish that I had regulated my conduct by the maxims which I despised,
for I should then have escaped a misfortune which I shall never retrieve; and
the sense of, which I am now endeavoring to suspend, by relating it to you as
a lesson to others, and considering my loss of happiness as an acquisition of
wisdom.

While I was in France with a traveling tutor, I received a letter which
acquainted me that my father, who had been long declining, was dead; and that
it was necessary I should immediately return to England, to take possession of
his estate, which was not inconsiderable, though there were mortgages upon it
to near half its value.

When I arrived, I found a letter which the old gentleman had written and
directed to me with his own hand. It contained some general rules for my
conduct, and some animadversions upon his own: he took notice of the
encumbrances under which he left me the paternal inheritance, which had
descended through many generations; and expressed the most earnest desire that
it might yet be transmitted entire to posterity. With this view, he said, he
had negociated a marriage between me and the only daughter of his old friend
Sir George Homestead, of the North; an amiable young lady, whose alliance would
be an honor to my family, and whose fortune would much more than redeem my
estate.

He had given the Knight a faithful account of his affairs, who, after having
taken some time to consider the proposals, and consult his friends, had
consented to the match, upon condition that his daughter and I should be
agreeable to each other, and that my behavior should confirm the character
that had been given of me. My father added, that he hoped to have lived till
this alliance had taken place; but as Providence had otherwise determined, he
entreated, as his last request, that as soon as my affairs should be settled,
and decency would permit, I would make Sir George a visit, and neglect nothing
to accomplish this purpose.

I was touched with the zeal and tenderness of paternal affection, which was
then directing me to happiness, after the heart that felt it had ceased to
beat, and the (...) that expressed it was mouldering in the dust. I had also
seen the lady not indeed since we were children; but I remembered that her
person was agreeable, and her temper sweet: I did not, therefore, hesitate a
moment, whether my father's injunctions should be obeyed. I proceeded to fettle
his affairs; I took an account of debts and credits, visited the tenants,
recovered my usual gaiety, and at the end of about nine months set out for Six
George's feat in the North; having before opened an epistolary correspondence,
and expressed my impatience to possess the happiness which my father had so
kindly secured.

I was better pleased to be well mounted, than to ^oll in a chariot, or be
jumbled in a post chaise: and I knew that Sir George was an old sportsman, a
plain hearty blade, who would like me better in a pair of buckskin breeches on
the back of a good hunter, than in a trimmed suit, and gaudy equipage: I
therefore set out on horseback with only one servant, and reached Stilton the
first night.

In the morning, as I was mounting, a gentleman, who had just got on horseback
before me, ordered his servant to make some inquiry about the road, which I
happened to overhear, and told him with great familiarity, that I was going the
same way, and if he pleased we would travel together: to this he consented,
with as much frankness, and as little ceremony; and I set forward, greatly
delighted that chance had afforded me a companion.

We Immediately entered into conversation, and I soon found that he had been
abroad: we extolled the roads and the polity of France, the cities, the
palaces, and the villas; entered into a critical examination of the most
celebrated seats in England, the peculiarity of the buildings and situation,
cross ways, market towns, the imposition of innkeepers, and the sports of the
field: topics, by which we mutually recommended ourselves to each other, (...)
we had both opportunities to discover equal knowledge, and to display truth
with such evidence as prevented diversity of opinion.

After we had rode about two hours, we overtook another gentleman whom we
accosted with the same familiarity that we had used to each other: we asked him
how (...) he was going, and which way; at what rate he traveled, where ^e put
up, and many other questions of the same kind. The gentleman, who appeared to
be near fifty, received our address with great coldness, returned short and
indirect answers to our inquiries, and often looking with great attention on us
both, sometimes put forward that he might get before us, and sometimes checked
his horse that he might remain behind. But we were resolved to disappoint him;
and finding that his reserve increased, and that he was visibly displeased, we
winked at each other, and determined the old Put should afford us some sport.
After we had rode together upon very ill terms more than half an hour, my
companion, with an air of ceremonious gravity, asked him if he knew of any
house upon the road where he might be accommodated with a wench. The gentleman,
who was I believe afraid of giving us a pretense to quarrel, did not resent
this insult any otherwise than by making no reply. I then began to talk to my
companion as if we had been old acquaintances, reminding him, that the
gentleman extremely resembled a person from whom we had taken a girl that he
was carrying to the bagnio, and indeed, that his present reserve made me
suspect him to be same; but that as we were willing to ask his pardon, we hoped
it would be forgotten, and that we should still have the pleasure of dining
together at the next inn. The gentleman was still silent; but as his perplexity
and resentment visibly increased, he proportionably increased our
entertainment, which did not, however, last long, for he suddenly turned down a
lane; upon which we set up a horse-laugh, that continued till he was out of
hearing, and then pursuing our journey, we talked of the adventure, which
afforded us conversation and merriment for the rest of the day.

The next morning we parted, and in the evening I arrived at Homestead-Hall.
The old Knight received me with great affection, and immediately introduced me
to his daughter, whom I now thought the finest woman I had ever seen. I could
easily discover that I was not unwelcome to her, merely upon her father's
recommendation, and I enjoyed by anticipation the felicity which I considered
as within my grasp. But the pleasing scene, in which I had suffered my
imagination to wander, suddenly disappeared as by the power of inchantment^^
without any visible motive, the behavior of the whole family was changed; my
assiduities to the lady were repressed; she was never to be found alone; the
Knight treated me with a cold civility: I was no longer a party in their
visits, nor was willingly attended even by the servants. I made many attempts
to discover the cause of this misfortune, but without success; and one morning,
when I had drawn Sir George into the garden by himself, and was about to urge
him upon the subject, he prevented me, by saying, that his promise to my
father, for whom he had the highest regard, as I well knew, was conditional;
that he had always resolved to leave his daughter a free choice; and that she
had requested him to acquaint me, that her affections were otherwise engaged,
and to entreat that I would therefore discontinue my addresse^. My surprise and
concern at this declaration, were such as left me no power to reply; and I saw
Sir George turn from me, and go into the house, without making any attempt to
stop him, or to obtain a farther explanation. Afterward indeed, I frequently
expostulated, entreated, and complained; but, perceiving that all was
ineffectual, I took my leave, and determined that I would still solicit by
letter; for the lady had taken such possession of my heart, that I would
joyfully have married her, though I had been sure that her father would
immediately have left all his fortune to a stranger.

I meditated on my epistolary project all the way to London; and before I had
been three days in town, I wrote a long letter to Sir George, in which I
conjured him, In the strongest terms, to account for the change in his
behavior; and insisted, that, on this occasion, to conceal the truth, was in
the highest degree dishonorable to himself, and injurious to me.

To this letter, after about ten days, I received the following answer

SIR,
It is with great reluctance that I reveal the motives of my conduct, because
they are much to your disadvantage. The enclosed is a letter which I received
from a worthy gentleman in the country, and contains a full answer to your
inquiries, which I had rather you should receive in any hand than in mine.

I am, your humble Servant, GEO. HOMESTEAD.


I immediately opened the paper enclosed, in which, with the utmost impatience,
I read as follows:

SIR,
I saw a person with your family yesterday at the races, to whom I was soon
after informed you intended to give your daughter. Upon this occasion, it is my
indispensible duty to acquaint you, that if his character is to be determined
by his company, he will inevitably entail diseases and beggary upon his
posterity, whatever be the merit of his wife, or the affluence of his fortune*
He overtook me on the road from London, a few weeks ago, in company with a
wretch, who by their discourse appeared to be his old and familiar
acquaintance, and whom I well remember to have seen brought before my friend
Justice Worthy, when I was accidentally at his house, as the keeper of a
brothel in Covent Garden. He has since won a considerable sum with false dice
at the masquerade, for which he was obliged to leave the kingdom, and is still
liable to a prosecution. Be assured that I have a perfect knowledge of both;
for some incidents, not necessary to mention, kept me near them so long on the
road, that it is impossible I should be mistaken.

I am, Sir, yours, etc. JAMES TRUEMAN.


The moment I had read this letter, the riddle was solved. I knew Mr. Trueman
to be the gentleman whom I had concurred with a stranger, (picked up by
accident.) to insult without provocation on the road. I was in a moment covered
with confusion; and though I was alone, could not help covering my face with my
hands. I abhorred my folly, which appeared yet more enormous every time it was
reviewed.

I courted the society of a stranger, and a stranger I persecuted with insult:
thus I associated with infamy, and thus my associate became known. I hoped,
however, to convince, Sir George, that I had no knowledge of the wretch whose
infamy I had shared, except that which I had acquired from the letter of his
friend. But before I had taken proper measures for my justification, I had the
mortification to hear that the lady was married to a neighboring gentleman,
who had long made his addresses to her, and whom Sir George had before rejected
in the ardour of his friendship for my father.

How narrow, Sir, is the path of rectitude, and how much may be lost by the
slightest deviation!

I am, your humble servant, ABULUS.

On the Justice of PROVIDENCE in the distribution of RICHES.
To whom can riches, give repute or trust,
Content or pleasure, but the good and just?
POPE.
CHREMYLUS, who was an old and a good man, and withal exceeding poor, being
desirous to leave some riches to his son, consults the oracle of Apollo upon
the subject. The oracle bid him follow the first man he should see upon his
going out of the temple. The person he chanced to see was to appearance an old,
sordid, blind man; but upon his following him from place to place, he at last
found, by his own confession, that he was Plutus the god of riches, and that he
was just come out of the house of a miser. Plutus further told him, that when
he was a boy he used to declare, that as soon as he came to age, he would
distribute wealth to none but virtuous and just men; upon which Jupiter,
considering the pernicious consequences of such a resolution, took his sight
away from him, and left him to stroll about the world in the blind condition
wherein Chremylus beheld him. With much ado Chremylus prevailed upon him to go
to his house, where he met an old woman in a tattered raiment, who had been his
guest for many years, and whose name was Poverty. The old woman refusing to
turn out so readily as he would have her, he threatened to banish her, not only
from his own house, but cut of Greece, if she made any more words upon the
matter. Poverty on this occasion pleads her cause very notably, and represents
to her old landlord, that should she be driven out of the country, all their
trades, arts, and sciences, would be driven out with her; and that if every one
was rich, they would never be supplied with those pomps, ornaments, and
conveniences of life, which made riches desirable. She likewise represented
the several advantages which she bestowed upon her votaries, in regard to their
shape, their health, and their activity, by preserving them from gouts,
dropsies, unwieldiness, and intemperance. But whatever she had to say for
herself, she was at last forced to move off. Chremylus immediately considered
how he might restore Plutus to his sight; and in order to do it, conveyed him
to the temple of Esoulapius, who was famous for cures and miracles of this
nature. By this means the deity recovered his eyes, and began to make a right
use of them, by enriching every one that was distinguished by piety toward the
gods, and justice toward men; and at the same time by taking away his gifts
from the impious and undeserving. This produced several merry incidents 'till
in the last act Mercury descends with great complaints from the gods, that
since the good men were grown rich they had received no sacrifices, which is
confirmed by a priest of Jupiter, who enters with a remonstrance, that since
these late innovations he was reduced to a starving condition, and could not
live upon his office. Chremylus, who in the beginning of the play was religious
in his poverty, concludes with a proposal which was relished by all the good
men, who were now grown rich as well as himself, (i. e.) that they should carry
Plutus in solemn procession to the temple, and install him in the place of
Jupiter. This allegory instructed the Athenians in two points; first, as it
vindicated the conduct of Providence in its ordinary distribution of wealth;
and, in the next place, as it showed the great tendency of riches to corrupt
the morals of those who possessed them.

On the FORCE of AFFECTION.
Tears of compassion are nature's mark to know an honest heart by.
VOLTAIRE.
A YOUNG gentleman and lady of ancient and honorable houses in Cornwall, had
from their childhood entertained for each other a generous and noble passion,
which had long been opposed by their friends, by reason of the inequality of
their fortunes; but their constancy to each other, and obedience to those on
whom they depended, wrought so much upon their relations, that those celebrated
lovers were at length joined in marriage. Soon after the nuptials, the
bridegroom was obliged to go into a foreign country to take care of a
considerable fortune which was left him by a relation, and came very
opportunely to improve their moderate circumstances. They received the
congratulations of all the country upon this occasion; and I remember it was a
common sentence in every one's mouth, You see how faithful love is rewarded.

He took his agreeable voyage, and sent home every post fresh accounts of his
success in his affairs abroad; but at last (though he designed to return with
the next ship) he lamented in his letters, that business should detain him some
time longer from home, because he would give himself the pleasure of an
unexpected arrival.

The young lady, after the heat of the day, walked every evening on the
seashore, near which she lived, with a familiar friend, her husband's
kinswoman, and diverted herself with what objects they met with there, or upon
discourse of the future methods of life in the happy change of their
circumstances. They stood one evening on the shore together in a perfect
tranquillity, observing the setting of the sun, the calm face of the deep, and
the silent heaving of the waves, which gently rolled toward them, and broke at
their feet; when, at a distance, her kinswoman saw something floating on the
water, which she fancied was a chest; and, with a smile, told her, she saw it
first, and if it came ashore full of jewels, she had a right to it. They both
fixed their eyes upon it, and entertained themselves with the subject of the
wreck, the cousin still asserting her right; but promising, if it was a prize,
to give her a very rich coral for her child, of which she was then big,
provided she might be godmother. Their mirth soon abated when they observed,
upon the nearer approach, that it was a human body. The young lady, who had a
heart naturally filled with pity and compassion, made many melancholy
reflections on the occasion. Who knows, (said she) but this man may be the only
hope and heir of a wealthy house, the darling of indulgent parents, who are now
in impertinent mirth, and pleasing themselves with the thoughts of offering him
a bride they have got ready for him? Or, may he not be the master of a family
that wholly depended on his life? There may, for aught we know, be half a dozen
fatherless children, and a tender wife, now exposed to poverty by his death.
What pleasure might he have promised himself in the different welcomes he was
to have from her and them? But let us go away, it is a dreadful sight! ^he best
office we can ^o is to take care that the poor man, whoever he is, may be
decently buried. She turned away, when a wave threw the carcass on shore. The
kinswoman immediately shrieked out. Oh, my cousin! and fell upon the ground.
The unhappy wife went to help her friend, when she saw her own husband at her
feet, and dropped into a swoon upon the body. An old woman, who had been the
gentleman's nurse, came about this time to call the ladies into supper, and
found her child (as she always called him) dead on the shore, her mistress and
kinswoman both lying dead by him. Her loud lamentations, and calling her young
master to life, soon awaked the friend from her ^rance; but the wife was gone
for ever.

When the family and neighborhood got together round the bodies, no one asked
any questions, but the objects before them told the story.

Incidents of this nature are the more moving, when they are drawn by persons
concerned in the catastrophe, notwithstanding they are often oppressed beyond
the power of giving them in a distinct light, except we gather their sorrow
from their inability to speak it.

I have two original letters, written both on the same day, which seem to be
exquisite in their kinds. The occasion was this: a gentleman who had courted a
most agreeable young woman, and won her heart, obtained also the consent of her
father, to whom she was an only child. The old man had a fancy that they should
be married in the same church where he himself was, in a village in
Westmoreland, and made them set out, while he was laid up with the goat at
London. The bridegroom took only his man, and the bride her maid: they had the
most agreeable journey imaginable to the place of marriage; from whence the
bridegroom wrote the following letter to his wife's father:

March 18, 167^ SIR,
After a very pleasant journey hither, we are preparing for the happy hour in
which I am to be your son. I assure you the bride carries it in the eye of the
vicar, who married you much beyond her mother; though he says, your open
sleeves, pataloons, and shoulder-knots, made a much better show than the
finical dress I am in. However, I am contented to be the second fine man this
village ever saw, and shall make it very merry before night, because I shall
write myself from thence.

Your most dutiful Son, T. D.


"The bride gives her duty, and is as handsome as an angel. I am the happiest
man breathing."

The villagers were assembled about the church, and the happy couple took a
walk in a private garden. The bridegroom's man knew his master would leave the
place on a sudden after the wedding, and seeing him draw his pistols the night
before, took this opportunity to go into the chamber and charge them. Upon
their return from the garden, they went into the room; and after a little fond
raillery on the subject of their courtship, the lover took up a pistol, which
he knew he had unloaded the night before, and presenting it to her, said with
the most graceful air, while she looked pleased with his agreeable flattery,
Now, Madam, repent of all these cruelties you have been guilty of to me;
consider, before you die, how often you have made a poor wretch freeze under
your casement; you shall die, you tyrant! you shall die, with all those
instruments of death and destruction about you, with that enchanting smile,
those killing ringlets of your hair! -- Give fire, said she, laughing. He did
so, and shot her dead. Who can speak his condition! but he bore it so patiently
as to call up his man. The poor wretch entered, and his master locked the door
upon him. Will, said he, did you charge these pistols! He answered Yes. Upon
which he shot him dead with that remaining. -- After this, amidst a thousand
broken sobs, piercing groans, and distracted motions, he wrote the following
letter to the father of his dead mistress:

SIR,
"I, who two hours hours ago told you truly I was the happiest man alive, am
now the most miserable. Your daughter lies dead at my feet, killed by my own
hands, through a mistake of my man's charging my pistols unknown to me. Him I
have murdered for it. Such is my wedding day! I will immediately follow my wife
to her grave. But before I throw myself upon my sword, I command my distraction
so far as to explain my story to you. I fear my heart will not keep together
till I have stabbed it. Poor, good man! -- Remember, he that killed your
daughter died for it: in the article of death, I give you my thanks, and pray
for you, though I do not for myself. If it be possible, do not curse me.


On CRUELTY to ANIMALS.
Take not away the life you cannot give,
For all things have an equal right to live.
DRYDEN.
I CANNOT think it extravagant to imagine, that mankind are no less, in
proportion, accountable for the ill use of their dominion over creatures of the
lower rank of beings, than for the exercise of tyranny over their own species.
The more entirely the inferior creation is submitted to our power, the more
answerable we should seem for our mismanagement of it; and the rather, as the
very condition of nature renders these creatures incapable of receiving any
recompense in another life for their ill treatment in this.

It is observable of those noxious animals which have qualities more powerful
to injure us, that they naturally avoid mankind, and never hurt us, unless
provoked or necessitated by hunger. Man, on the other hand, seeks out and
pursues even the most inoffensive animals, on purpose to persecute and destroy
them.

Montaigne thinks it some reflection upon human nature itself, that few people
take delight in seeing beasts caress or play together, but almost every one is
pleased to see them lacerate and worry one another. I am sorry this temper has
become almost a distinguished character of our own nation, from the observation
which is made by foreigners of our beloved pastimes, bear-beating,
cockfighting, and the like. We should find it hard to vindicate the destroying
any thing that has life, merely out of wantonness; yet in this principle our
children are bred up, and one of the first pleasures we allow them is the
license of inflicting pain upon poor animals; almost as soon as we are sensible
what life is ourselves, we make it our sport to take it from other creatures. I
cannot but believe a very good use might be made of the fancy which children
have for birds and insects. Mr. Lock takes notice of a mother who permitted
them to her children, but rewarded or punished them as they treated them well
or ill. This was no other than entering them be times into a daily exercise of
humanity, and improving their very diversion into a virtue.

I fancy too, some advantage might be taken of the common notion, that it is
ominous or unlucky to destroy some sorts of birds, as swallows or martins; this
opinion might possibly arise from the confidence these birds seem to put in us
by building under our roofs, so that it is a kind of violation of the laws of
hospitality to murder them. As for robin red-breasts in particular, it is not
improbable they owe their security to the old ballad of the Children in the
Woods. However it be, I do not know, I say, why this prejudice, well improved
and carried as far as it would go, might not be made to conduce to the
preservation of many innocent creatures, (...) now exposed to all the
wantonness of an ignorant ^^^barity.

There are other animals that have the misfortune, for no manner of reason, to
be treated as common enemies, Wherever found. The conceit that a cat has nine
lives, has cost at least nine lives in ten of the whole race of them: scarce a
boy in the street but has in this point outdone Hercules himself, who was
famous for killing a monster that had but three lives. Whether the
unaccountable animosity against this useful domestic may be any cause of the
general persecution of owls, (who are a sort of feathered cats) or whether it
be only an unreasonable pique the moderns have taken to a serious countenance,
I shall not determine; though I am inclined to believe the former; since I
observe the whole reason alleged for the destruction of frogs (...) because
they are like roads. Yet amidst all the misfortunes of these unfriendly
creatures, it is some happiness that we have not yet taken a fancy to eat them;
for should our countrymen refine upon the French ever so little, it is not to
be conceived to what unheard of torments, owls, cats, and frogs may yet be
reserved.

When we grow up to man, we have another succession of sanguinary sports; in
particular hunting. I dare not attack a diversion, which has such authority and
custom to support it, but must have leave to be of opinion, that the agitations
of that exercise, with the example and number of the chasers, not a little
contribute to resist those checks, which compassion would naturally suggest in
behalf of the animal pursued. Nor shall I say with Monsieur Fleury, that this
sport is a remain of Gothic barbarity; but I must animadvert upon a certain
custom yet in use with us, and barbarous enough to be derived from the Goths,
or even the Scythians; I mean the savage compliment our huntsmen pass upon the
ladies of quality, who are present at the death of a stag, when they put the
knife into their hand to cut the throat of a helpless, trembling, and weeping
creature, -- That lies beneath the knife,
Looks up, and from her butcher begs her life.


But if our sports are destructive, our gluttony is more so, and in a more in
human manner. Lobsters roasted alive-pigs whipped to death, fowls sewed up, are
testimonies of our outrageous luxury. Those who (as Seneca expresses it) divide
their lives betwixt an anxious conscience, and a nauseated stomach, have a just
reward of their gluttony in the diseases it brings with it: for human savages,
like other wild beasts, find snares and poisons in the provisions of life, and
are allured by their appetites to their destruction. I know nothing more
shocking or horrid than the prospect of one of their kitchens covered with
blood, and filled with the cries of creatures expiring in tortures. It gives
one an image of the Giant's den in a romance, (...) with the scattered heads
and mangled limbs of those who were slain by his cruelty.

The excellent Plutarch, (who has more strokes of goodnature in his writings
than I remember in any author) cites a saying of Cato to this effect, "That it
is no easy task to preach to the belly, which has no ears. Yet if (says he) we
are ashamed to he so out of fashion, as not to offend, let us at least offend
with some discretion and measure. If we kill an animal for our provision, let
us do it with the meltings of compassion; and without tormenting it. Let us
consider that it is in its own nature cruelty to put a living creature to
death; we at least destroy a soul that has sense and perception." In the life
of Cato the censor, he takes occasion, from the severe disposition in man, to
discourse in this manner: it thought to be esteemed a happiness to mankind,
that our humanity has a wider sphere to exert itself in, than bare justice. It
is no more than the obligation of our very birth to practice equity to our
kind; but humanity may be extended through the whole order of creatures, even
to the meanest: such actions of charity are the overflowings of a mild good
nature on all below us. It is certainly the part of a well-natured man to take
care of his horses and dogs, not only in expectation of their labor, while
they are foals and whelps, but even when their old age has made them incapable
of service.

History tells of a wise and polite nation that rejected a person of the first
quality, who stood for a justiciary office, only because he had been observed
in his youth to take pleasure in tearing and murdering birds. And of another,
that expelled a man out of the senate, for dashing a bird against the ground
which had taken shelter in his bosom.

Every one knows how remarkable the Turks are for their humanity of this kind:
I remember an Arabian author, who had written a treatise, to show how far a
man, supposed to have subsisted in a desert island, without any instruction, or
so much as the sight of any other man, may, by the pure light of nature, attain
the knowledge of philosophy and virtue. One of the first things he makes him
observe, is that universal benevolence of nature in the protection and
preservation of its creatures. In imitation of which, the first act of virtue
he thinks this self-taught philosopher would of course fall into, is to relieve
and assist all the animals about him in their wants and distresses.

In Dryden's Ovid are some very tender and pathetic lines applicable to this
occasion: The sheep was sacrificed on no pretense,
But meek and unresisting innocence;
A patient, useful creature, born to bear
The warm and wooly fleece that clothed her murderer.
And daily to give down the milk she bred,
A tribute for the grass on which she ^ed;
Living both, ^^ed and raiment she supplies,
And is of least advantage when she dies.
How did the toiling ox his death deserve?
A downright simple drudge, and born toserve.
O ^^^ant! with what justice can thou^ pope
The promise of the year, a plenteous crop
When thou destroyed thy laboring steer, who tilled,
And plough'd with pain thy else ungrateful field?
From his yet reeking neck to draw the yoke,
That neck with which the surly clods be broke:
And to the batchet yield thy bush and man,
Who finished autumn, and the spring began.
What more advance can mortals make in sin,
So near perfection, Who with blood begin?
Deaf to the calf that lies beneath the knife,
Looks up, and from her butcher begs her life.
Deaf to the harmless kid, that are he dies,
All methods to procure thy mercy tries,
And imitates in vain the children's cries.


Perhaps that voice or cry so nearly resembling the human, with which
Providence has endued so many different animals, might purposely be given them
to move our pity, and prevent those cruelties we are too apt to inflict on our
fellow creatures.

The VISION of JUSTICE.
At dead of night imperial Reason sleeps;
And Fancy, with her train, loose vigils keeps.
DRYDEN.
I WAS last week taking a solitary walk in the gardens of Lincoln's Inn; (a
favor that is indulged me by several of the benchers who are my intimate
friends, and grown old with me in this neighborhood) when, according to the
nature of men in years who have made but little progress in the advancement of
their fortunes or their same, I was repining on the sudden rise of many persons
who are my juniors, and indeed at the unequal distribution of wealth, honor,
and all other blessings 'of life. I was lost in this thought, when the night
came upon me, and drew my mind into a far more agreeable contemplation. The
heaven above me appeared in all its glories, and presented me with such a
hemisphere of stars, as made the most agreeable prospect imaginable to one who
delights in the study of nature. It happened to be a freezing night, which had
purified the whole body of air into such a bright transparent ether, as made
every constellation visible; and at the same time, gave such a particular
glowing to the stars, that I thought it the richest sky I had ever seen. I
could not but behold a scene so wonderfully adorned and lifted up (if I may be
allowed that expression) without suitable meditations on the Author of such
illustrious and amazing objects. For, on these occasions, philosophy suggests
motives to religion, and religion adds pleasure to philosophy.

As soon as I had recovered my usual temper and serenity of soul, I retired to
my lodgings, with the satisfaction of having passed away a few hours in the
proper employment of a reasonable creature; and promising myself that my
slumbers would be sweet; I no sooner fell into them, but I dreamed a dream, or
saw a vision, (for I knew not which to call it) that seemed to rise out of my
evening meditation, and had something in it so solemn and serious, that I
cannot forbear communicating it; though I must confess the wildness of
imagination (which in a dream is always loose and irregular) discovers itself
too much in several parts of it.

Me thought I saw the same azure sky diversified with the same glorious
luminaries which had entertained me a little before I fell asleep. I was
looking very attentively on that sign in the heavens which is called by the
name of the Balance, when on a sudden there appeared in it an extraordinary
light, as if the sun should rise at midnight. By its increasing in breadth and
luster, I soon found that it approached toward the earth; and at length could
discern something like a shadow hovering in the midst of a great glory, which
in a little time after I distinctly perceived to be the figure of a woman. I
fancied at first it might have been the angel, or intelligence, that guided the
constellation from which it descended; but, upon a nearer view, I saw about her
all the emblems with which the Goddess of Justice is usually described. Her
countenance was unspeakably awful and majestic, but exquisitely beautiful to
those whose eyes were strong enough to behold it; her smiles transported with
rapture; her frowns terrified to despair. She held in her hand a mirror,
endowed with the same qualities as that which the painters put into the hand of
Truth.

There streamed from it a light, which distinguished itself from all the
splendour that surrounded her, more than a flash of lightning shines in the
midst of daylight. As she moved it in her hand, it brightened the heavens, the
air, or the earth. When she had descended so low as to be seen and heard by
mortals, to make the pomp of her appearance more supportable, she threw
darkness and clouds about her, that tempered the light into a thousand
beautiful shades and colors, and multiplied that luster, which before was too
strong and dazzling, into a variety of milder glories.

In the mean time, the world was in alarm, and all the inhabitants of it
gathered together upon a spacious plain; so that I seemed to have the whole
species before my eyes. A voice was heard from the clouds, declaring the
intention of this visit, which was to restore and appropriate to every one
living what was his due. The fear and hope, joy and sorrow, which appeared in
that great assembly after this solemn declaration, are not to be expressed. The
first edict was then pronounced, that all titles and claims to riches and
estates, or to any part of them, should be immediately vested in the rightful
owner. Upon this the inhabitants of the earth held up the instruments of their
tenures, whether in parchment, paper, wax, or any other form of conveyance; and
as the goddess moved the mirror of truth, which she held in her hand, so that
the light which flowed from it fell upon the multitude, they examined the
several instruments by the beams of it: the rays of the mirror had a particular
quality of setting fire to all forgery and falsehood. The blaze of papers, the
melting of seals, and the crackling of parchments, made a very odd scene. The
fire very often ran through two or three lines only, and then stopped. Though I
could not but observe the flames chiefly broke out among the interlineations,
and codicils: the light of the mirror, as it was turned up and down, pierced
into all the dark corners and recesses of the universe, and by that means
detected many writings and records which had been hidden or buried by time,
chance, or design. This occasioned a wonderful revolution among the people. At
the first time, the spoils of extortion, fraud, robbery, with all the fruits of
bribery and corruption, were thrown together in a prodigious pile, that almost
reached to the clouds, and was called the mount of restitution; to which all
injured persons were invited, to receive what belonged to them.

One might see crowds of people in tattered garments come, up, and change
clothes with others that were dressed with lace and embroidery. Several who
were plumbs, or very near it, became men of moderate fortunes; and many others,
who were overgrown in wealth and possessions, had no more left than what they
usually spent. What moved my concern most, was to see a certain street of the
greatest credit in Europe, from one end to the other become bankrupt.

The next command was for the whole body of mankind to separate themselves into
their proper families: which was no sooner done, but an edict was issued
requiring all children to repair to their true and natural fathers. This put a
great part of the assembly in motion; for as the mirror was moved over them, it
inspired every one with such a natural instinct, as directed them to their real
parents. It was a very melancholy spectacle to see the fathers of very large
families become childless, and bachelors undone by a charge of sons and
daughters. You might see a presumptuous heir of a great estate ask blessings of
his coachman; and a celebrated toast paying her duty to a valet de chamber.
Many, under vows of celibacy, appeared surrounded with a numerous issue. The
change of parentage would have caused great lamentation, but, that the calamity
was pretty common; and that generally those who lost their children had the
satisfaction of seeing them put into the hands of their dearest friends. Men
were no sooner settled in their right to their possessions and their progeny,
but there was a third order proclaimed, that all the posts of dignity and
honor in the universe should be conferred on persons of the greatest merit,
abilities, and perfections. The handsome, the strong, and the wealthy,
immediately pressed forward; but not being able to bear the splendour of the
mirror which played upon their faces, they immediately fell back upon the
crowd: but as the goddess tried the multitude by her glass, as the eagle does
its young ones by the luster of the sun, it was remarkable, that every one
turned away his face from it who had not distinguished himself either by
virtue, knowledge, or capacity in business, either military or civil. This
select assembly was drawn up in the center of a prodigious multitude, which was
diffused on all sides, and stood observing them as idle people used to gather
about a regiment that were exercising their arms. They were drawn up in three
bodies: in the first were the men of virtue, in the second the men of
knowledge, and in the third the men of business. It was impossible to look at
the first column without a secret veneration, their aspects were so sweetened
with humanity, raised with contemplation, emboldened with resolution, and
adorned with the most agreeable airs, which are those that proceed from secret
habits of virtue, I could not but take notice, that there were many faces among
them which were unknown, not only to the multitude, but even to several of
their own body.

In the second column, consisting of the men of knowledge, there had been great
disputes before they fell into their ranks, which they did not do at last,
without the positive command of the goddess who presided over the assembly. She
had so ordered it, that men of the greatest genius and strongest sense were
placed at the head of the column: behind these were such as had formed their
minds very much on the thoughts and writings of others. In the rear of the
column were men who had more wit than sense, or more learning than
understanding. All living authors of any value were ranged in one of these
classes; but I must confess I was very much surprised to see a great body of
editors, critics, commentators, and grammarians meet with so ill a reception.
They had formed themselves into a body, and, with a great deal of arrogance,
demanded the first station in the column of knowledge; but the goddess, instead
of complying with the request, clapped them all into liveries, and bid them
know themselves for no other but the lacquies of the learned.

The third column were men of business, and consisted of persons of military
and civil capacities. The former marched out from the rest, and placed
themselves in the front; on which the other shook their heads at them, but did
not think fit to dispute the post with them. I could not but make several
observations upon this last column of people; but I have certain private
reasons why I do not think fit to communicate them to the public. In order to
fill up all the posts of honor, dignity, and profit, there was a draught made
out of each column of men, who were masters of all the three qualifications in
some degree, and were preferred to stations of the first rank. The second
draught was made out of such as were possessed of any two of the
qualifications, who were disposed of in stations of a second dignity. Those who
were left, and were endowed only with one of them, had their suitable posts.
When this was over, there remained many places of trust and profit unfilled,
for which there were fresh draughts made out of the surrounding multitude, who
had any appearance of those excellencies, or were recommended by those who
possessed them in reality.

All were surprised to see so many new faces in the most eminent dignities;
and, for my own part, I was very well pleased to see that all my friends either
kept their present posts, or were advanced to higher.

Having filled my paper with those particulars of my vision which concerned the
male part of mankind, I must reserve for another occasion the sequel of it,
which relates to the fair sex.

A Continuation of the VISION.
Dreams are but interludes, which Fancy makes,
When monarch Reason sleeps -- this mimic wakes;
Compounds a medley of disjointed things,
A Court of cobblers -- and a mob of kings.
DRYDEN.
THE male world were dismissed by the goddess of justice, and disappeared, when
on a sudden the whole plain was covered with women. So charming a multitude
filled my heart with unspeakable pleasure; and as the celestial light of the
mirror shone upon their faces, several of them seemed rather persons descended
in the trai^ of the goddess, than such as were brought before her for their
trial. The clack of tongues, and confusion of voices, in this new assembly,
were so very great, that the goddess was obliged to command silence several
times, and with some severity, before she could make them attentive to the
edicts. They were all sensible, that the most important affair among womankind
was then to be settled, which every one knows to be the point of place. This
had raised innumerable disputes among them, and put the whole sex into a
tumult. Every one produced her claim, and pleaded her pretensions. Birth,
beauty, wit, or wealth, were words that rang in my ears from all parts of the
plain. Some boasted of the merit of their husbands, others of their own power
in governing them. Some pleaded their unspotted virginity; others their
numerous issue. Some valued themselves as they were the mothers, and others as
they were the daughters of considerable persons. There was not a single
accomplishment, unmentioned, or unpractised. The whole congregation was full of
singing, dancing, tossing, ogling, speaking, smiling, sighing, fanning,
frowning, and all those other irresistible arts which women put in practice to
captivate the hearts of reasonable creatures. The goddess, to end the dispute,
caused it to be proclaimed, That every one should take place according as she
was more or less beautiful.

This declaration gave great satisfaction to the whole assembly, which
immediately bridled up, and appeared in all its beauties. Such as believed
themselves graceful in their motions, found an occasion of falling back,
advancing forward, or making a false step, that they might show their persons
in the most becoming air. Such as had fine necks and bosoms, were wonderfully
curious to look over the heads of the multitude, and observe the most distant
parts of the assembly. Several clapped their hands on their foreheads, as
helping their sight to look upon the glories that surrounded the goddess, but
in reality to show their fine hands and arms. The ladies were yet better
pleased when they heard, that in the decision of this great controversy, each
of them should be her own judge, and take her place according to her own
opinion of herself, when she consulted her looking-glass.

The goddess, then let down the mirror of truth in a golden chain, which
appeared larger in proportion as it descended, and approached nearer to the
eyes of the beholders. It was the particular property of this looking-glass to
banish all false appearances, and show people what they really are. The whole
women were represented without regard to the usual external features, which
were made entirely conformable to their real characters. In short, the most
accomplished (taking the whole circle of female perfections) were the most
beautiful; and the most defective, the most deformed. The goddess so varied the
motion of the glass, and placed it in so many different lights, that each had
an opportunity of seeing herself in it.

It is impossible to describe the rage, the pleasure, or astonishment, that
appeared in each face upon its representation in the mirror; multitudes started
at their own form, and would have broken the glass if they could have reached
it. Many saw their blooming features wither as they looked upon them, and their
self-admiration turning into a loathing and abhorrence. The lady who was
thought so agreeable in her anger, and was so often celebrated for a woman of
fire and spirit, was frighted at her own image, and fancied she saw a fury in
the glass. The interested mistress beheld a Happy, and the subtle jilt a
Sphynx. I was very much troubled in my own heart, to see such a destruction of
fine faces; but at the same time had the pleasure of seeing several improved,
which I had before looked upon as the greatest masterpieces of nature. I
observed that some few were so humble as to be surprised at their own charms;
and that many a one, who had lived in the retirement and severity of a vestal,
shined forth in all the graces and attractions of a Siren. I was ravished at
the sight of a particular image in the mirror, which I thought the most
beautiful object that my eyes ever beheld. There was something more than human
in her countenance; her eyes were so full of light that they seemed to beautify
every thing they looked upon. Her face was so enlivened with such a florid
bloom, as did not so properly seem the mark of health as of immortality. Her
shape, her stature, and her whole mein, were such as distinguished her even
there, where the whole fair sex were assembled.

I was impatient to see the lady represented by so divine an image, whom I
found to be the person that stood at my right hand, and in the same point of
view with myself. This was a little old woman, who in her prime had been about
five feet high, though at present shrunk to about three quarters of that
measure; (...) natural aspect was puckered up with wrinkles, and her^^ and
covered with gray hairs. I had observed all along an innocent cheerfulness in
her face, which was now height^^ into rapture, as she beheld herself in the
glass. It was an odd circumstance in my dream, (but I cannot ^^bear relating
it) I conceived so great an inclination toward her, that I had thoughts of
discoursing her upon the point of marriage, when on a sudden she was carried
from me; for the word was now given, that all who were pleased with their own
images should separate, and place themselves at the head of their sex.

This detachment was afterward divided into three bodies, consisting of maids,
wives, and widows; the wives being placed in the middle, with the maids on the
right, and the widows on the left: though it was with difficulty that these two
last bodies were hindered from falling into the center. This separation of
those who I ed their real selves, not having lessened the number of the main
body so considerably as it might have been wished, the goddess, after having
drawn up her mirror, thought fit to make new distinctions among those who did
not like the figures they saw in it. She made several wholesome e^^cts, which
are slipped out of my mind; but there were two which dwelt upon it, as being very
extraordinary in their kind, and executed with great severity. Their design was
to make an example of two extremes in the female world; of those who were very
severe on the conduct of others, and of those who were very regardless of their
own. The first sentence therefore the goddess pronounced was. That all females
addicted to censoriousness and detraction (...) lose the use of speech: a
punishment which would to most grievous to the offender, and what should be the
and of all punishments, effectual for rooting out the crime. Upon this edict,
which was as soon executed as published, the noise of this assembly
considerably abated. It was a melancholy spact^c^e to see so many who had the
reputation of rigid virtue struck dumb. A lady who stood by me, and saw my
concern, told me, she wondered how I could be concerned for such a pack of --.
I found, by the shaking of her head, she was going to give me their characters;
but by her saying no more, I perceived she had lost the command of her tongue.
This calamity fell very heavy upon that part of women who are distinguished by
the name of Prudes, a courtly word for female hypocrites, who have a short way
of being virtuous, by showing that others are vicious. The second sentence was
then pronounced against the loose part of the sex, That all should immediately
be pregnant, who in any part of their life had run the hazard of it. This
produced a very goodly appearance, and revealed so many misconducts, that made
that who were lately struck dumb, repine more than ever at their want of
utterance; though, at the same time, (as afflictions seldom come single) many
of the mutes were also seized with this new calamity. The ladies were now in
such a condition that they would have wanted room, had not the plain been large
enough to let them divide their ground, and extend their lines or all sides. It
was sensible affliction to me, to see such a multitude of fair ones, either
dumb, or big bellied. But (...) was something more at case, when I found that
they agreed upon several regulations to cover such misfortunes. Among others,
that it should be an established maxim in all nations, that a woman's first
child might or me into the world within six months after the acquaintance with
her husband; and that grief might retard the birth of her last still fourteen
months after his decease.

This vision ^asted till my usual hour of waking, which I did with some
surprise to find myself alone, after having been engaged almost a whole night
in so prodigious a multitude. I could not but reflect with wonder, at the
partiality and extravagan^t of my vision; which, according to my thoughts, had
not done justice to the sex. If virtue in men is more venerable, it is in women
more lovely; which Milton has very finely expressed in his Paradise Lost, where
Adam, speaking of Eve, after having exerted his own pre-eminence, as being
first in creation and internal faculties, breaks out into the following rapture.

-- Yet when I approach
Her loveliness so absolute she seems,
And in herself complete; so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best:
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded (...) Wisdom in discourse with her
Loses, discountenanced, and like folly shows.
Authority and reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally (...) and, to consummate all,
Greatness of mind, and nobleness, their seat
Build in her loveliest, and creation awe
About her, as a guard angelic placed.
No Life pleasing to GOD that is not useful to MAN. An Eastern STORY.
Thus God and nature linked the general frame,
And bade Self-love and Social be the same.
POPE.
IT pleased the mighty sovereign Abbas-Carascan, from whom the kings of the
earth derive honor and dominion, to set Mirza his servant over the province of
Tauris. In the hand of Mirza the balance of distribution was splendid with
impartiality; and under his administration the weak were protected, the learned
received honor, and the diligent became rich: Mirza, therefore, was beheld by
every eye with complacency, and every tongue pronounced blessings on his head.
But it was observed that he derived no joys from the benefits which he
diffused; he became pensive and melancholy; he spent his leisure in solitude:
In his palace he sat motionless upon a sofa; and when he went out, his walk was
slow, and his eyes were fixed upon the ground: he applied to the business of
state with reluctance; and resolved to relinquish the (...) government, of
which he could no longer enjoy the reward.

He therefore obtained permission to approach the throne of his Sovereign; and
being asked what was his request, he made this reply, "May the Lord of the
world forgive the slave whom he has honored, if Mirza presume he again to lay
the bounty of Abbas at his feet. Thou have given me the dominion of a country,
fruitful as the gardens of Damascus; and of a city, glorious above all others,
except that only which reflects the splendour of thy presence. But the longest
life is a period scarce sufficient to prepare for death: all other business is
vain and trivial, as the toil of emmets in the path of the traveller, under
whose foot they perish for ever; and all enjoyment is unsubstantial and
evanescent, as the colors of the bow that appear in the interval of a storm.
Suffer me therefore, to prepare for the approach of eternity; let me give up my
soul to meditation; let solitude and silence acquaint me with the mysteries of
devotion; let me forget the world, and by the world be forgotten, till the
moment arrives in which the veil of eternity shall fall, and I shall be found
at the bar of the Almighty." Mirza then bowed himself to the earth, and stood
silent.

By the command of Abbas it is recorded, that at these words he trembled upon
that throne at the footstool of which the world pays homage. He looked round
upon his nobles; but every countenance was pale, and every eye was upon the
earth. No man opened his mouth; and the King first broke silence, after it had
continued an hour.

"Mirza, terror and doubt are come upon me: I am alarmed, as a man who suddenly
perceives that he is near the brink of a precipice, and is urged forward by an
irresistible force; but yet I know not whether my danger is a reality or a
dream. I am, as thou art, a reptile of the earth; my life is a moment; and
eternity, in which days and years, and ages are nothing; eternity is before me,
for which I also should prepare: but by whom the must the faithful be governed?
By those only who have no fear of judgment; by those alone whose life is
brutal; because, like brutes, they do not consider that they shall die. Or who,
indeed, are the faithful? Are the busy multitudes that crowd the city in a
state of perdition? And is the cell of the Dervise along (...) are of paradise?
To all, the life of a Dervise is not possible; to all, therefore, it cannot be
a duty. Depart to the house which has in the city been prepared for thy
residence; (...) meditate the reason of they request: and may he who illumes
the mind of the humble, enable me to determine with wisdom!"

Mirza departed, and on the third day, having received no commands, he again
requested an audience, and it was granted. When he entered the royal presence,
his countenance appeared more cheerful; he drew a letter from his bosom, and
having kissed it, he presented it with his light hand.

"My Lord, said he, I have learned by this letter, which I received from Cosrou
the Iman, who now stands before thee, in what manner life may be best improved.
I am enabled to look back with pleasure, and forward with hope; and I shall now
rejoice still to be the shadow of thy power at Tauris, and to keep those
honors which I so lately wished to resign." The king, who had listened to
Mirza with a mixture of surprise and curiosity, immediately gave the letter to
Cosrou, and commanded that it should be read. The eyes of the court were at
once turned on the hoary sage, whose countenance was suffused with an honest
blush; and it was not without some hesitation that he read these words:

"To Mirza, whom the wisdom of Abbas our mighty Lord has honored with
dominion, be everlasting health! When I heard thy purpose to withdraw the
blessings of thy government from the thousands of Tauris, my heart was wounded
with the arrow of affliction, and my eyes became dim with sorrow. But who shall
speak before the King, when he is troubled? And who shall boast of knowledge,
when he is distressed by doubt? To thee I will relate the events of my youth,
which thou have renewed before me; and those truths which they taught me, may
the Prophet multiply to thee.

"Under the instruction of the physician Aluazer, I obtained an early knowledge
of his art. To those who were smitten with diseases, I could administer plants
which the sun had impregnated with the spirit of health. But the scenes of
pain, languor, and mortality, which were perpetually rising before me, made me
often tremble for myself. I saw the grave open at my feet: I determined
therefore, to contemplate only the regions beyond it, and to despise every
acquisition which I could not keep. I conceived an opinion, that as there was
no merit but a voluntary poverty, and silent meditation, those who desired
money were not proper objects of bounty; therefore money was despised. I buried
mine in the earth; and renouncing society, I wandered into a wild and
sequestered part of the country; my dwelling was a cave by the side of a hill;
I drank the running water from the spring, and eat such fruits and herbs as I
could find. To increase the austerity of my life, I frequently watched all
night, sitting at the entrance of the cave with my face to the east, resigning
myself to the secret influences of the Prophet, and expecting illumination from
above. One morning after my nocturnal vigil, just as I perceived the horizon
glow at the approach of the sun, the power of sleep became irresistible, and I
sunk under it. I imagined myself still sitting at the entrance of my cell; that
the dawn increased, and that as I looked earnestly for the first beam of day, a
dark spot appeared to intercept it. I perceived that it was in motion: it
increased in size as it drew near, and at length I discovered it to be an
eagle. I still kept my eye fixed steadfastly upon it, and saw it alight at a
small distance; where I now descried a fox, whose two fore legs appeared to be
broken. Before this fox the eagle laid part of a kid, which it had brought in
its talons, and then disappeared. When I awoke, I laid my forehead upon the
ground, and blessed the Prophet for the instruction of the morning. I reviewed
my dream, and said thus to myself, "Cosrou, thou have done well to renounce the
tumult, the business, and the vanities of life; but thou have as yet only done
it in part: thou art still every day busied in search of food; thy mind is not
wholly at rest, neither is thy trust in Providence complete. What art thou
taught by this vision? If thou have seen an eagle commissioned by heaven to
feed a fox that was lame, shall not the hand of heaven also supply thee with
food; when that which prevents thee from procuring it to thyself is not
necessity, but devotion?" I was now so confident of a miraculous supply, that I
neglected to walk out for my repast, which, after the first day, I expected
with an impatience that left me little power of attending to any other object:
this impatience, however, I labored to suppress, and persisted in my
resolution; but my eyes at length began to fail me, and my knees smote each
other: I threw myself backward, and hoped my weakness would soon increase to
insensibility. But I was suddenly roused by the voice of an invisible being,
who pronounced these words: "Cosrou, I am the angel who, by the command of the
Almighty, have registered the thoughts of thy heart, which I am now
commissioned to reprove. Whilst thou waft attempting to become wise above that
which is revealed, thy fully has perverted the instructions which were
vouchsafed to thee. Art thou disabled as the fox (...) Have thou not rather the
powers of the eagle? Arise, let the eagle be the object of thy emulation. To
pain and sickness be thou again the messenger of ease and health. Virtue is not
rest, but action. If thou do good to man, as an evidence of thy love to God,
thy virtue will be exalted from moral to divine; and that happiness, which is
the pledge of paradise, will be thy reward upon earth."

"At these words, I was not less astonished than if a mountain had been
overturned at my feet. I humbled myself in the dust; I returned to the city. I
dug up my treasure; I was liberal, yet I became rich. My skill in restoring
health to the body gave me frequent opportunities of curing the diseases of the
soul. I put on the sacred vestments; I grew eminent beyond my merit; and it was
the pleasure of the King that I should stand before him. Now, therefore, be not
offended; I boast of no knowledge that I have not received. As the sands of the
desert drink up the drops of rain, or the dew of the morning; so do I also, who
am but dust, imbibe the instructions of the Prophet. Believe, then, that it is
he who tells thee, all knowledge is profane which terminates in thyself; and by
a life wasted in speculation, little even of this can be gained. When the gates
of paradise are thrown open before thee, thy mind shall be irradiated in a
moment. Here thou can little more than pile error upon error; there thou
shall build truth upon truth. Wait, therefore, for the glorious vision; and, in
the mean time, emulate the eagle. Much is in thy power, and therefore much is
expected of thee. Though the Almighty only can give virtue; yet, as a prince,
thou may stimulate those to beneficence, who act from no higher motive than
immediate interest; thou can not produce the principle, but may enforce the
practice. The relief of the poor is equal, whether they receive it from
ostentation or charity; and the effect of example is the same, whether it be
intended to obtain the favor of God or man. Let thy virtue be thus diffused;
and if thou believe with reverence, thou shall be accepted above. Farewell.
-- May the smile of him who resides in the Heaven of heavens be upon thee! and
against thy name, in the volume of his will, may Happiness be written!"

The King, whose doubts, like those of Mirza, were now removed, looked up with
a smile that communicated the joy of his mind. He dismissed the prince to his
government; and commanded those events to be recorded, to the end that
posterity may know, "That no life is pleasing to God, but that which is useful
to mankind!"

The JUDGMENT of COMMON SENSE: A VISION.
No glass or coloring will avail,
But Truth and Justice here prevail.
R.
I WAS the other day buried in the deepest contemplation, on reading that paper
of the Guardian in which we are presented with a view of that impartial court
of justice in the infernal regions, where mankind (according to the ancient
mythology) are supposed to be dealt with in proportion to their good or evil
actions while or earth. In the midst of this reverie, I was seized with a
profound sleep when methought I was in that part of the lower regions I had
been reading of. The great hurry and fatigue of business made Minos (who then
sat as judge) to be desirous of some respite; for which reason he left Common
Sense, lately arrived from the upper world, to officiate in his room.

The first who appeared before this new substitute of Minos, was a figure that
approached with an easy assurance in his countenance; he smiled on the court
with a seeming complacency; and laid-claim to Elysium, from the many generous
and friendly actions of his life. No public subscription was attempted, but he
was among the first to encourage it; no acquaintance in distress, but he
contributed to their relief: In short, he was looked upon, while on earth, as a
humane, generous man; beloved by his neighbors, and esteemed by his
acquaintances; but on further examination, it was proved, that this very person
was mean enough to become a slave to a party for a pension; that though
seemingly humane to individuals, he was a betrayer and ruiner of his country's
interest; and his seeming virtues proceeded not from any goodness of heart, but
an ostentation to keep up the empty shows of consequential grandeur. On which
Common Sense with a look of severity, telling him, that of all cruelty, that
toward the public was the most unpardonable, nodded toward a black officer on
the left to take him into custody. This was no sooner done, than another ghost
was brought forward, who amazed the whole court with his unaccountable
behavior. When asked to what purpose he had lived fifty-three years and some
odd months; in the most careless, pick-tooth manner, with his eyes half shut,
he replied, None: and being told that was not a satisfactory answer, he
retorted with a gape -- Perhaps so. In a word, he was found to be such a one as
Prior describes: He soundly slept the night away,
And just did nothing all the day.


This pretty gentleman being informed that indolence was not the road to
Elysium, was ordered to cast off to the left. To him succeeded a first minister
of state: but it being proved, on his trial, that nature had designed him for a
juggler, and that he had by mistake been forced to animate the wrong body, he
was remanded back again to earth, to shine in his proper sphere. I was buried
in thought for some time at what I saw, when I awakened out of my reverie, at
the appearance of a ghost with a bloated countenance; who, on being asked what
sort of a life he had led; answered, A very harmless one; that from the moment
he had come to his estate, he had never known what it was to be thoroughly
sober; and that he had consequently been a friend to his country by promoting
the excise; and as it was his fortune to be taken off in a drunken fit* he
humbly hoped he might be ranked among those who died in the service of their
country. The court was some time puzzled to find out a proper punishment for a
life so scandalously misspent: they knew flames would be thrown away upon him:
but at length his station was fixed among the suicides, the most dismal,
melancholy spot in hell.

Quite different from the former was the next that was called upon. It was a
young creature, with an unspeakable innocence and sweetness in her countenance,
attended with a melancholy and wanness, which seemed deeply rooted in her. When
the usual question was put, instead of answering, she burst into a flood of
tears, nor was she able to utter one word; but a neighboring ghost, who
happened to arrive about the same time, informed Common Sense that she had an
unblemished character, and was universally esteemed for her good nature and
sense, till unfortunately she had given credit to the protestations of a young
gentleman, who had avowed in the most sacred manner to make her his bride; but
after gaining his ends, had basely deserted her, which flung her into a
melancholy that soon put an end to her life. The whole court was moved at the
relation; but Common Sense telling her she had already sufficiently expiated
for her credulity, and that the villain who betrayed her was principally to
answer for the crime, ordered the keeper of Elysium to take her into his
protection; which he had no sooner done, than sorrow fled away, her bloom
returned, and modesty and loveliness shone with the most becoming sweetness.
Upon s^eing this a whole shoal of coquettes flocked to their trial, not
doubting to meet with the same good fortune; but their gambols had no other
effect on Common Sense than to hasten their filing off to the left. As for
Fops, Methodists, Jansenists, Humbuggers, and others of the same species, as
they were known enemies to Common Sense, their trials were deferred till the
return of Minos, left justice from him might seem partial. What seemed to me
remarkable was, that Common Sense often mistook Methodists for Jansenists, and
Jansenists for Methodists; so greatly seemed to him the resemblance between
those two sectaries.

Room was now made for a lady of figure, who pressed forward with an easy
freedom in her air, that bespoke her used to the best of company. The question
being put, she declared she had led a life quite gay and polite; that drums,
routs, balls, intrigues, dress, etc. had taken up her whole time; and that in
the end she had died a martyr to her politeness, by a violent cold she had got
at a masquerade. On being demanded what good she had done? What charities
bestowed, etc. etc. What good! what charities! replied she; these are very odd
sort of questions: why, my dear, dear Sir, do you think we fine ladies can have
time to think of such things? No, no; our whole life is taken up with the more
important articles of cards, scandal, dress, etc. Away with her, cries Common
Sense; to the left with her; make room for her ladyship. Hey-day, what have we
got here, continues he to a Harlequin, who entered playing his antic tricks, to
the great amusement, as he expected, of the spectators; but no sooner did the
keeper of Tartarus spy him, than (without waiting for orders) he laid his
clutches on him, and poor Lunn was immediately dragged from the bar, amidst the
repeated hisses of the whole court. Pray, friend, says Common Sense to the
next, why that dejected countenance? I lived thirty seven years a farmer,
(answered the ghost) had three sons and one daughter, by a wife whom I tenderly
loved, as I did my poor children whose education I was particularly careful of,
and should have been the happiest of mankind, had not the distemper among the
cattle, in a few weeks deprived me of my whole stock; my landlord threw me into
prison for a debt he knew it was impossible for me at that time to pay. (...)
this situation I did what I could to contribute to the maintenance of my
family, by making nets, purses, etc. but it was insufficient, and I died for
want of common necessaries. This was exactly the case of a poor farmer, who
died in a miserable condition in YORK Castle.
Pray take care of him, cried Common Sense to the Elysium keeper, and convince
him, that the more unfortunate virtue is in the other world, the greater the
reward here; and though your children are deprived of you, they are more
particularly the care of a superior power and better parent, who never fails,
sooner or later, to reward goodness. The keeper of Elysium smiling, bid him
enter the happy portal; telling him he would meet with his wife there, whom it
seems, a broken heart had kindly delivered from a troublesome world about six
months before.

The next who mounted was a grave looking gentleman, who no sooner mentioned
his being of the sacerdotal order, than Common Sense cut him short, by telling
him it was a rule of court, when a band of cassocks appeared, to have inquiry
made through Elysium if any were in the least indebted to the reverend claimant
for the happiness they enjoyed; and if such evidence appeared in his behalf, he
was to be admitted; if not, he was obliged to take the contrary road. Upon his
dismission appeared two duellists, who had honorably expired in their
vocation; no sooner were they known than Common Sense acquainted the black
officer, that duellists were always his property, and desired he would lend
them his hand. On their disappearing, a gay young fellow was introduced,
hallooing and shouting with the most impudent stare, and settled assurance
imaginable, in his countenance: hey day, says Common Sense, who have we go
here? Pray, good bashful Sir, what may you be? D -- e, old gentleman, returns
the spark, do you know what a buck, what a wit is? But I cannot answer
impertinent questions now: I have kept a long fast, d -- 's. Can you help me to
a fresh bit of game? Z -- ds, I wish I had a few brother bucks here, we would
soon show them we could play hell and the devil as well as the best of them
below stairs. Pray, good Mr. Buck, cries Common Sense, move off to the left;
and you, Sir, (speaking to the black officer) let his buckship be well hunted
when you get him into the dark regions.

Well, friend, says Common Sense to a ghost who thrust forward, what may your
passport be to Elysium? I have been, replied the ghost, all my lifetime a most
zealous churchman, a true orthodox believer, a staunch advocate. -- Look you,
friend, replied Common Sense, we never in this court inquire into the faith,
but into the actions of those who appear before us; how did you spend the fifty
three years you were confined to the upper world? In showing my zeal, replies
the ghost, to the true religion: by reviling, slandering, and persecuting all
unbelievers, and forcing into the pale of the church all who were in the wrong
road to -- Hold, hold, cries Common Sense, you have been in the wrong road
yourself all y^^ (...) time. Charity and benevolence are the sure (...) to
Elysium, as persecution and fiery zeal never fail ^^^ding their followers to
Tartarus; move off, pray -- aw^^^ with him.

The next called up was a ghost who boasted m^^^ of his ingenuity and superior
talents, and gloried it several inventions which were of the utmost consequence
(as he said) to mankind. I hope, says Common Sense, the world is at present
reaping the benefit of your ingenuity. It did while I lived, answered the
ghost; but as I did not care to publish those secrets in my lifetime, they
died with me. Wretch, cries Common Sense, to imagine superior qualifications
were granted by Heaven but for the good of the society in which they were
placed. Wise men are designed to be vehicles of blessings from above: nor are
misers of any sort so detestable as those, who through mean, selfish views,
bury in oblivion what might prove a public and lasting benefit to their
fellow creatures: take him away.

On this gentleman's disappearance, a ghost advanced, who brought a copy of his
epitaph (by way of credentials) with him from the other world, in which he was
extolled beyond the skies for a loving husband, a tender father, a sincere
friend, etc. etc. which is as much as to say, cries Common Sense, that you died
rich, and your heirs were glad to dismiss you with a fulsome compliment: what
say your actions for you? On examination, this loving husband was found to have
kept a brace of mistresses; for whose support he had abridged his wife of the
common necessaries of life. This tender father took such care of his children,
that they were unacquainted with every kind of knowledge, but a few of the
fashionable vices: and as for friendship, though it was a word often in his
(...), he never knew any strong enough to withstand the least impulse of
interest: he was profuse to extravagance, and yet the greatest of misers where
merit in indigence (...) distress called for his assistance. Common Sense, on
(...) ^^koned to the keeper of Tartarus, who, without (...), enlisted himself
among his finister acquaintance.

(...) ^^rt about this time was interrupted by a noise at a distance,
occasioned by a dispute between Charon and ^^ailor, who had, unperceived by
him, slipped into his boa^ and when he landed refused to pay the usual fare. The
^lunt tar, without paying much regard to those he was before, called Charon an
old fool; swore he had not a drop of sailor's blood in his whole carcass, or he
would have known better than to have asked a brother for passage-money: that,
for his part, it had been his fortune to be killed in a naval engagement,
fighting against the enemies of his country, and had left all above stairs at
sixes and sevens; yet that nothing vexed him so much, as that a fellow who wore
trousers, should have a mercenary temper. Common Sense, who knew the value of
his blunt honesty, ordered him, with a smile, to veer of to the Elysium side,
to make way for a ghost who had been born to a good estate, but had foolishly
squandered it away among parasites and sharping gamesters, and left behind him
a numerous progeny of beggars. This wretch was condemned to wear long asses
ears, a fool's coat, and a rattle with dice; to be the scoff and jest of all
hell, and in short, to be the most despicable among the damned: nor was this
all; for the sins of his posterity, whom he by his folly had reduced to the
necessity of committing many crimes, were to be doubly punished in him. No
sooner was he taken into custody, than I was called to the bar; but my
conscience accusing me of a multitude of unrepented crimes, threw me into such
a fright, that luckily for me, it put an end to my dream.

CARAZAN'S VISION: or, SOCIAL LOVE and BENEFICENCE recommended.
Grasp the whole world of reason, life, and sense,
In one close system of benevolence;
Happier, as kinder, in whatever degree,
A height of bliss is height of charity.
POPE.
CARAZAN, the merchant of Bagdat, was eminent throughout all the East for his
avarice and wealth; his original is obscure as that of the spark, which by the
collision of steel and adamant is struck out of the darkness; and the patient
labor of persevering diligence alone had made him rich. It was remembered,
that when he was indigent he was thought to be generous; and he was still
acknowledged to be inflexibly just. But whether in his dealings with men he
discovered a perfidy which tempted him to put his trust in gold; or whether in
proportion as he accumulated wealth, he-discovered his own importance by
increase, Carazan prized it more as he used it less: he gradually lost the
inclination to do good, as he acquired the power; and as the hand of time
scattered snow upon his head, the freezing influence extended to his bosom.

But though the door of Carazan was never opened by hospitality, nor his hand
by compassion, yet fear led him constantly to the mosque at the stated hours of
prayer: he performed all the rites of devotion with the most scrupulous
punctuality, and he had thrice paid his vows at the temple of the Prophet. That
devotion which arises from the love of God, and necessarily includes the love
of man, as it connects gratitude with beneficence, and exalts that which was
mortal to divine, confers new dignity upon goodness, and is the object not only
of affection but of reverence. On the contrary, the devotion of the selfish,
whether it be thought to avert the punishment which every one wishes to be
inslicted, or to insure it by the complication of hypocrisy with guilt, never
fails to excite indignation and abhorrence. Carazan, therefore, when he had
'locked his door, and turning round with a look of circumspective suspicion,
proceeded to the mosque, was followed by every eye with silent malignity; the
poor suspended their supplications when he passed by; though he was known by
every man, yet no man saluted him.

Such had long been the life of Carazan, and such was the character which he
had acquired, when notice was given by proclamation, that he was removed to a
magnificent building in the center of the city; that his table should be spread
for the hungry, and that the stranger should be welcome to his bed. The
multitude soon rushed like a torrent to his door, where they beheld him
distributing bread to the hungry, and apparel to the naked, his eye softened
with compassion, and his cheeks glowing with delight. Every one gazed with
astonishment at the prodigy; and the murmur of innumerable voices increasing
like the sound of approaching thunder. Carazan beckoned with his hand:
attention suspended the tumult in a moment; and be thus gratified the curiosity
which procured him audience.

To Him who touches the mountains and they smoke, the Almighty and the most
merciful, be everlasting honor! -- he has ordained sleep to be the minister
of instruction, as his visions have reproved me in the night. As I was sitting
alone in my Haram, with my lamp burning before me, computing the product of my
merchandise, and exulting in the increase of my wealth, I fell into a deep
sleep, and the hand of him who dwells in the third heaven was upon me. I beheld
the angel of death coming forward like a whirlwind, and he smote me before I
could deprecate the blow. At the same moment I found myself lifted from the
ground, and transported with astonishing rapidity through the region of the
air. The earth was contracted to an atom between; and the stars glowed round me
with a luster that obscured the sun. The gate of paradise was now in sight; and
I was intercepted by a sudden brightness which no human eye could behold: the
irrevocable sentence was now to be pronounced: my day of probation was past,
and from the evil of my life nothing could be taken away, nor could any thing
be added to the good. When I reflected that my lot for eternity was cast, which
not all the powers of nature could reverse, my con^^^ence totally forsook me;
and while I stood trembling and silent, covered with confusion, and chilled
with horror, I was thus addressed by the radiance that flamed before me.

"Carazan, thy worship has not been accepted, because it was not prompted by
the love of God; neither can thy righteousness be rewarded, because it was not
produced by the love of man: for thy own sake only have thou rendered to every
man his due: and thou have approached the almighty only for thyself. Thou have
not looked up with gratitude, nor round thee with kindness. Around thee thou
have indeed beheld vice and folly: but if vice and folly could justify thy
parsimony, would they not condemn the bounty of heaven? If not upon the foolish
and the vicious, where shall the sun diffuse his light, or the clouds distill
their dew? Where shall the lips of the spring breathe fragrance, or the hand of
autumn diffuse plenty? Remember, Carazan that thou have shut compassion from
thy heart, and grasped thy treasures with an hand of iron: thou have lived for
thyself; and, therefore, henceforth for ever thou shall subsist alone. From the
light of heaven, and from the society of all beings, shall thou be driven;
solitude shall protract the lingering hours of eternity, and darkness aggravate
the horror of despair."

At this moment I was driven, by some secret and irresistible power, through
the glowing system of creation, and passed innumerable worlds in a moment. As I
approached the verge of nature, I perceived the shadows of total and boundless
vacuity deepen before me, a dreadful region of eternal silence, solitude, and
darkness! unutterable horror seized me at the prospect, and this exclamation
burst from me with all the vehemence of desire: Oh! that I had been doomed for
ever to the common receptacle of impenitence and guilt! their society would
have alleviated the torment of despair, and the rage of fire could not have
excluded the comfort of light. Or, if I had been condemned to reside on a
comet, that would return but once in a thousand years to the regions of light
and life, the hope of these periods, however distant, would cheer me in the
dreary interval of cold, and darkness, and the vicissitude would divide
eternity into time. While this thought passed over my mind, I lost sight of the
remotest star, and the last glimmering of light was quenched in utter darkness.
The agonies of despair increased every moment, as every moment augmented my
distance from the last habitable world. I reflected with intolerable anguish,
that when ten thousand thousand years had carried me beyond the reach of all
but that power who fills infinitude, I should still look forward into an
immense abyss of darkness, through which I should still drive without succor
and without society, ^^^ther and f^rther still, for ever and ever. I then
stretched out my hands toward the regions of existence, with an emotion that
awaked me. Thus have I been taught to estimate society, like every other
blessing, by its loss. My heart is warmed to liberality; and I am zealous to
communicate the happiness which I feel, to those from it is derived; for the
society of one wretch, whom, in the pride of prosperity, I would have spurned
from my door, would, in the dreadful solitude to which I was condemned, have
been more highly prized than the gold of Afric, or the gems of Golconda.

At this reflection upon his dream, Carazan became suddenly silent, and looked
upwards in an ecstacy of gratitude and devotion. The multitude was struck at
once with the precept and the example; and the Caliph, to whom the event was
related, that he might be liberal beyond the power of gold, commanded it to be
recorded for the benefit of posterity.

On CREATION and the ANIMAL WORLD.
Range where you please, in water, earth, and air --
God is in every thing, and every where.
R.
THOUGH there is a great deal of pleasure in contemplating the material world,
by which I mean that system of bodies into which nature has so curiously
wrought the mass of dead matter, with the several relations which those bodies
bear to one another; there is still, methinks, something more wonderful and
surprising in contemplations on the world of life, by which I mean all those
animals with which every part of the universe is furnished. The material world
is only the shell of the universe: the world of life are its inhabitants.

If we consider those parts of the material world which lie the nearest to us,
and are therefore subject to our observations and inquiries, it is amazing to
consider the infinity of animals with which it is stocked. Every part of matter
is peopled: every green leaf swarms with inhabitants. There is scarce a single
humor in the body of man, or of any other animal, in which our glasses do not
discover myriads of living creatures. The surface of animals is also covered
with other animals; which are in the same manner the basis of other animals
that live upon them: nay, we find in the most solid bodies, as in marble
itself, innumerable cells and cavities, that are crowded with such
imperceptible inhabitants, as are too little for the naked eye to discover. On
the other hand, if we look into the ^ore bulky parts of nature, we see the
seas, lakes, and rivers, teeming with numberless kinds of living creatures, we
find every mountain and marsh, wilderness and wood, plentifully stocked with
birds and beasts, and every part of matter affording proper necessaries and
conveniences for the livelihood of multitudes which inhabit it.

The author of the Plurality of Worlds draws a very good argument from this
consideration for the peopling of every planet; as indeed it seems very
probable, from the analogy of reason, that if no part of matter which we are
acquainted with lies waste and useless, those great bodies, which are at such a
distance from us, should not be desert and unpeopled, but rather that they
should be furnished with beings adapted to their respective situations.

Existence is a blessing to those beings only which are endowed with
perception, and is in a manner thrown away upon dead matter, any farther than
as it is subservient to beings which are conscious of their existence.
Accordingly we find, from the bodies which lie under our observation, that
matter is only made as the basis and support of animals; and that there is no
more of the one than what is necessary to the existence of the other.

Infinite goodness is of so communicative a nature, that it seems to delight in
the conferring of existence upon every degree of perceptive being. As this is a
speculation which I have often pursued with great pleasure to myself, I shall
enlarge farther upon it, by considering that part of the scale of being which
comes within our knowledge.

There are some living creatures which are raised but just above dead matter.
To mention only that species of shell fish which is formed in the fashion of a
cone, that grow to the surface of several rocks, and immediately die upon their
being severed from the place where they grow. There are many other creatures
but one remove from these, which have no other sense besides that of feeling
and taste. Others have still an additional one of hearing: others of small, and
others of sight. It is wonderful to observe, by what a gradual progress the
world of life advances through a prodigious variety of species, before a
creature is formed that is complete in all its senses; and even among these
there is such a different degree of perfection in the sense which one animal
enjoys, beyond what appears in another, that though the sense in different
animals be distinguished by the same common denominations, it seems almost of a
different nature. If, after this, we look into the several inward perfections
of cunning and sagacity, or what we generally call instinct, we find them
rising after the same manner imperceptibly one above another, and receiving
additional improvements according to the species in which they are implanted.
This progress in nature is so very gradual, that the most perfect of an
inferior species comes very near to the most imperfect of that which is
immediately above it.

The exuberant and overflowing goodness of the supreme Being, whose mercy
extends to all his works, is plainly seen, as I have before ^^inted, from his
having made so very little matter, at least what falls within our knowledge,
that does not swarm with life: no^ is his goodness less seen in the diversity,
than in the multitude of living creatures. Had he only made one species of
animals, none of the rest would have enjoyed the happiness of existence; he
has, therefore, specified in his creation every degree of life, every capacity
of beings. The whole chasm of nature, from a plant to a man, is filled up with
diverse kinds of creatures, rising one over another, by such a gentle and easy
ascent, that the little transitions and deviations from one species to another
are almost insensible. This intermediate space is so well husbanded and
managed, that there is scarce a degree of perception which does not appear in
some one part of the world of life. Is the goodness or wisdom of the divine
Being more manifested in this his proceeding?

There is a consequence, besides those I have already mentioned, which seems
very naturally deducible from the foregoing considerations. If the scale of
being rises by such a regular progress so high as a man, we may, by a parity of
reason, suppose that it still proceeds gradually through those beings which are
of a superior nature to him; since there is an infinitely greater space and
room for different degrees of perfection between the supreme Being and man,
than between man and the most despicable insect. This consequence of so great a
variety of beings which are superior to us, from that variety which is inferior
to us, is made by Mr. Lock, in a passage which I shall here set down, after
having premised, that notwithstanding there is such infinite room between man
and his Maker for the creative power to exert itself in, it is impossible that
it should ever be filled up, since there will be still an infinite gap or
distance between the highest created being, and the great power which produced
them.

"That there should be more species of intelligent creatures above us than
there are of sensible and material below us, is probable to me from hence, that
in all the visible corporeal world, we see no chasms or gaps. All quite down
from us, the descent is by easy steps, and a continued series of things, that
each remove differs very little one from the other. There are fishes that have
wings, and are no strangers to the airy region: and there are some birds, that
are inhabitants of the water, whose blood is cold as fishes, and their ^^^sh so
like in taste, that the scrupulous are allowed them on fish days. There are
animals so near akin both to birds and beasts, that they are in the middle
between both: amphibious animals link the terrestrial and aquatic together:
seals live on land and at sea, and porpoises have the warm blood and entrails
of a hog; not to mention what is confidently reported of mermaids, or seamen.
There are some brutes that seem to have as much knowledge and reason as some
that are called men; and the animal and vegetable kingdoms are so nearly
joined, that if you will take the lowest of the one, and the highest of the
other, there will scarce be perceived any great difference between them: and so
on, until we come to the lowest and the most inorganical parts of matter, we
shall find every where that the several species are linked together, and differ
but in almost insensible degrees. And when we consider the infinite power and
wisdom of the Maker, we have reason to think, that it is suitable to the
magnificent harmony of the universe, and the great design and infinite goodness
of the Architect, that the species of creatures should also, by gentle degrees,
ascend upwards from us toward his infinite perfection, as we see they
gradually descend from us downwards: which, if it be probable, we have reason
then to be persuaded, that there are far more species of creatures above us
than there are beneath; we being in a degree of perfection much more remote
from the infinite being of God than we are from the lowest state of being, and
that which approaches nearest to nothing; and yet of all those distinct species
we have no clear distinct ideas."

In this system of being there is no creature so wonderful in its nature, and
which so much deserves our particular attention as man, who fills up the middle
space between the animal and the intellectual nature, the visible and invisible
world, and is that link in the chain of beings which has been often termed the
Nexus utriusque Mundi. So that he who in one respect is associated with angels
and archangels, may look upon a being of infinite perfection as his father, and
the highest order of spirits as his brethren; may, in another respect, say to
corruption, Thou art my father; and to the worm, Thou art my mother and sister.

On the DEITY, and the wonderful FRAME of HUMAN and ANIMAL BODIES.
God first made angels bodiless pure minds;
Then other things which mindless bodies be.
Last he made man, the horizon' twixt both kinds,
In whom we do the world's abridgment see.
DAVIS.
THOSE who were skilled in anatomy among the ancients concluded, from the
outward and inward make of a human body, that it was the work of a being
transcendently wise and powerful. As the world grew more enlightened in this
art, their discoveries gave them fresh opportunities of admiring the conduct of
providence in the formation of a human body. Galen was converted by his
dissections; and could not but own a supreme Being upon a survey of this his
handiwork. There were, indeed, many parts of which the old anatomists did not
know the certain use; but as they saw that most of those which they examined
were adapted with admirable art to their several functions, they did not
question but those whose uses they could not determine were contrived with the
same wisdom for respective ends and purposes. Since the circulation of the
blood has been found out, and many other great discoveries have been made by
our modern anatomists, we see new wonders in the human frame, and discern
several important uses for those parts which the ancients knew nothing of. In
short, the body of man is such a subject as stands the utmost test of
examination. Though it appears formed with the nicest wisdom, upon the most
superficial survey of it, it still mends upon the search, and produces our
surprise and amazement in proportion as we pry into it. What I have here said
of a human body may be applied to the body of every animal which has been the
subject of an anatomical observation.

The body of an animal is an object adequate to our senses. It is a particular
system of providence, that lies in a narrow compass. The eye is able to command
it, and by successive inquiries can search into all its parts. Could the body
of the whole earth, or indeed the whole universe, be thus submitted to the
examination of our senses, were it not too big and disproportioned for our
inquiries, too unwieldy for the management of the eye and hand, there is no
question but it would appear to us as curious and well-contrived a frame as
that of a human body. We could see the same concatenation and subservience, the
same necessity and usefulness, the same beauty and harmony in all and every of
its parts, as what we discover in the body of every single animal.

The more extended our reason is, and the more able to grapple the immense
objects, the greater still are those discoveries which it makes of wisdom and
providence in the works of the creation. A Sir Isaac Newton, who stands up as
the miracle of the present age, can look through a whole planetary system;
consider it in its weight, number, and measure; and draw from it as many
demonstrations of infinite power and wisdom, as a more confined understanding
is able to deduce from the system of a human body.

But to return to our speculations on anatomy. I shall here consider the frabic
and texture of the bodies of animals in one particular view; which, in my
opinion, shows the hand of a thinking and all-wise Being in their formation,
with the evidence of a thousand demonstrations. I think we may lay this down as
an incontestible principle, that chance never acts in a perpetual uniformity
and consistency with itself. If one should always fling the same number with
ten thousand dice, or see every throw just five times less, or five times more
in number than the throw which immediately preceded it, who would not imagine
there is some invisible power which directs the cast? This is the proceeding
which we find in the operations of nature. Every kind of animal is diversified
by different magnitudes, each of which gives rise to a different species. Let a
man trace the dog or lion kind, and he will observe how many of the works of
nature are published, if I may use the expression, in a variety of editions. If
we look into the reptile world, or into those different kinds of animals that
fill the element of water, we meet with the same repetitions among several
species, that differ very little from one another but in size and bulk. You
find the same creature that is drawn at large, copied out in several
proportions, and ending in miniature. It would be tedious to produce instances
of this regular conduct in Providence, as it would be superfluous to those who
are versed in the natural history of animals. The magnificent harmony of the
universe is such, that we may observe innumerable divisions running upon the
same ground. I might also extend this speculation to the dead parts of nature,
in which we may find matter disposed into many similar systems, as well in our
survey of stars and planets, as of stones, vegetables, and other sublunary
parts of the creation. In a word, Providence has shown the richness of its
goodness and wisdom, not only in the production of many original species, but
in the multiplicity of descents which it has made on every original species in
particular.

But to pursue this thought still farther: every living creature considered in
itself has many very complicated parts that are exact copies of some other
parts which it possesses, and which are complicated in the same manner. One eye
would have been sufficient for the subsistence and preservation of an animal;
but, in order to better his condition, we see another placed with a
mathematical exactness in the same most advantageous situation, and in every
particular of the same size and texture. Is it possible for chance to be so
uniform in her operations? Should a million of dice turn up twice together the
same number, the wonder would be nothing in comparison of this. But when we see
this similitude and resemblance in the arm, the hand, the fingers; when we see
one half of the body entirely correspond with the other in all those minute
strokes, without which a man might very well have subsisted: nay, when we often
see a single part repeated an hundred times in the same body, notwithstanding
it consists in the most intricate weaving of numberless fibers, and those parts
differing still in magnitude, as the convenience of their particular situation
requires; surely man must have a strange cast of understanding, who does not
discover the finger of God in so wonderful a work. These duplicates in those
parts of the body, without which a man might have very well subsisted, though
not so well as with them, are a plain demonstration of an all-wise Contriver;
as those more numerous copyings, which are found among the vessels of the same
body, are evident demonstrations that they could not be the work of chance.
This argument receives additional strength, if we apply it to every animal and
insect within our knowledge, as well as to those numberless living creatures
that are objects too minute for the human eye: and if we consider how the
several species in this whole world of life resemble one another in very many
particulars, so far as is convenient for their respective states of existence,
it is much more probable, that an hundred million of dice should be casually
thrown a hundred million of times in the same number, than that the body of any
single animal should be produced by the fortuitous concourse of matter. And
that the like chance should arise in innumerable instances, requires a degree
of credulity that is not under the direction of common sense. We may carry this
consideration yet farther, if we reflect on the two sexes in every living
species, with their resemblances to each other, and those particular
distinctions that were necessary for the keeping up of this great world of life.

There are many more demonstrations of a Supreme Being, and of his transcendent
wisdom, power, and goodness, in the formation of the body of a living creature;
for which I refer my reader to other writings, particularly to the sixth book
of the poem entitled Creation, where the anatomy of the human body is described
with great perspicuity and elegance.

On the ATTRIBUTES of GOD, and the STARRY HEAVENS.
Hail sovereign goodness, great productive mind!
On all thy works, thyself inscribed we find.
BLACKLOCK.
I WAS yesterday about sunset walking in the open fields, till the night
insensibly fell upon me. I at first amused myself with all the richness and
variety of colors which appeared in the western parts of heaven: in proportion
as they faded away and went out, several stars and planets appeared, one after
another, until the whole firmament was in a glow. The blueness of the ether
was exceedingly heightened and enlivened by the season of the year, and by the
rays of all those luminaries that passed through it. The Galaxy appeared in its
most beautiful white. To complete the scene, the full moon rose at length in
that clouded majesty which Milton takes notice of, and opened to the eye a new
picture of nature, which was more finely shaded, and disposed among softer
lights, than that which the sun had before discovered to us.

As I was surveying the moon walking in her brightness, and taking her progress
among the constellations, a thought arose in me, which I believe very often
perplexes and disturbs man of a serious and contemplative nature. David himself
fell into it in that reflection, "When I consider the heavens, the work of thy
fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou have ordained; what is man, that
thou art mindful of him! and the son of man, that thou regardest him!" In the
same manner, when I consider the infinite host of stars, or, to speak more
philosophically, of suns, which were then shining upon me, with those
innumerable sets of planets or worlds which were moving round their respective
suns; when I still enlarged the idea, and supposed another heaven of suns, and
worlds rising still above this which we discovered, and these still enlightened
by a superior firmament of luminaries, which are planted at so great a
distance, that they may appear to the inhabitants of the former as the stars do
to us: in short, while I pursued this thought, I could not but reflect on that
little insignificant figure which I myself bore amidst the immensity of God's
works.

Were the sun, which enlightens this part of the creation, with all the hosts
of planetary worlds that move about him, utterly extinguished and annihilated,
they would not be missed more than a grain of sand on the sea shore. The space
they possess is so exceeding little in comparison of the whole, that it would
scarce make a blank in the creation. -- The chasm would be imperceptible to an
eye that could take in the whole compass of nature, and pass from one end of
creation to the other, as it is possible there may be such a sense in ourselves
hereafter, or in creatures which are at present more exalted than ourselves. We
see many stars by the help of glasses, which we do not discover with our naked
eye; and the finer our telescopes are, the more still are our discoveries.
Huygenius carries this thought so far, that he does not think it impossible but
there may be stars whose light has not yet traveled down to us since their
first creation. There is no question but the universe has certain bounds set to
it; but when we consider that it is the work of infinite power, prompted by
infinite goodness, with an infinite space to exert itself in, how can our
imagination set any bounds to it?

To return therefore to my first thought, I could not but look upon myself with
secret horror, as a being that was not worthy the smallest regard of one who
had so great a work under his care and superintendency. I was afraid of being
overlooked amidst the immensity of nature, and lost among that infinite variety
of creatures which in all probability swarm through all those immeasurable
regions of matter.

In order to recover myself from this mortifying thought, I considered that it
took its rise from those narrow conceptions which we are apt to entertain of
the divine nature. We ourselves cannot attend to many different objects at the
same time. If we are careful to inspect some things, we must of course neglect
others. This imperfection which we observe in ourselves, is an imperfection
which cleaves in some degree to creatures of the highest capacities, as they
are creatures, that is, beings of finite and limited natures. The presence of
every created being is confined to a certain measure of space, and consequently
his observation is stinted to a certain number of objects. The sphere in which
we move, and act, and understand, is of a wider circumference to one creature
than another, according as we rise one above another in the scale of existence.
But the widest of these our spheres has its circumference. When therefore we
reflect on the divine nature, we are so used and accustomed to this
imperfection in ourselves, that we cannot for-hear in some measure ascribing it
to Him in whom there is no shadow of imperfection. Our reason, indeed, assures
us, that his attributes are infinite; but the poorness of our conceptions is
such, that it cannot forbear setting bounds to every thing it contemplates,
until our reason comes again to our succor, and throws down all those little
prejudices which rise in us unawares, and are natural to the mind of man.

We should therefore utterly extinguish this melancholy thought, of our being
overlooked by our Maker in the multiplicity of his works, and the infinity of
these objects among which he seems to be incessantly employed; if we consider,
in the first place, that he is omnipresent; and that, in the second place, he
is omniscient.

If we consider him in his omnipresence, his being passes through, actuates,
and supports the whole frame of nature; his creation, and every part of it, is
full of him. There is nothing he has made that is either so distant, so little,
or so inconsiderable, which he does not essentially inhabit. His substance is
within the substance of every being, whether material or immaterial, and as
intimately present to it as that being is to itself. It would be an
imperfection in him, were he able to remove out of one place into another, or
to withdraw himself from any thing he has created, or from any part of that
space which is diffused and spread abroad to infinity. In short, to speak of
him in the language of the old philosopher, he is a Being whose center is every
where, and his circumference no where.

In the second place, he is omniscient as well as omnipresent. His omniscience
indeed, necessarily and naturally flows from his omnipresence; he cannot but be
conscious of every motion that arises in the whole material world, which he
thus essentially pervades, and of every thought that is stirring in the
intellectual world, to every part of which he is intimately united. Several
moralists have considered the creation as the temple of God, which he has built
with his own hand, and which is filled with his presence. Others have
considered infinite space as the receptacle, or rather the habitation of the
Almighty: but the noblest and most exalted way of considering this infinite
space, is that of Sir Isaac Newton, who calls it the Sensorium of the Godhead.
Brutes and men have their sensoriola, or little sensoriums, by which they
apprehend the presence, and perceive the actions of a few objects that lie
contiguous to them. Their knowledge and observation turn within a very narrow
circle. But as God Almighty cannot but perceive and know every thing in which
he resides, infinite space gives room to infinite knowledge, and is, as it
were, an organ to omniscience.

Were the soul separated from the body, and with one glance of thought could
start beyond the bounds of the creation; should it for millions of years
continue its progress through infinite space with the same activity, it would
still find itself within the embrace of its Creator, and encompassed round with
the immensity of the Godhead. Whilst we are in the body, he is not less present
with us, because he is concealed from us. "O that I knew where I might find
him! (says Job) Behold I go forward, but he is not there! and backward, but I
cannot perceive him. On the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold
him. He hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him." In short,
reason, as well as revelation assure us, that he cannot be absent from us,
notwithstanding he is undiscovered by us.

In this consideration of God Almighty's omnipresence and omniscience, every
uncomfortable thought vanishes. He cannot but regard every thing that has
being, especially such of his creatures who fear they are not regarded by him.
He is privy to all their thoughts, and to that anxiety of heart in particular,
which is apt to trouble them on this occasion: for, as it is impossible he
should overlook any of his creatures, so we may be confident that he regards,
with an eye of mercy, those who endeavor to recommend themselves to his
notice, and in an unfeigned humility of heart think themselves unworthy that he
should be mindful of them.

On the IMMORTALITY of the SOUL.
When my freed soul to its bright sphere shall fly,
Through b^andless orbs eternal regions spy,
And, like the sun, be all one glorious eye.
SHAKESPEARE.
I WAS yesterday walking alone in one of my friend's woods, and lost myself in
it very agreeably; as I was running over in my mind the several arguments that
establish the great point which is the basis of morality, and the source of all
the pleasing hopes and secret joys that can arise in the heart of a reasonable
creature, viz. the immortality of the soul. I considered these several proofs,
drawn,

First, From the nature of the soul itself, and particularly its immateriality;
which, though not absolutely necessary to the eternity of its duration, has, I
think, been evinced to almost a demonstration.

Secondly, From its passions and sentiments, as particularly from its love of
existence, its horror of annihilation, and its hopes of immortality; with that
secret satisfaction which it finds in the practice of virtue, and that
uneasiness which follows in it upon the commission of vice.

Thirdly, From the nature of the Supreme Being, whose justice, goodness,
wisdom, and veracity, are all concerned in this great point.

But amongst these and other excellent arguments for the immortality of the
soul, there is one drawn from the perpetual progress of the soul to its
perfection, without a possibility of ever arriving at it; which is a hint that
I do not remember to have seen opened and improved by others who have written
on this subject, though it seems to me to carry a great ^^ight with it. How can
it enter into the thought of (...) that the soul, which is capable of such
immense perfections, and of receiving new improvements to all eternity, shall
fall away into nothing almost as soon as it is created! are such abilities made
for no purpose? A brute arrives at a point of perfection that he can never
pass: in a few years he has all the endowments he is capable of, and were he to
live ten thousand more, would be the same thing ^e is at present. Were a human
soul thus at a stand in ^^s accomplishments -- were its faculties to be
f^^^^blown, and capable of no farther enlargement, I would imagine it might
fall away insensibly, and drop at once into a state of annihilation. But can we
believe a thinking being, that is in a perpetual progress of improvement, and
traveling on from perfection to perfection, after having just looked abroad
into the works of its Creator, and made a few discoveries of his infinite
goodness, wisdom, and power, must perish at its first setting out, and in the
very beginning of its inquiries?

A man, considered in his present state, seems only sent into the world to
propagate his kind. He provides himself with a successor, and immediately quits
his post to make room for him. He does not seem born to enjoy life, but to
deliver it down to others. This is not surprising to consider in animals which
are formed for our use, and can finish their business in a short life. The
silkworm after having spun her task, lays her eggs, and dies. But a man can
never have taken his full measure of knowledge; has not time to subdue his
passions, establish his soul in virtue, and come up to the perfection of his
nature, before he is hurried off the stage. Would an infinitely wise being make
such glorious creatures for so mean a purpose? Can be delight in the production
of such abortive intelligencies, such short-lived reasonable beings? Would he
give us talents that are not to be exerted? Capacities that are not to be
gratified? How can we find that wisdom, which shines through all his works, in
the formation of man, without looking on this world as only a nursery for the
next, and believing that the several generations of rational creatures, which
rise up and disappear in such quick successions, are only to receive their
first rudiments of existence here, and afterward to be transplanted into a
more friendly climate, where they may spread and flourish to all eternity?

There is not, in my opinion, a more pleasing and triumphant consideration in
religion, than this of the perpetual progress which the soul makes toward the
perfection of its nature, without ever arriving at a period in it. To look upon
the soul as going on from strength to strength; to consider that it is to shine
for ever with new accessions of glory, and brighten to all eternity; that it
will still be adding virtue to virtue, and knowledge to knowledge; carries in
it something wonderfully agreeable to that ambition which is natural to the
mind of man. Nay, it must be a prospect pleasing to God himself, to see his
creation for ever beautifying in his eyes, and drawing nearer to him by greater
degrees of resemblance.

Methinks this single consideration of the progress of a finite spirit to
perfection, will be sufficient to extinguish all envy in inferior nature, and
all contempt in superior. That cherubim which now appears as a God to a human
soul, knows very well that the period will come about in eternity, when the
human soul will be as perfect as he himself now is; nay, when it shall look
down upon that degree of perfection as much as it now falls short of it. It is
true, the higher nature still advances, he by that means preserves the distance
and superiority in the scale of beings; but he knows, how high soever the
station is of which he stands possessed at present, the inferior nature will at
length mount up to it, and shine forth in the same degree of glory.

With what astonishment and veneration may we look into our own souls, where
there are such hidden stores of virtue and knowledge, such inexhausted sources
of perfection! we know not yet what we shall be; nor will it ever enter into
the heart of man to conceive the glory that will be always in reserve for him.
The soul, considered with its Creator, is like one of those mathematical lines
that may draw nearer to one another to all eternity, without a possibility of
touching it: and can there be a thought so transporting, as to consider
ourselves in these perpetual approaches to him, who is not only the standard of
perfection, but of happiness?

On the VICISSITUDE of MATERIAL BEINGS.
Where is the dust that has not been alive?
The spade, the plough, disturb our ancestors;
From human mould we reap our daily bread.
YOUNG.
IN a late conversation among some of the great and the wise, Thereon, a man of
wealth and figure, but unacquainted with the philosophic science, sat in the
midst of his friends of both sexes in a stately room, with rich variety of
furniture. Thereon complained, that he had often heard it said how much we were
all indebted to the country and the plough: but, for his part, he knew no
obligation that we had to that low rank of mankind, whose life is taken up in
the fields, the woods, and the meadows; but that they paid their rents well,
that the gentlemen might live at their ease. Crito was pleased to seize the
occasion, and entertained the gay audience with a surprising lecture of
philosophy.

"Permit me, Thereon, said he, to be an advocate for the peasant, and I can draw
up a long account of particulars for which you are indebted to the field and
the forest, and to the men that cultivate the ground, and are engaged in rural
business. Look around you on all the furniture of the room, survey your own
clothing, cast your eyes on all the splendid array of Therina and Persis, and
the other ladies near them, and you will find, that, except a few glittering
stones, and a little gold and silver which were dug out of the bowels of the
earth, you can scarce see any thing that was not once growing green upon the
ground, through the various labors of the planter and the ploughman. Whence
came the floor you tread on, part where of is inlaid with wood of different
colors? Whence these fair pannels of wainscot, and the cornice that
encompasses and adorns the room? Whence this lofty room of cedar, and the
carved ornaments of it? Are they not all the spoils of the trees of the forest?
Were not these once the verdant standard of the grove or mountain? What are
your hangings of gay tapestry? Are they not owing to the fleece of the sheep,
which borrowed their nourishment from the grass of the meadows? Thus the finery
of your parlour once was grass: and should you favor me with a turn into your
bedchamber, I could show that the curtains, and the linen, and costly
coverings, where you take your nightly repose, were some years ago all growing
in the fields.

But I need not retire from the place where we are seated, to give you abundant
discoveries of this truth: is not the hair of camels a part of the materials
which compose those rich curtains which hang down by the windows, and the easy
chairs which accommodate your friends? And if you think a little, you will find
that camels, with their hair, were made of grass, as well as the sheep with
their wool. What are the books that lie in the window, and the little
implements of paper and wax, pens, and wafers, which I presume may be found in
the escrutore? They have all the same original; they were once more vegetables.
Paper and books owe their being to the tatters of linen which were woven of the
threads of flax, or hemp. The pasteboard covers are composed of paper, and the
leather is the skin of the calf, that drew its life and sustenance from the
meadows. The pen that you write with was plucked from the wing of the goose,
which lived upon the grass of the common: the inkhorn was borrowed from the
front of the grazing ox: the wafer is made of the paste of bread-corn; and the
wax is originally plundered from the be, who stole it out of a thousand
flowers.

Permit me, ladies, said the philosopher, to mention your dress; too nice a
subject indeed for a scholar to pretend any skill in: but I persuade myself
your candor will not resent my naming the rich materials, since I leave those
more important points, the fashion and the air, to be decided entirely by your
superior skill. Shall I inquire, then, who gave Persis the silken habit which
she wears? Did she not borrow it from the worm that spun those shining threads?
And whence did the worm borrow it? From the leaves of the Mulberry-tree, which
was planted and nourished for this purpose by the country swain. May I ask
again, How came Therina by the fine linen which she is pleased to appear in,
and the costly lace of Flanders that surrounds it? Was it not made of the
stalks of flax that grew up in the field like other vegetables? And are not the
finest of your muslins owing to the Indian cotton-tree? Nor can you tell me,
Thereon, one upper garment you have, whether co^^, cloak, or night gown, from
your shoulders to your very feet, as rich and as new as you think it, which the
sheep, or the poor silkworm has not worn before you. It is certain the beaver
bore your hat upon his skin; that soft fur was his covering before it was
yours: and the materials of your very shoes, both the upper part and the soles
of them, cover the calf of the heifer before they were put on your feet: all
this was grass at first; for we have seen that all the animal world owes its
being to vegetables.

Give me leave, Madam, said he to Therina, without offense, to lead you into
further wonder. You have seen that the furniture of the place where we are, as
well as precious attire in which you are dressed, were lately the production,
and the ornament of the forest, the meadow, or the garden. But could you
forgive me, if I should attempt to persuade you, that this beautiful body of
yours, those lovely limbs, were once growing also in the fields and meadows? I
see, Ladies, you are a little shocked and surprised at the thought. I confess
the idea and sentiments of philosophy are not always so courtly and so
favorable to huma^ nature, as to be addressed to the tender sex: but pardon
me, Therina, if I inquire, Was not your infancy nursed with milk and
bread-corn? Have you not been fed with wheat, though it was of the finest kind?
And your drink, what has it been, but either the infusion of barley, or the
juice of the grape? Or, for variety, perhaps the cider grove has supplied you.
The flesh with which you have been nourished to such a well proportioned
stature, belonged to four footed animals, or to the fowls of the air; and each
of these have been either fed with corn or grass. Whence then, Madam, has your
body been supported, and what do you think it is made of?

But it is safer to transfer the argument to myself. These limbs of mine,
Therina, owe themselves entirely to the animal and vegetable food, to the
roots, or the stalks, or the leaves, or the fruit of plants, or the flesh of
the brute creatures, which have passed through my mouth for these fifty years,
or the mouth of my parents before me. This hand would have been worn to a mere
skeleton, my arms had been dry bones, and my trunk and ribs the statue of
death, had they not all received perpetual recruits from the field. These lips
which now address you, are of the same materials, and they were once growing
like the grass on the earth. This very flesh, which I call mine now, did belong
to the sheep or the ox before it was part of me; and it served to clothe those
bones before it covered mine. You know, Thereon, you are a gentleman who delight
in rural sports, when you reside at your country seat, and you love to feast on
the game that you have pursued. Did you ever suppose that any part of yourself
was once hurried through the air in the breast of a frightened partridge, which
came before night into your net? Or that any piece of you was driven through
the fields before the full-mouthed hounds on the legs of a hunted hare, which
was the next day prepared for your table? Had you ever so strange a thought as
this? And can you believe it now? Or, upon a survey of that argument, can you
tell how to deny it? And what are hares and partridges made of, but growing
herbage, or shattered corn?

It is true, you have sometimes tasted fish, either from the sea or rivers, but
even those in their original are also sorts of grass; they have been fed partly
by sea-weeds, and partly by lesser fish, which they have devoured, whose prime
and natural nourishment was from some vegetable matter in the watery world. In
short, Sir, I am free to declare, that whether I have eaten cheese or butter,
bread or milk, whether I have fed on the ox or the sheep, or the fowls of the
air, I am certain that this body, and these limbs of mine, even to my teeth and
nails, and the hairs of my head, are all borrowed originally from the vegetable
creation. Every thing of me that is not a thinking power, that is not mind, or
spirit, was once growing like grass on the ground, or was made of the roots
which supported some green herbage.

And now, Thereon, What do you think of all these paradoxes? Which of them do
you cavil at? Which leaves you room for doubt or question? Is not philosophy an
entertaining study, that teaches us our original, and the astonishing
operations of divine Wisdom and Providence? But it teaches us also to have
humble thoughts of ourselves, and to remember from whence we came. Thereon, to
conclude the discourse, confessed his surprise and conviction; he acknowledged
the justice of Crito's whole argument, gave him hearty thanks for his
instructive lecture, and resolved to remember those amazing scenes of the
operations of nature, and the adorable wisdom of God his Maker. Nor shall I
ever forget, said he, the strange and unexpected dependence of man on all the
meaner parts of the creation. I am convinced, that pride was never made for
man, when I see how much akin his body is to the fowls of the air and brutes
of the earth. And I think, said he, I am more indebted to my tenants than ever
I could have imagined; nor will I cast such a scornful eye again on the grazier
and the farmer, since this flesh and blood of mine, as well as the furniture of
my house, and the clothes I wear, were once growing in the fields or woods,
under their care and cultivation; and I find I am nearer akin to them, since
this self of mine, with all the finery that covers it, was made originally of
the same materials with them and their coarser coverings.

One the CHOICE of present and future HAPPINESS and MISERY.
The wint'ry blasts of death
Kill not the buds of virtue: no, they spread
Beneath the heavenly beams of brighter suns,
Through endless ages into brighter powers
THOMSON.
ALEWD young fellow seeing an aged Hermit go by him barefooted, Father, says
he, you are in a very miserable condition, if there is not another world. True,
son, said the Hermit, but what is thy condition if there is? Man is a creature
designed for two different states of being, or rather for two different lives.
His first life is short and transient; his second permanent and lasting. The
question we are all concerned in is this. In which of these two lives is it our
chief interest to make ourselves happy? Or, in other words, whether we should
endeavor to secure to ourselves the pleasures and gratifications of a life
which is uncertain and precarious, and at its utmost length of a very
inconsiderable duration; or secure to ourselves the pleasures of a life which
is fixed and settled, and will never end? Every man, upon the first hearing of
this question, knows very well which side of it he ought to close with. But,
however right we are in theory, it is plain that in practice we adhere to the
wrong side of the question. We make provision for this life, as though it were
never to have an end; and for the other life, as though it were never to have a
beginning.

Should a spirit of superior rank, who is a stranger to human nature,
accidentally alight upon the earth, and take a new survey of its inhabitants;
what would his notions of us be? Would not he think that we are a species of
beings made for quite different ends and purposes than what we really are; must
not he imagine, that we are placed in this world to get riches and honors?
Would not he think that it was our duty to toil after wealth, and station, and
title? Nay, would not he believe we are forbidden poverty by threats of eternal
punishment, and enjoined to pursue our pleasures under pain of damnation? He
would certainly imagine, that we are influenced by a scheme of duties quite
opposite to those which are indeed prescribed to us. And truly, according to
such an imagination, he must conclude, that we are a species of most obedient
creatures in the universe; that we are constant to our duty; and that we keep a
steady eye on the end for which we were sent hither.

But how great would be his astonishment, when he learned that we were beings
not designed to exist in this world above three score and ten years; and that
the greatest part of this busy species fall short even of that age? How would
he be lost in horror and admiration, when he should know that this set of
creatures, who lay out all their endeavors for this life, which scarce
deserves the name of existence; when, I say, he should know that this set of
creatures are to exist to all eternity in another life for which they make no
preparations? Nothing can be a greater disgrace to reason, than that men, who
are persuaded of these two different states of being, should be perpetually
employed in providing for a life of threescore and ten years, and neglecting to
make provision for that which, after many myriads of years, will be still new,
and still in its beginning, especially when we consider that our endeavors for
making ourselves great, rich, or honorable, or whatever else we place our
happiness in, may after all prove unsuccessful; whereas, if we constantly and
sincerely endeavor to make ourselves happy in the other life, we are sure that
our endeavors will succeed, and that we shall not be disappointed of our hope.

The following question is started by one of the schoolmen: -- Supposing the
whole body of the earth were a great ball or mass of the finest sand, and that
a single grain or particle of this sand should be annihilated every thousand
years. Supposing then that you had it in your choice to be happy all the while
this prodigious mass of sand ^^s consuming by this slow method, till there was
no grain of it left, on condition you were to be miserable ever after, or
supposing that you might be happy for ever after; on condition you should be
miserable till the whole mass of sand were thus annihilated at the rate of one
grain in a thousand years: which of these two cases would you make your choice?

It must be confessed, in this case, so many thousands of years are to the
imagination as a kind of eternity, though in reality they do not bear so great
a proportion to that duration which is to follow them, as an unit does to the
greatest number which you can put together in figures, or as one of those
grains of sand to the supposed heap. Reason, therefore tells us, without any
manner of hesitation, which would be the better part in this choice. However,
as I have before intimated, our reason might in such a case be so overset by
the imagination, as to dispose some persons to sink under the consideration of
the great length of the first part of this duration, and of the great distance
of that second duration which is to succeed it. The mind, I say, might give
itself to that happiness which is at hand, considering that it is so very near,
and that it would last so very long. But when the choice we actually have
before us is this, Whether we will choose to be happy for the space of only
threescore and ten, nay perhaps of only twenty or ten years, I might say of
only a day or an hour, and miserable to all eternity; or, on the contrary,
miserable for this short term of years, and happy for a whole eternity? What
words are sufficient to express that folly and want of consideration, which in
such a case would make a wrong choice!

I here put a case even at the worst, by supposing (what seldom happens) that a
course of virtue makes us miserable in this life: but if we suppose (as it
generally happens) that virtue would make us more happy, even in this life,
than a contrary course of vice, how can we sufficiently condemn the stupidity
or madness of those persons who are capable of making so absurd a choice?

Every wise man therefore will consider this life only as it may conduce to the
happiness of the other, and cheerfully sacrifice the pleasures of a few years
to those of an eternity.

The MOUNTAIN of MISERIES. A VISION.
-- By outward show,
Men judge of happiness and woe;
Seek virtue -- and of that possessed,
To Providence resign the rest.
GAY.
IT is a celebrated thought of Socrates, That if all the misfortunes of mankind
were cast into a public stock, in order to be equally distributed among the
whole species, those who now think themselves the most unhappy, would prefer
the share they are already possessed of, before that which would fall to them
by such a proper division. Horace has carried this thought a great deal
further; which implies, that the hardships or misfortunes we lie under, are
more easy to us than those of any other person would be, in case we should
change conditions with him.

As I was ruminating on these two remarks, and seated in my elbow chair, I
insensibly fell asleep; when, on a sudden, me thought there was a proclamation
made by Jupiter, that every mortal should bring in his griefs and calamities,
and throw them together in a heap. There was a large plain appointed for this
purpose. I took my stand in the center of it, and saw with a great deal of
pleasure the whole human species marching one after another, and throwing down
their several loads, which immediately grew up into a prodigious mountain, that
seemed to rise above the clouds.

There was a certain lady, of a thin airy shape, who was very active in this
solemnity. She carried a magnifying glass in one of her hands, and was clothed
in a loose flowing robe embroidered with several figures of fiends and
specter, that discovered themselves in a thousand chimerical shapes, as her
garment hovered in the wind. There was something wild and distracted in her
looks. Her name was Fancy. She led up every mortal to the appointed place,
after having very officiously assisted him in making up his pack, and laying it
upon his shoulders. My heart melted within me to see my fellow creatures
groaning under their respective burdens, and to consider that prodigious bulk
of human calamities which lay before me.

There were, however, several persons who gave, me great diversion upon this
occasion. I observed one bringing in a fardel very carefully concealed under an
old embroidered cloak, which, upon his throwing it upon the heap, I discovered
it to be Poverty. Another, after a great deal of puffing, threw down his
luggage; which, upon examining, I found to be his wife.

There were multitudes of lovers saddled with very whimsical burdens, composed
of darts and flames; but what was very odd, though they sighed as if their
heart would break under these bundles of calamities, they could not persuade
themselves to cast them into the heap when they came up to it; but after a few
faint efforts shook their heads, and marched away as heavy loaded as they came.
I saw multitudes of old women throw down wrinkles, and several young ones who
stripped themselves of a tawny skin. There were very great heaps of red noses,
large lips, and ^^^ty teeth. The truth of it is, I was surprised to see the
greatest part of the mountain made up of bodily deformities. Observing one
advance toward the heap with a larger cargo than ordinary upon his back, I
found upon his nearer approach, that it was only a natural hump, which he
disposed of with great joy of heart among this collection of human miseries.
There were likewise distempers of all sorts, though I could not but observe
that there were many more imaginary than real. One little packet I could not
but take notice (...), which was a complication of all the diseases incident to
human nature, and was in the hand of a great many fine people: this was called
the Spleen. But what most of all surprised me, was a remark I made, that there
was not a single vice or folly thrown into the whole heap: at which I was very
much astonished, having concluded within myself, that every one would take this
opportunity of getting rid of his passions, prejudices, and frailties.

I took notice in particular of a very profligate fellow, who I did not
question came loaded with his crimes; but upon searching into his bundle, I
found, that instead of throwing his guilt from him, he had only laid down his
memory. He was followed by another worthless rogue, who flung away his modesty
instead of his ignorance.

When the whole race of mankind had thus cast down their burdens, the Phantom,
which had been so busy on this occasion, seeing me an idle spectator of what
passed, approached toward me. I grew uneasy at her presence, when on a sudden
she held her magnifying glass full before mine eyes. I no sooner saw my face in
it, but was startled at the shortness of it, which now appeared to me in the
utmost aggravation. The immoderate breadth of the features made me very much
out of humor with my own countenance, upon which I threw it from me like a
mask. It happened very luckily that one who stood by me had just before thrown
down his visage, which it seems was too long for him. It was indeed extended to
a most shameful length: I believe the very chin was, (modestly speaking) as
long as my whole face. We had both of us an opportunity of mending ourselves;
and all the contributions being now brought in, every man was at liberty to
change his misfortunes for those of another person. But as there arose many new
incidents in the sequel of my vision, I shall reserve them for the subject of
my next paper.

The VISION continued.
All gracious Providence is good and wise,
Alike in what it gives, and what denies.
POPE.
IN my last paper, I gave my readers a sight of that mountain of miseries which
was made up of those several calamities that afflict the minds of men: I saw,
with unspeakable pleasure, the whole species thus delivered from its sorrows;
though, at the same time, as we stood round the heap, and surveyed the several
materials of which it was composed, there was scarce a mortal, in this vast
multitude, who did not discover what he thought pleasures and blessings of
life; and wondered how the owners of them ever came to look upon them as
burdens and griev^nces.

As we were regarding very attentively this confusion of miseries, this chaos
of calamity, Jupiter issued out a second proclamation, that every one was now
at ^^^erty to change his affliction, and to return to his habitation with any
other such bundle as should be delivered to him.

Upon this, Fancy began to bestir herself, and parcelling up the whole heap
with incredible activity, recommended to every one his particular packet. The
hurry and confusion at this time was not to be expressed. Some observations
which I made upon this occasion I shall communicate to the public. A venerable
grey-headed man, who had laid down the cholic, and who I found wanted in heir
to his estate, snatched up an undutiful son, that had been thrown into the heap
by an angry father. -- The graceless youth, in less than a quarter of an hour,
pulled the old gentleman by the beard, and had like to have knocked his brains
out; so that meeting the true father, who came toward him in a fit of the
gripes, he begged him to take his son again, and give him back his chon^; but
they were incapable either of them to recede from the choice they had made. A
poor galley-slave, who had thrown down his chains, took up the gout in their
stead; but made such wry faces, that one might easily perceive he was no great
gainer by the bargain. It was pleasant enough to see the several exchanges that
were made for sickness against poverty, hunger against want of appetite, and
care against pain.

The female world were very busy among themselves in bartering for features:
one was trucking a lock of gray hairs for a carbuncle; another was making over
a short waist for a pair of round shoulders, and a third cheapening a bad face
for a lost reputation: but on all these occasions, there was not one of them
who did not think the new blemish, as soon as she had got it into her
possession much more disagreeable than the old one. I made the same observation
on every other misfortune or calamity, which every one in the assembly brought
upon himself, in lies of what he had parted with: whether it be that all the
evils which befall us are in some measure suited and proportioned to our
strength, or that every ill becomes more supportable by our being accustomed to
it, I shall not determine.

I could not from my heart forbear pitying the poor humpbacked gentleman
mentioned in the former paper, who went off a very well-shaped person with a
stone in his bladde^; nor the fine gentleman who had struck up a bargain with
him that limped through the whole assembly of ladies, who used to admire him,
with a pair of shoulders peeping over his head.

I must not omit my own particular adventure. My friend with the long visage
had no sooner taken upon him my short face, but he made such a grotesque figure
in it, that as I looked upon him I could not forbear laughing at myself,
insomuch that I put my own face out of countenance. The poor gentleman was so
sensible of the ridicule, that I found he was ashamed of what he had done: on
the other side, I found that I myself had got no great reason to triumph; for
as I went to touch my forehead, I missed the place, and clapped my finger on my
upper lip. Besides, as my nose was exceeding prominent, I gave it two or three
unlucky knocks, as I was playing my hand about my face, and aiming at some
other part of it. I saw two other gentlemen by me, who were in the same
ridiculous circumstances. These had made a foolish swap between a couple of
thick bandy legs, and two long trap-sticks that had no calves to them. One of
these looked like a man walking upon stilts, and was so lifted up in the air
above his ordinary height, that his head turned round with it; while the other
made such auk-ward circles as he attempted to walk, that he scarce knew how to
move forward upon his new supporters. Observing him to be a very pleasant kind
of a fellow, I stuck my cane into the ground, and told him I would lay him a
bottle of wine that he did not march up to it on a line, that I drew for him,
in a quarter of an hour.

The heap was at last distributed among the two sexes, who made a most piteous
sight, as they wandered up and down under the pressure of their several
burdens. The whole plain was filled with murmurs and complaints, groans and
lamentations. Jupiter at length, taking compassion upon the poor mortals,
ordered them a second time to lay down their loads, with a design to give every
one his own again. They discharged them with a great deal of pleasure; after
which the Phantom, which had led them into such gross delusion, was commanded
to disappear. There was sent in her stead a goddess of a quite different
figure: Her motions were steady and composed, and her aspect serious and
cheerful. She every now and then cast her eyes toward heaven, and fixed them
upon Jupiter. Her name was Patience. She had no sooner, placed herself by the
Mount of Sorrows, but, what I thought very remarkable, the whole heap sunk to
such a degree, that it did not appear a third part so big as it was before. She
after wards returned every man his own proper calamity, and teaching him how to
bear it in the most commodious manner, he marched off with it contentedly,
being very well pleased that he had not been left to his own choice as to the
kind of evils which fell to his lot.

Besides the several pieces of morality to be drawn out of this vision, I
learnt from it, never to repine at my own misfortunes, or to envy the happiness
of another, since it is impossible for any man to form a right judgment of his
neighbor's sufferings; for which reason also I have determined never to think
too lightly of another's complaints, but to regard the sorrows of my
fellow creatures with sentiments of humanity and compassion.

The VISION of ALMET. An EASTERN STORY.
Fortune her gifts may variously dispose;
And these be happy called, unhappy those;
But heaven's just balance equal will appear,
While these are placed in hope, and those in fear.
POPE.
ALMET the Dervise, who watched the sacred lamp, in the sepulcher of the
prophet, as he one day role from the devotions of the morning, which he had
performed at the gate of the temple, with his body turned toward the cast, and
his forehead upon the earth, saw before him a man in splendid apparel, attended
by a long retinue, who gazed steadfastly upon him with a look of mournful
complacency, and seemed desirous to speak, but unwilling to offend.

The Dervise, after a short silence, advanced, and saluting him with the calm
dignity which independence confers upon humility, requested that he would
reveal his purpose.

"Almet, said the stranger, thou see before thee a man whom the hand of
Prosperity has overwhelmed with wretchedness. Whatever I once desired as the
means of happiness I now possess; but I am not yet happy, and therefore I
despair. I regret the lapse of time, because it glides away without enjoyment;
and as I expect nothing in the future but the vanity of the past, I do not wish
it should arrive. Yet I tremble lest it should be cut off; and my heart sinks
when I anticipate the moment, in which eternity shall close^^over the vacuity
of my life, like the seas upon the path of a ship, and leave no traces of my
existence more durable than the furrow which remains after the waves have
united. If, in the treasures of wisdom, there is any precept to obtain
felicity, vouchsafe it to me: for this purpose have I come; a purpose which yet
I fear to reveal, left, like all the former, it should be disappointed." Almet
listened with looks of astonishment and pity, to this complaint of a being, in
whom reason was known to be a pledge of immortality: but the serenity of his
countenance soon returned; and stretching out his hands toward heaven,
"Stranger," said he, "the knowledge which I have received from the prophet I
will communicate to thee."

"As I was sitting once at the porch of the temple, pensive and alone, mine
eyes wandered among the multitude that was scattered before me; and while-I
remarked the wariness and solicitude which was visible in every countenance, I
was suddenly struck with a sense of their condition. Wretched mortals, said I,
to what purpose are you busy? If to produce happiness, by whom is it enjoyed?
Do the linens of Egypt, and the silks of Persia bestow felicity on those who
wear them, equal to the wretchedness of yonder slaves whom I see leading the
camels that bring them? Is the fineness of the texture, or the splendour of the
tints, regarded with delight by those to whom custom has rendered them
familiar? Or can the power of habit render others insensible of pain, who live
only to traverse the desert; a scene of dreadful uniformity, where a barren
level is bounded only by the horizon; where no change of prospect nor variety
of images, relieve the traveller from a sense of toil, and danger of
whirlwinds, which in a moment may bury him in the ^and; and of thirst, which
the wealthy have given half their possessions to allay? Do those on whom
hereditary diamonds sparkle with unregarded luster, gain from the possession
what is lost by the wretch who seeks them in the mine? -- Who lives excluded
from the common bounties of nature; to whom even the vicissitude of day and
night is not known; who signs in perpetual darkness, and whose life is one
mournful alternative of insensibility and labor? If those are not happy who
possess in proportion as those are wretched who bestow, how vain a dream is the
life of man! and if there is indeed such difference in the value of existence,
how shall we acquit of partiality the hand by which this difference has been
made?

"While my thoughts thus multiplied, and my heart burnt within me, I became
sensible of a sudden influence from above. The streets and the crowds of Mecca
disappeared. I found myself sitting on the declivity of a mountain, and
perceived at my right hand an angel, whom I knew to be Azoran, the minister of
reproof. When I saw him I was afraid. I cast my eyes upon the ground, and was
about to deprecate his anger, when he commanded me to be silent. "Almet, said
he, thou have devoted thy life to meditation, that thy counsel might deliver
ignorance from the mazes of error, and deter presumption from the precipice of
guilt; but the book of nature thou have read without understanding: it is again
open before thee; look up, consider it, and be wise."

"I looked up, and beheld an enclosure, beautiful as the gardens of paradise,
but of a small extent. Through the middle there was a green walk; at the end a
wild desert; and beyond, impenetrable darkness. The walk was shaded with trees
of every kind, that were covered at once with blossoms and fruit; innumerable
birds were singing in the branches; the grass was intermingled with flowers,
which impregnated the breeze with fragrance, and painted the path with beauty:
on the one side flowed a gentle transparent stream, which was just heard to
murmur over the golden sands that sparkled at the bottom; and on the other were
walks and bowers, fountains, grottos, and cascades, which diversified the scene
with endless variety, but did not conceal the bounds."

"While I was gazing in a transport of delight and wonder on this enchanting
spot, I perceived a man stealing along the walk with a thoughtful and
deliberate pace: his eyes were fixed upon the earth, and his arms crossed on
his bosom; he sometimes started as if a sudden pang had seized him; his
countenance expressed solicitude and terror: he looked round with a sigh, and
having gazed a moment on the desert that lay before him, he seemed as if he
wished to stop, but was impelled forward by some insensible power: his
features, however, soon settled again into a calm melancholy; his eyes were
again fixed on the ground, and he went on as before with apparent reluctance,
but without emotion. I was struck with this appearance; and turning hastily to
the angel, was about to inquire what could produce such infelicity in a being
surrounded with every object that could gratify every sense; but he prevented
my request: "The book of nature, said he, is before thee; look up, consider it
and be wise." I looked, and beheld a valley between two mountains that were
craggy and barren: on the path there was, no verdure, and the mountains
afforded no shade: the sun burnt in the zenith, and every spring was dried up:
but the valley terminated in a country that was pleasant and fertile, shaded
with woods, and adorned with buildings. At a second view, I discovered a man in
this valley, meagre indeed and naked, but his countenance was cheerful, and his
deportment active: he kept his eye fixed upon the country before him, and
looked as if he would have run, but that he was restrained, as the other had
been impelled, by some secret influence: sometimes, indeed, I perceived a
sudden expression of pain, and sometimes he stepped short as if his foot was
pierced by the asperities of the way; but the sprightliness of his countenance
instantly returned, and he passed forward without appearance of repining or
complaint."

I turned again toward the angel, impatient to inquire from what secret source
happiness was derived, in a situation so different from that in which it might
have been expected? But he again prevented my request: "Almet, said he,
remember what thou have seen, and let this memorial be written upon the tablet
of thine heart. Remember, Almet, that the world in which thou art placed is but
the road to another; and that happiness depends not upon the path, but the end.
The value of this period of thy existence is fixed by hope and fear. The wretch
who wished to linger in the garden, who looked round upon its limits with
terror, was destitute of enjoyment, because he was destitute of hope, and was
perpetually tormented by the dread of losing that which he did not enjoy. The
song of the birds had been repeated till it was not heard, and the flowers had
so often recurred, that their beauty was not seen; the river glided by
unnoticed, and he feared to lift his eye to the prospect, left he should behold
the waste that circumscribed it. But he that toiled through the valley was
happy, because he looked forward with hope. Thus, to the sojourner upon earth,
it is of little moment, whether the path he treads be strewed with flowers or
with thorns, if he perceive himself to approach those regions, in comparison of
which the thorns and the flowers of this wilderness lose their distinction, and
are both alike impotent to give pleasure or pain.

"What then has Eternal Wisdom unequally distributed? That which can make every
station happy, and without which every station must be wretched, is acquired by
virtue; and virtue is possible to all. Remember, Almet, the vision which thou
have seen; and let my words be written on the tablet of thy heart, that thou
may direct the wanderer to happiness, and justify God to man."

While the voice of Azoran was yet founding in my ear, the prospect vanished
from before me, and I found myself again sitting at the porch of the temple.
The sun was gone down, the multitude was retired to rest, and the solemn quiet
of midnight concurred with the resolution of my doubts to complete the
tranquillity of my mind.

Such, my son, was the vision which the prophet vouchsafed me, not for my sake
only, but for thine. Thou have sought felicity in temporal things; and
therefore thou art disappointed. Let not instruction be lost upon thee; but go
thy way, let thy flock clothe the naked, and thy table feed the hungry; deliver
the po^^ from oppression, and let thy conversation be above. Thus shall thou
rejoice in hope, and look forward to the end of life as the consummation of thy
felicity.

Almet, in whose breast devotion kindled as he spoke, returned into she temple,
and the stranger departed in peace.

On OMENS.
Alas! you know the cause too well;
The salt is spilt, to me it fell;
Then to contribute to my loss,
The knife and fork were laid across.
Last night, I vow to heaven it is true,
Bounce from the fire a coffin flew.
GAY.
GOING yesterday to dine with an old acquaintance, I had the misfortune to find
his whole family very much dejected. Upon asking him the occasion of it, he
told me that his wife had dreamt a very strange dream the night before, which
they were afraid portended some misfortune to themselves or to their children.
At her coming into the room I observed a settled melancholy in her countenance,
which I should have been troubled for, had I not heard from whence it
proceeded. We were no sooner set down, but after having looked upon me a little
while, "My dear, says she, turning to her husband, you may now see the stranger
that was in the candle last night." Soon after this, as they began to talk of
family affairs, a little boy at the other end of the table told her, that he
was to go into joining hand on Thursday: "Thursday! says she, no child, if it
please God, you shall not begin upon Childer^as-day; tell your writing-master
that Friday will be soon enough." I was reflecting within myself on the oddness
of her fancy, and wondering that any body would establish it as a rule to lose
a day in every week. In the midst of these my musings, she desired me to reach
her a little salt upon the point of my knife, which I did, in such a
trepidation and hurry of obedience, that I let it drop by the way; at which she
immediately startled, and said it fell toward her.

Upon this I looked very black; and observing the concern of the whole table,
began to consider myself, with some confusion, as a person that had brought a
disaster upon the family. The lady, however, recovering herself, after a little
space, said to her husband, with a sigh, "My dear, misfortunes never come
single." My friend, I found, acted but an under part at his table, and being a
man of more good nature than understanding, thinks himself obliged to fall in
with all the passions and humors of his yoke fellow: "^o you remember, child,
said she, that the pigeon-house ^ell the very afternoon that our careless wench
spilt the salt upon the table!" "yes, says he, my dear, and the nex^^^ost
brought us an account of the battle of Almanza." The reader may guess at the
figure I made, after having done all this mischief. I dispatched my dinner as
fast as I could, with my usual taciturnity; when, to my utter confusion, the
lady seeing me quitting my knife and fork, and laying them across one another
upon my plate, desired me that I would humor her so far as to take them out of
that figure, and place them side by side. What the absurdity was which I had
committed I did not know, but I suppose there was some traditionary
superstition in it; and therefore, in obedience to the lady of the house, I
disposed of my knife and fork in two parallel lines, which is a figure I shall
always lay them in for the future, though I do not know any reason for it.

It is not difficult for a man to see that a person has conceived an aversion
to him. For my own part, I quickly found, by the lady's looks, that she
regarded me as a very odd kind of a fellow, with an unfortunate aspect: for
which reason I took my leave immediately after dinner, and withdrew to my own
lodgings. Upon my return home, I fell into a profound contemplation on the
evils that attend those superstitious follies of mankind; how they subject us
to imaginary afflictions, and additional sorrows, that do not properly come
within our lot. As if the natural calamities of life were not sufficient for
it, we turn the most indifferent circumstances into misfortunes, and suffer as
much from trifling accidents as from real evils. I have known the shooting of a
star spoil a night's rest; and have seen a man in love grow pale and lose his
appetite, upon the plucking of a merry thought. A screech owl at midnight has
alarmed a family more than a band of robbers; nay, the voice of a cricket has
struck more terror than the roaring of a lion. There is nothing so
inconsiderable, which may not appear dreadful to an imagination filled with
omens and prognostics. A rusty nail, or crooked pin, shoots up into prodigies.

I remember I was once in a mixed assembly, that was full of noise and mi^^^,
when on a sudden an old woman unluckily observed there were thirteen of us in
company. The remark struck a panic of terror into several who were present,
insomuch that one or two of the ladies were going to leave the room; but a
friend of mine taking notice that one of our female companions was big with
child, affirmed there were fourteen in the room, and that instead of portending
that one of the company should die, it plainly foretold that one of them should
be (...). Had not my friend found this experiment to break the omen, I question
not but half the women in the company would have fallen sick that very night.

An old maid, that is troubled with the vapors, produces infinite disturbances
of this kind among her friends and neighbors. I knew a maiden aunt of a great
family, who is one of those antiquated sibyls, that forebodes and prophesies
from one end of the year to the other. She is always seeing apparitions, and
hearing dead watches; and was the other day almost frightened out of her wits
by the great house-dog, that howled in the stable at the time when she lay ill
of the toothache.

Such an extravagant cast of mind engages multitudes of people, not only in
impertinent terror, but in supernumerary duties of life; and arises from (...)
fear and ignorance which are natural to the soul of man. The horror with which
we entertain the thought^ of death, (or indeed of any future evil) and the
uncertainty of its approach, fill a melancholy mind with innumerable
apprehensions and suspicions, and consequently dispose it to the observation of
such groundless prod^^ies and predictions. For, as it is the chief concern of
wise men, to retrench the evils of life by the reasonings of philosophy, it is
the employment of fools to multiply them by the sentiments of superstition.

For my own part, I should be very much troubled were I endowed with this
divining quality, though it should inform me truly of every thing that can
befall me: I would not anticipate the relish of any happiness, nor feel the
weight of any misery, before it actually arrives.

I know but one way of fortifying my soul against th^se gloomy presages and
terrors of mind; and that is, by securing to myself the friendship and
protection of that Being, who disposes of events, and governs futurity. He
sees, at one view, the whole thread of my existence; not only that part of it
which I have already passed through, but that which runs forward into all the
depths of eternity. When I lay me down to sleep, I recommend myself to his
care; when I awake, I give myself up to his direction. Amidst all the evils
that threaten me, I will look up to him (...) help, and question not but he
will either avert, or turn them to my advantage. Though I know neither the time
nor the manner of the death I am to die, I am not at all solicitous about it;
because I am sure that he knows them both, and that he will not fail to comfort
and support me under them.

On GHOSTS and APPARITIONS.
When apparitions fill the mind.
The (...)'s unnerv'd, and reason's blind.
R.
I REMEMBER last winter there were several young girls of the neighborhood
sitting about the fire with my landlady's daughters, and telling stories of
spirits (...) apparitions. Upon my opening the door, the young women broke off
their discourse; but my landlady's daughter telling them that it was no body
but the gentleman, (for that is the name I go by in the neighborhood, as well
as in the family) they went on without minding me. I seated myself by the
candle that stood on a table at one end of the room; and pretending to read a
book that I took out of my pocket, heard several dreadful stories of ghosts as
pale as-ashes that had stood at the foot of a be^ or walked over a churchyard
by moonlight; and of others that had been conjured into the Red Sea, for
disturbing people's rest, and drawing their curtains at midnight; with many
other old women's ^ables of the like nature. As one spirit raised another, I
observed that at the end of every story the whole company closed their ranks,
and crowded about the fire. I took notice, in particular, of a little boy, who
was so attentive to every story, that I am mistaken if he ventures to go to bed
by himself these twelve months. Indeed they talked so long, that the
imaginations of the who^^ assembly were manifestly crazed, and I am sure will
be the worse for it as long as they live. I heard one of the girls, that had
looked upon me over her shoulder, asking the company how long I had been in the
room, and whether I did not look paler than I used to do. This put me under
some apprehensions that I should be forced to explain myself, if I did not
retire; for which reason I took the candle in my hand, and went up into my
chamber, not without wondering at this unaccountable weakness in reasonable
creatures, that they should love to astonish and terrify one another. Were I a
father, I should take particular care to preserve my children from these little
horrors of imagination which they are apt to contract when they are young, and
are not able to ^^ake off when they are in years. I have known a soldier that
has entered a breach, affrighted at his own shadow, and look pale at a little
scratching at his door, who the day before had marched up against a battery of
cannon. There are instances of persons who have been terrified even to
distraction at the figure of a tree, or the shaking of a bull-rush. The truth
of it is, I look upon a ^ound imagination as the greatest blessing of life,
next to a clear judgment and a good conscience. In the mean time, since there
are very few whose minds are not more or less subject to those dreadful
thoughts and apprehensions, we ought to arm ourselves against them by the
dictates of reason and religion, to pull the old (...) of (...) hearts, (...)
extinguish those impertinent notions which (...) at a time when we were not
able to judge of their absurdity.

The IMPORTANCE of the early CHOICE of a CALLING, and the Perseverance in it.
Be well advised, and wary council make,
Ere thou do any business undertake;
When undertaken, thy endeavors bend,
To bring thy actions to a perfect end.
RANDOLPH.
IT is never without very melancholy reflections that we can observe the
misconduct or miscarriage of those men who seem by the force of understanding,
or extent of knowledge, exempted from the general frailties of human nature,
and privileged from the common infelicities of life. Though the world is
crowded with scenes of calamity, we look for the most part upon the general
mass of wretchedness with very little regard, and fix our eyes upon the state
of particular persons, whom the eminence of their qualities marks out from the
multitude: as in reading the account of a battle, we seldom reflect on the
vulgar heaps of slaughter, but follow the here with our whole attention through
all the varieties of his fortunes, without a thought of the thousands that are
falling round him.

With the same kind of anxious veneration I have, for many years, been making
observations on the life of Polyphilus, a man whom all his acquaintances have,
from his first appearance in the world, feared for the quickness of his
discernment, and admired for the multiplicity of his seize; but whose
progress in life, and whose usefulness to mankind, have perhaps been hindered
by the superfluity of his knowledge, and the celerity of his mind.

Polyphilus was remarkable at the school for surpassing all his companions,
without any visible application. And at the university was distinguished
equally for his successful progress, as well through the rough and thorny mazes
of science, as the smooth and ^^^wing parts of politer literature; without any
strict confinement to hours of study, or any remarkable forbearance of the
common amusements of young men.

When Polyphilus was at the age in which men usually choose their profession,
and prepare to enter into a public character, (...) eye was fixed upon him; and
all were curious to inquire what this universal genius would fix upon for the
employment of life: and no doubt was made but that he would leave all his
cotemporaries behind him; and mount to the highest honors of that class in
which he should enlist himself, without those delays and pauses which must
always be endured by meaner abilities.

Polyphilus, though by no means insolent or assuming, had been sufficiently
encouraged by uninterrupted success, to place great confidence in his own
parts; and was not below his companions in the indulgence of his hopes, and
expectations of the astonishment with which the world would be struck, when
first his luster should break ou^ upon it; nor could he help (for whom does not
constant flattery intoxicate?) to join sometimes in the mirth of his friends,
at the sudden disappearance of those who, having shone a while, and drawn the
eyes of the public upon their feeble luster, were now doomed to fade away
before him.

It is natural for a man to catch advantageous notions of the condition which
those with whom he converses, are striving to attain. Polyphilus, in a ramble
to London, fell accidentally among the physicians; and was so much pleased with
the prospect of turning philosophy to profit, and so highly delighted with a
new theory of fevers, which (...) into his imagination, and which, after having
considered in a few hours, he found himself able to maintain against all the
advocates for the ancient system, that he resolved to apply himself to anatomy,
botany, and chemistry; and to leave no part unconquered, either of the animal,
mineral, or vegetable kingdoms.

He therefore read authors, constructed systems, and fried experiments. But
unhappily, as he was going to see a new plant in flower at Chelsea, he met, (in
crossing Westminster to take the water,) the chancellor's coach. He had the
curiosity to follow him into the hall; where a remarkable cause happened to be
tried; he found himself able to produce so many arguments which the lawyers had
omitted on both sides, that he determined to quit physic for a profession in
which he found it would be so easy to excel; and which promised higher honors
and larger profits, without melancholy attendance upon misery, mean submission
to peevishness, and continued interruption to rest and pleasure.

He immediately took chambers in the Temple, bought a common place book, and
confined himself for some (...) to the perusal of the statutes, year-books,
pleadings, and reports. He was a constant hoarer of the proceedings in the
courts, and began to put cases with reasonable accuracy. -- But he soon
discovered, by considering the fortune of lawyers, that preferment was not to
be got by acuteness, learning, and eloquence. He was perplexed by the
absurdities of attorneys, and misrepresentations made by his clients of their
own causes; by the useless anxiety of one, and the incessant importunity of
another. He began to repent of having devoted himself to a study, which was so
narrow in its comprehension, which could never carry his name to any other
country; and thought it unworthy of a man of parts, to sell his life only for
money. The barrenness of his fellow-students forced him generally into other
company, at his hours of entertainment: and, among the varieties of
conversation through which his curiosity was daily wandering, he, by chance,
mingled at a tavern with some intelligent officers of the army. A man of
letters was easily dazzled with the gaiety of their appearance, and softened
into kindness by the politeness of their address. He therefore cultivated this
new acquaintance; and when he saw how readily they found, in every place,
admission and regard, and how familiarly they mingled with every rank and order
of men, he began to feel his heart beat for military honors; and wondered how
the prejudices of the university should have made him so long insensible of
that ambition, which had fired so many hearts in every age, and negligent of
that calling, which is above all others, universally and invariably
illustrious, and which gives, even to the exterior appearance of its
professors, a dignity and freedom unknown to the rest of mankind.

These favorable impressions were made still deeper by his conversation with
the ladies; whose regard for soldiers he could not observe without wishing
himself one of that happy fraternity, to which the female world seem to have
devoted all their charms and their kindness. The love of knowledge, which was
still his predominant inclination, was gratified by the recital of adventures,
and accounts of foreign countries; and therefore he thought there was no way of
life in which all his views could so completely concenter as in that of a
soldier. In the art of war, he thought it not difficult to excel, having
observed his new friends not very much versed in the principles of tactics or
fortification: and therefore he studied all the military writers, both ancient
and modern; and in a short time, could tell how to have gained every remarkable
battle that had been lost from the beginning of the world. He often showed at a
table, how Alexander should have been checked in his conquests; what was the
fatal error at Pharsalia; how Charles of Sweden might have escaped his ruin at
Poltowa, and how Marlborough might have been made to repent his temerity at
Blenheim. He entrenched armies upon paper, so that no superiority of numbers
could force them; and modelled in clay many impregnable fortresses, on which
the present arts of attack would be exhausted without effect.

Polyphilus in a short time obtained a commission; but before he could rub off
the solemnity of a scholar, and gain the true air of military vivacity, a war
was declared, and forces sent to the continent. Here Polyphilus unhappily
found, that study alone would not make a soldier: for, being much accustomed to
think the sense of danger sunk into his mind, he felt at the approach of any
action tha^ terror which a sentence of death would have brought upon him. He
saw, that instead of conquering their fears, the endeavors of his gay friends
were only to escape them: but his philosophy chained his mind to its object;
and rather loaded him with shackles, than furnished him with arms. He however
suppressed his misery in silence, and passed through the campaign with honor;
but found himself utterly unable to support another.

He then had recourse again to his books, and continued to ^ange from one study
to another. As I usually visit him once a month, and am admitted to him without
previous notice, I have found him within this last half year decyphering the
Chinese language, making a farce, collecting a vocabulary of the obsolete terms
of the English law, writing an Inquiry concerning the ancient Corinthian brass,
and forming a new scheme of the variations of the needle.

Thus his powerful genius which might have extended the sphere of any science,
or benefited the world in any profession, is dissipated in a boundless variety,
without any profit to others or to himself. He makes sudden irruptions into the
regions of knowledge, and sees all obstacles give way before him; but he never
stays long enough to complete his conquest, to establish laws, or bring away
the spoils.

Such is often the folly of those men, whom nature has enabled to obtain skill
and knowledge on terms so easy, that they have no sense of the value of the
acquisition; who are qualified to make such speedy progress in learning, that
they think themselves at liberty to loiter in the way: and often, by turning
aside after every new object like Atalanta, lose the race to slower
competitors, who press diligently forward, and whose force is directed to a
single point.

I have often thought them happy that have been fixed, from the first dawn of
thought, in a determination to some state of life, by the choice of one whose
authority may preclude caprice, and whose influence may prejudice them in the
favor of his opinion. The general precept of consulting the genius is of
little use, unless we are told how the genius can be known. If it is to be
discovered only by experiment, life will be lost before the resolution can be
fixed; if any other inclinations are to be found, they may perhaps be very
early discerned. At least, if to miscarry in an attempt be a proof of having
mistaken the direction of the genius, men appear not less frequently deceived
with regard to themselves than to others: and therefore no one has much reason
to complain that his life was planned out by friends; or to be confident that
he should have had either more honor or happiness, by being abandoned to the
chance of his own fancy.

It was said of the learned Sanderson, that when he was preparing his lectures,
he hesitated so much, and rejected so often, that at the time of reading he was
often forced to produce, not what was best, but what happened to be at hand.
This will be the state of every man, who, in the choice of his employment,
balances all the arguments on every side. The complication is so intricate, the
motives and objections so numerous; there is so much play for the inclination,
and so much remains in the power of others, that (reason forced at last to rest
in neutraility) the decision devolves into the hands of chance; and after a
great part of life spent in inquiries which can never be resolved, the rest
must often pass in repenting the unnecessary delay; and can be useful to few
other purposes, than to warn others against the same folly; and to show that of
two states of life, equally consistent with religion and virtue, he who chooses
earliest, and perseveres in it, chusest best.

It is therefore of the utmost importance, that all who have any intention of
doing well for themselves or others, and of acquiring a reputation superior to
the common names which are hourly sinking into oblivion, and swept away by time
among the refuse of fame, should add to their reason and spirit the power of
persisting in their purpose; since all the performances of human art, at which
we look with praise or wonder, are instances of the resistless force of
perseverance. It is by this that the quarry becomes a pyramid, and that distant
countries are united by canals. If a man were to compare the effects of a
single stroke of the pick axe, or of one impression of the spade, with the
general design and last effect, he would be overwhelmed by the sense of their
disproportion: Yet those petty operations, incessantly continued, at last
surmount the greatest difficulties; and mountains are levelled, and oceans
bounded by the slender force of human beings.

On INCITEMENT to Enterprise and Emulation* Story of the Admirable CRI^HTON.
He who despairing in dull languor lies,
To glorious deeds will never, never rise;
Like a dull weed, he vegetates and dies.
R.
I HAVE sometimes heard it disputed in conversation, whether it be more
laudable or desirable, that a man should think too highly or too meanly of
himself: it is on all hands agreed to be best, that he should think rightly;
but since a falliable being will always make some deviations from exact
rectitude, it is not wholly useless to inquire toward which side it is safer
to incline.

The prejudices of mankind seem to favor him who (...) by under-rating his own
powers; he is considered as a modest and harmless member of society, not likely
to break the peace by competition, to endeavor after such splendour of
reputation as may dim the luster of others, or to interrupt any in the
enjoyment of themselves; he is no man's rival, and therefore may be every man's
friend.

The opinion which a man entertains of himself, ought to be distinguished, in
order to an accurate discussion of this question, as it relates to persons or
to things. To think highly of ourselves in comparison with others, to assume by
our own authority that precedence which none are willing to grant, must be
always invidious and offensive; but to rate our powers high in proportion to
things, and imagine ourselves equal to great undertakings, while we leave
others in possession of the same abilities, cannot with equal justice provoke
censure.

It must be confessed, that self-love may dispose us to decide too hastily in
our own favor; but who is hurt by the mistake? If we are incited by this vain
opinion to attempt more than we can perform, ours is the labor, and ours is
the disgrace.

But he that dares to think well of himself, will not always prove to be
mistaken; and the good effects of his confidence will then appear in great
attempts, and great performances: if he should not fully complete his design,
he will at least advance it so far, as to leave an easy task for him what
succeeds him; and even though ^e should wholly fail, he will fail with honor.

But from the opposite error, from torpid despondency can come no advantage; it
is the frost of the soul which binds up all its powers, and congeals life in
perpetual sterility. He that has no hopes of success, will make no attempts;
and where nothing is attempted, nothing will be done.

Every man should, therefore, endeavor to maintain in himself a favorable
opinion of the powers of the human mind; which are, perhaps, in every man
greater than they appear, and might, by diligent cultivation, be exalted to a
degree beyond what their possessor presumes to believe. There is scarce any man
but has found himself able, at the instigation of necessity, to do what in a
state of leisure and deliberation he would have concluded impossible; and some
of our species have signalized themselves by such achievements, as prove there
are few things above human hope.

It has been the policy of all nations to preserve, by some public monuments,
the memory of those who have served their country by great exploits (...) there
is the same reason for continuing or reviving the names of those whose
extensive abilities have dignified humanity. An honest emulation may be alike
excited, and the phillosopher's curiosity may be inflamed by a catalogue of the
works of Boil or Bacon, as Themistocles was kept awke by the trophies of
Miltiades.

Among the favorites of nature that have from time to time appeared in the
world, enriched with various endowments and contrarieties of excellence, none
seems to have been more exalted above the common rate of humanity, than the man
known about two centuries ago by the appellation of the Admirable Crichton; of
whose history, whatever we may suppress as surpassing credibility, yet we
shall, upon incontestible authority, relate enough to rank him among prodigies.

Virtue, says Virgil, is better accepted when it comes in a pleasing form. The
person of Crichton was eminently beautiful; but his beauty was consistent with
such activity and strength, that in fencing he would spring at one bound the
length of twenty feet upon his antagonist; and he used the sword in either hand
with such force and dexterity, that scarce any one had courage to engage him.

Having studied at St. Andrews, in Scotland, he went to Paris in his
twenty-first year, and affixed on the gate of the college of Navarre, a kind of
challenge to the learned of that university, to dispute with them on a certain
day; offering to his opponents, whoever they might be, the choice of ten
languages, and of all the faculties and ^^^ences. On the day appointed, three
thousand auditors assembled, when four doctors of the church, and fifty ^^sters
appeared against him; and one of his antagonists confesses that the doctors
were defeated; that he gave proofs of knowledge above the reach of man; and
that (...) hundred years passed without food or sleep would not be sufficient
for the attainment of his learning. After a disputation of nine hours, he was
presented by the president and professors with a diamond and purse of gold, and
dismissed with repeated acclamations.

From Paris he went to Rome, where he made the same challenge, and had in the
presence of the Pope and Cardinals the same success. Afterward he contracted
at Venice an acquaintance with Aldus Manutius, by whom he was introduced to the
learned of that city; he then visited Padua, where he engaged in another public
disputation, beginning his performance with an extempore poem in praise of the
city and the assembly then present, and concluding with an oration equally
unpremeditated in commendation of ignorance.

He afterward published another challenge, in which he declared himself ready
to detect the errors of Aristotle and all his commentators, either in the
common forms of logic, or in any which his antagonists should propose, of an
hundred different kinds of verse.

These acquisitions of learning, however stupendous, were not gained at the
expense of any pleasure which youth generally indulges, or by the omission of
any accomplishment in which it becomes a gentleman to excel: he practiced in
great perfection the arts of drawing and painting; he was an eminent performer
in both vocal and instrumental music; he danced with uncommon gracefulness; and
on the day after his disputation at Paris, exhibited his skill in horsemanship
before the court of France, where, at a public match of tilting, he bore away
the ring upon his lance fifteen times together.

He excelled likewise in domestic games of less dignit^ and reputation; and in
the interval between his challenge and disputation at Paris, he spent (...)
much of his time at cards, dice, and tennis, that a lampoon was fixed upon the
gate of the Sorbonne, directing those who would see this monster of erudition,
to look for him a^ the tavern.

So extensive was his acquaintance with life and manners, that in an Italian
comedy, composed by himself and exhibited before the court of Mantua, he is
said (...) have personated fifteen different characters, in all (...) he might
succeed without great difficulty; since (...) such power of retention, that
once hearing an (...) an hour, he would repeat it exactly, and in the (...)
follow the speaker through all the variety of tone and gesticulation.

Nor was his skill in arms less than in learning, (...) his courage inferior to
his skill. There was a prize-fighter at Mantua, who, (traveling about the
world, according to the barbarous custom of that (...), as a general
challenger) had defeated the most celebrated masters in many parts of Europe;
and in Mantua where he then resided, had killed three that appeared against
him. The Duke repented that he had granted him his protection; when Crichton,
looking on his sanguinary success with indignation, offered to stake fifteen
hundred pistoles, and mount the stage against him. The Duke with some
reluctance consented; and on the day fixed, the combatants appeared: their
weapons seemed to have been the single rapier, which was then newly introduced
into Italy. The prize-fighter advanced with greater violence and fierceness,
while Crichton contented himself calmly to ward his passes, and suffered him to
exhaust his vigor by his own fury. Crichton then became the assailant; and
pressed upon him with such force and agility, that he thrust him thrice through
the body, and saw him expire. He then divided the prize he had won, among the
windows whose husbands had been killed.

The death of this wonderful man I should be willing to conceal, did I not know
that every reader will inquire curiously after that fatal hour, which is common
to all human beings, however distinguished from each other by nature or fortune.

The Duke of Mantua having received so many proofs of his various merit, made
him tutor to his son Vincentia de Conzaga, a prince of loose manners and
turbulent disposition. On this occasion it was that he composed the comedy in
which he exhibited so many different characters with exact propriety. But his
honor was of short continuance; for as he was one night in time of Carnival
^^bling about the streets with his guitar in his hand, he was attacked by six
men masked. Neither his courage nor s^ill at this exigence deserted him; he
opposed them with such activity and spirit, that he soon dispersed th^n, and
disarmed their leader, who throwing off his (...) discovered himself to be the
prince his pupil. Crichton, falling on his knees, took his own sword by the
point, and presented it to the prince; who immediately seized it, and
instigated, as some say, by jealousy, according to others only by drunken fury
and brutal resentment, basely thrust him through the heart.

Thus was the Admirable Crichton brought into that state in which he could
excel the meanest of mankind only by a few empty honors paid to his memory.
The court of Mantua testified their esteem by public mourning; the cotemporary
wits were profuse of their encomiums; and the palaces of Italy were adorned
with pictures, representing him on^ horseback, with a lance in one hand, and a
book in the other.

On LABOR and EXERCISE.
The wise, for cure, on exercise depend,
God never made his work for man to mend.
DRYDEN.
BODILY labor is of two kinds, either that which a man submits to for his
livelihood, or that which he undergoes for his pleasure. The latter of them
generally changes the name of labor for that of exercise, but differs only
from ordinary labor as it rises from another motive.

A country life abounds in both these kinds of labor, and for that reason
gives a man a greater stock of health, and consequently a more perfect
enjoyment of himself* than any other way of life. I consider the body as a
system of tubes and glands; or, to use a more rustic phrase, a bundle of pipes
and strainers, fitted to one another after so wonderful a manner* as to make a
proper engine for the soul to work with. This description does not only
comprehend the bowels, bones, tendons, veins, nerves, and arteries, but every
muscle, every ligature, which is a composition of fibers, that are so many
imperceptible tubes or pipes interwoven on all sides with invisible glands or
strainers.

The general idea of a human body, without considering it in the niceties of
anatomy, lets us see how absolutely necessary labor is for the right
preservation of it. There must be frequent motions and agitations, to mix,
digest, and separate the juices contained in it, as well as to clear and
cleanse that infinitude of pipes and strainers of which it is composed, and to
give their solid parts a more firm and lasting tone. Labor or exercise
ferments the humors, casts them into their proper channel, throws off
redundancies, and helps nature in those secret distributions, without which the
body cannot subsist in its vigor, nor the soul act with cheerfulness.

I might here mention the effects which this has upon all the faculties of the
mind, by keeping the understanding clear, the imagination untroubled, and
refining those spirits that are necessary for the proper exertion of our
intellectual faculties, during the present laws of union between soul and body.
It is to a neglect in this particular that we must ascribe the spleen, which is
so frequent in men of studious and sedentary tempers; as well as the vapors,
to which those of the other sex are so often subject. Had not exercise been
absolutely necessary for our well-being, nature would not have made the body so
proper for it, by giving such an activity to the limbs, and such a plenty to
every part, as necessarily produce these compressions, extensions, contortions,
(...) and all other kinds of motions, that are necessary for the preservation
of such a system of tubes and glands, as have been before mentioned. And that
we might not want inducement to engage us in such an exercise of the body as is
proper for its welfare, it is so ordered, that nothing valuable can be procured
without it. Not to mention riches and honor, even food and raiment are not to
be come at, without the toil of the hands and sweat of the brow. Providence
furnishes materials, but expects that we should work them up ourselves. The
earth must be labored before it gives its increase; and when it is forced into
its several products, how many hands must they pass through before they are fit
for use! manufactures, trade, and agriculture, naturally employ more than
nineteen parts of the species in twenty; and as for those who are not obliged
to labor, by the condition in which they are born, they are more miserable
than the rest of mankind, unless they indulge themselves in that voluntary
labor which goes by the name of Exercise.

As I am a compound of soul and body, I consider myself as obliged to a double
scheme of duties; and I think I have not fulfilled the business of the day,
when I do not thus employ the one in labor and exercise, as well as the other
in contemplation and study.

On TEMPERANCE.
It Is to thy rules, O temperance! that we o^e
All pleasures which from health or strength can flow:
Vigor of body, purity of mind,
Unclouded reason, sentiment refined.
CHANDLER.
THERE is a story in the Arabian Nights Tales, of a king who had long
languished under an ill habit of body, and had taken abundance of remedies to
no purpose. At length, says the fable, a physician cured him by the following
method: he took a hollow ball of wood, and ^^lled it with several drugs, after
which he closed it so ^^tificially, that nothing appeared. He likewise took a
^^^ll, and after having hollowed the handle, and that part which strikes the
ball, he enclosed in them several drugs after the same manner as in the ball
itself. He then ordered the Sultan* who was his patient, to exercise himself
early in the morning with those rightly prepared instruments, till such time as
he should sweat. When, as the story goes, the virtue of the medicaments
perspiring through the wood, had so good an influence on the Sultan's
constitution, that they cured him of an indisposition which all the
compositions he had taken inwardly had not been able to remove. This eastern
allegory is finely contrived to show us how beneficial bodily labor (...) to
health, and that exercise is the most effectual physic. I shall in this place
recommend another great preservative of health, which in many cases produces
the same effect as exercise, and may, in some measure, supply its place where
opportunities of exercise are wanting. The preservative I am speaking of is
temperance, which has those particular advantages above all other means of
health, that it may be practiced by all ranks and conditions, at any season^ or
in any place. It is a kind of regimen into which every man may put himself,
without interruption to business, expense of money, or loss of time. (...)
exercise throws off all superfluities, temperance prevents them; if exercise
clears the vessels, temperance neither satiates nor overstrains them; if
exercise raise proper ferments in the humors, and promotes the circulation of
the blood, temperance gives nature her full play, and enables her to exert
herself in all her force and vigor. If exercise dissipates a growing
distemper, temperance starves it.

Physic, for the most part, is nothing else but the substitute of exercise or
temperance. Medicines are indeed absolutely necessary in acute distempers, that
cannot wait the slow operations of these two great instruments of health; but
did men live in an habitual course of exercise and temperance, there would be
but little occasion for them. Accordingly we find that those parts of the world
are most healthy, where they subsist by the chase; and that men lived longest
when their lives were employed in hunting, and when they had little food
besides what they caught. Blistering, cupping, and bleeding, are seldom of use
but to the idle and intemperate; as all those inward applications, which are so
much in practice among us, are for the most part nothing else but expedients to
make luxury consistent with health. The apothecary is perpetually employed in
countermining the cook and the vintner. It is said of Diogenes, that meeting a
young man who was going to a feast, he took him up in the street and carried
him home to his friends, as one who was running into imminent danger, had he
not prevented him. What would the philosopher have said, had he been present at
the gluttony of a modern meal? Would not he have thought the master of a family
mad, and have begged his servants to tie down his hands, had he seen him devour
fowl, fish, and flesh; swallow oil and vinegar, wines and spices; throw down
sallads of twenty different herbs, sauces of an hundred ingredients,
con^^^tions, and fruits of numberless sweets and flowers* What unnatural
motions and counter-ferments must such a medley of intemperance produce in the
body! For my part, when I behold ^a fashionable table set out in all its
magnificence, I fancy that I see gouts and drop^^^, ^evers and lethargies, with
other innumerable distempers, lying in ambuscade among the dishes.

Nature delights in the most plain and simple diet. Every animal, but man,
keeps to one dish. Herbs are the food of this species, fish of that, and flesh
of a third. Man falls upon every thing that comes in his way; not the smallest
fruit or excrescence of the earth, scarce a berry or mushroom can escape him.

It is impossible to lay down any determinate rule for temperance, because what
is luxury in one may be temperance in another; but there are few that have
lived any time in the world who are not judges of their own constitution, so
far as to know what kinds and what proportion of food do best agree with them.
Were I to consider my readers as my patients, and to prescribe such a kind of
temperance as is accommodated to all persons, and such as is particularly
suited to our climate and way of living, I would copy the following rules of a
very eminent physician. Make your whole repast out of one dish. If you indulge
in a second, avoid drinking any thing strong until you have finished your meal:
at the same time, abstain from all sauces, or at least from such as are not the
most plain and simple. A man could not well be guilty of gluttony, if he stuck
to these few obvious and easy rules. In the first case there would be no
variety of tastes to solicit his palate, and occasion excess; nor in the
second, any artificial provocatives to relieve satiety, and create a false
appetite. Were I to prescribe a rule for drinking, it would be formed upon a
saying quoted by Sir William Temple; The first glass for myself, the second for
my friends, the third for good humor, and the fourth for my enemies. But
because it is impossible for one who lives in the world to diet himself always
in so philosophical a manner, I think every man should have his days of
abstinence, according as his constitution will permit. These are great reliefs
to nature, as they qualify it for struggling with hunger and thirst, whenever
any distemper or duty of life puts it upon such difficulties; and at the same
time give it an opportunity of extricating itself from its oppressions, and
recovering the several tones and springs of its distended vessels. Besides,
that abstinence well-timed often kills a sickness in embrio, and destroys the
first seeds of an indisposition. It is observed by two or three ancient
authors, that Socrates, notwithstanding he lives in Athens during the great
plague which has made so much noise throughout all ages, and has been
celebrated at different times by such eminent hands: I say, notwithstanding
that he lived in the time of this devouring pestilence, he never caught the
least infection, which those writers unanimously ascribe to that uninterrupted
temperance which he always observed.

And here I cannot but mention an observation which I have often made, upon
reading the lives of the philosophers, and comparing it with any ^eries of
kings or great men of the same number. If we consider these ancient sages, a
great part of whose philosophy consisted in a temperate and abstemious course
of life, one would think the life of a philosopher and the life of a man, were
of two different dates: for we find the generality of these wise men were
nearer an hundred than sixty years of age at the time of their respective
deaths.

The benefits arising from a temperate course of life are set in a still more
striking light, in the following allegory of

The INFALLIBLE ELIXIR.
ESCULAPIUS, after his deification, or admittance among the gods, having
revisited his native country, and being one day (as curiosity led him a
rambling) in danger of being benighted, made the best of his way to a house he
saw at some distance, where he was hospitably received by the master of it.
Cremes, for that was the master's name, though but a young man, was infirm and
sickly. -- Of several dishes served up to supper, Cremes observed that his
guest eat but of one, and that the most simple; nor could all his entreaties
prevail on him to do otherwise. He was, nothwithstanding, highly delighted with
Esculapius' conversation, in which he observed a cheerfulness and knowledge
superior to any thing he had hitherto met with. The next morning Esculapius
took his leave, but not till he had engaged his good-natured host to pay him a
visit at a small villa, a few miles from thence, where he informed him of his
dwelling. Cremes came accordingly, and was most kindly received; but how great
was his amazement, when supper was served up, to see naught but milk, honey,
and a few roots, dressed in the plainest but neatest manner, to which hunger,
cheerfulness, and good sense, were the only sauces. Esculapius seemed to eat
with pleasure, while Cremes scarce tasted of them. On which a repast was
ordered more suitable to our guest's taste. Immediately there succeeded a
banquet composed of the most artful dishes that luxury could invent, with great
plenty and variety of the richest and most intoxicating wines. These too were
accompanied by damsels of bewitching beauty. It was now Cremes gave a loose to
his appetites, and every thing he tasted raised ecstasies beyond what he had
ever known. During the repast, the damsels sung and danced to entertain them;
their charms enchanted the enraptured guest, already flustered with what he had
drunk; his senses were lost in ecstatic confusion. Every thing round him seemed
Elysium, and he was on the point of indulging the most boundless freedoms,
when, on a sudden, their beauty, which was but a vizard, fell off, and
discovered forms the most hideous and forbidding imaginable. -- Lu^t, revenge,
folly, murder, meagre poverty, and despair, now appeared in the most odious
shapes, and the place instantly became a most dire scene of misery and
confusion. How often did Cremes wish himself far distant from such diabolical
company, and now dreaded the fatal consequence which threatened him. His blood
ran chill at his heart; his knees smote each other with fear, and joy and
rapture were converted to amazement and horror! when Esculapius perceived it
had made sufficient impression on his guest, he thus addressed him: "Know
Cremes, it is Esculapius who has thus entertained you, and what you have here
beheld is a true image of the deceitfulness and misery inseparable from luxury
and intemperance. Would you be happy, be temperate: temperance is the parent of
health, virtue, wisdom, plenty, and every thing that can make you happy in
this, or the world to come. It is indeed the true luxury of life; for without
it life cannot be enjoyed." This said, he disappeared, and left Cremes (instead
of an elegant apartment) in an open plain, full of ideas quite different from
those he had brought with him. On his return home, from the most luxurious he
became one of the most temperate men, by which wise method he soon regained
health. Frugality produced riches, an from an infirm and crazy constitution,
and almost ruined estate, by virtue of this infallible elixir, he became one of
the happiest men breathing, and lived to a healthy old age, revered as an
oracle for his wisdom throughout all Greece.

On the VANITY of some MEN'S WISHES and PRAYERS.
When to Almighty Jove our prayers we move,
May virtue guide, and heaven our suit approve.
R.
MENNIPUS, the philosopher, was a second time taken up into heaven by Jupiter,
when, for his entertainment, he lifted up a trap-door that was placed by his
footstool. At its rising there issued through it such a di^ of cries as
astonished the philosopher. Upon his asking what they meant, Jupiter told him
they were the prayers that were sent up to him from the earth. Mennipus, amidst
the confusion of voices, which was so great that nothing less than the ear of
Jove could distinguish them, heard the words riches, honor, long life,
repeated in several different tones and languages. When the first hubbub of
sounds was over, the trap-door being left open, the voices came up more
separate and distinct. The first prayer was a very odd one; it came from
Athens, and desired Jupiter to increase the wisdom and the beard of his humble
suppliant. Mennipus knew it, by the voice, to be the prayer of his friend
Lycander, the philosopher. This was succeeded by the petition of one who had
just laden a ship, and promised Jupiter, if he took care of it, and returned it
home again full of riches, he would make him an offering of a silver cup.
Jupiter thanked him for nothing; and bending down his ear more attentively than
ordinary, heard a voice complaining to him of the cruelty of an Ephesian widow,
and begging him to breed compassion in her heart: this, says Jupiter, is a very
honest fellow. I have received a great deal of incense from him; I will not be
so cruel to him as to hear his prayers. He was then interrupted with a whole
volley of vows, which were made for the health of a tyrannical prince by his
subjects, who prayed for him in his presence. Mennipus was surprised, after
having listened to prayers offered up with so much ardour and devotion, to hear
low whispers from the same assembly, expostulating with Jove for suffering such
a tyrant to live, and asking how his thunder could lie idle? Jupiter was so
offended at these prevaricating rascals, that he took down the first vows, and
puffed away the last. The philosopher, seeing a great cloud mounting upwards,
and making its way directly to the trap-door, inquired of Jupiter what it
meant. This, says Jupiter, is the smoke of a whole hecatomb that is offered me
by the general of an army, who is very importunate with me to let him cut off
an hundred thousand men that are drawn up in array against him: what does the
impudent wretch think I see in him, to believe that I will make a sacrifice of
so many mortals as good as himself, and all this to his glory, forsooth? -- But
hark, says Jupiter, there is a voice I never heard but in time of danger; it is
a rogue that is shipwrecked in the IonianSea: I saved him upon a plank but
three days ago, upon his promise to mend his manners; the scoundrel is not
worth a groat, and yet has the impudence to offer me a temple if I will keep
him from sinking. But yonder, says he, is a special youth for you; he desires
me to take his father, who keeps a great estate from him, out of the miseries
of human life. The old fellow shall live till he make his heart ache, I can
tell him that for his pains. This was followed by the soft voice of a pious
lady, desiring Jupiter that she might appear amiable and charming in the sight
of her Emperor. As the philosopher was reflecting on this extraordinary
petition, there blew a gentle wind through the trap-door, which he at first
mistook for a gale of zephyrs, but afterward found it to be a breeze of sighs:
they smelt strong of flowers and incense, and were succeeded by most passionate
complaints of wounds and torment, fire and arrows, cruelty, despair, and death.
Mennipus fancied that such lamentable cries arose from some general execution,
or from wretches lying under the torture; but Jupiter told him, they came to
him from the isle of Paphos, and that he every day received complaints of the
same nature from that whimsical tribe of mortals who are called Lovers. I am so
trifled with, says he, by this generation of both sexes, and find it so
impossible to please them, whether I grant or refuse their petitions, that I
shall order a western wind for the future to intercept them in their passage,
and blow them at random upon the earth. The last petition I heard was from a
very aged man, near a hundred years old, begging but for one year more of life,
and then promised to die contented. This is the rarest old fellow, says
Jupiter; he has made this prayer to me for above twenty years together. When he
was but fifty years old he desired only that he might live to see his son
settled in the world; I granted it. He then begged the same favor for his
daughter, and afterward that he might see the education of a grandson. When
all this was brought about, he put up a petition that he might live to finish a
house he was building. In short, he is an unreasonable old cur, and never wants
an excuse; I will hear no more of him. Upon which he flung down the trap-door
in a passion, and was resolved to give no more audiences that day.

Notwithstanding the levity of this fable, the moral of it very well deserves
our attention. The vanity of men's wishes, which are the natural prayers of the
mind, as well as many of those secret devotions which they offer up to the
Supreme Being, are sufficiently exposed by it. Among other reasons for set
forms of prayer, I have often thought it a very good one, that by this means
the folly and extravagance of men's desires may be kept within due bounds, and
not break out in absurd and ridiculous petitions on so great and solemn an
occasion.

On AERIAL CASTLE-BUILDING.
He dreams of riches, grandeur, and a crown:
He wakes, and finds himself a simple clown.
ROW.
ALNASCHAR was a very idle fellow, that never would set his hand to any
business during his father's life. When his father died, he left him to the
value of an hundred drachmas in Persian money. Alnaschar, in order to make the
best of it, laid it out in glasses, bottles, and the fi^^est earthen ware.
These he piled up in a large open basket, and having made choice of a very
little (...), placed the basket at his feet, and leaned his back against the
wall, in expectation of customers. As he sat in this posture, with his eyes
upon the basket, he fell into a most amusing train of thought, and was
overheard by one of the neighbors, as he talked to himself, in the following
manner: "This basket, says he, cost me at the wholesale merchant's an hundred
drachmas, which is all I have in the world. I shall quickly make two hundred of
it, by selling it in retail. These two hundred drachmas will in a very little
time rise to four hundred, which of course will amount in time to four
thousand. Four thousand drachmas cannot fail of making eight thousand. As soon
as by this means I am maste^ of ten thousand, I will lay aside my trade as a
glassman, and turn jeweller. I shall then deal in diamonds, pearls, and all
sorts of rich stones. When I have got together as much wealth as I can well
desire, I will make a purchase of the finest house I can find, with lands,
slaves, eunuchs, and horses. I shall then begin to enjoy myself, and make a
noise in the world. I will not, however, stop there, but continue my traffic
till I have got together an hundred thousand drachmas. When I have thus made
myself master of an hundred thousand drachmas, I shall naturally set myself on
the foot of a prince, and will demand the Grand Visir's daughter in marriage,
after having represented to that minister the information which I have received
of the beauty, wit, discretion, and other high qualities which his daughter
possesses. I will let him know, at the same time, that it is my intention to
make him a present of a thousand pieces of gold on our marriage night. As soon
as I have married the Grand Visir's daughter, I will buy her ten black eunuchs,
the youngest and best that can be got for money. I must afterward make my
father-in-law a visit with a great train and equipage. And when I am placed at
his right hand, which he will do in course, if it be only to honor his
daughter, I will give him the thousand pieces of gold which I promised him; and
afterward to his great surprise, I will present him with another purse of the
same value, with some short speech; as, Sir, you se^ I am a man of my word, I
always give mere than I promise.

"When I have brought the princess to my house, I shall take particular care to
breed in her a due respect for me, before I give the reins to love and
dalliance. To this end I shall confine her to her own apartment, make her a
short visit, and talk but little to her. Her women will represent to me that
she is inconsolable by reason of my unkindness, and beg me with tears to caress
her, and let her sit down by me; but I will still remain inexorable, and will
turn my back upon her all the first night. Her mother will then come and bring
her daughter to me, as I am seated on my sofa. The daughter, with tears in her
eyes, will fling herself at my feet, and beg of me to receive her into my
favor. Then will I, to imprint in her a thorough veneration for my person,
draw up my leg and spurn her from me with my foot in such a manner that she
shall fall down several paces from the sofa."

Alnaschar was entirely swallowed up in this chimerical vision, and could not
forbear acting with his foot what he had in his thoughts: so that unluckily
striking his basket of brittle ware, which was the foundation of all his
grandeur, he kicked his glasses to a great distance from him into the street,
and broke them into ten thousand pieces.

This is a humourous ridicule upon the foolish vanity of building castles in
the air, and idly wasting that time in empty flattering schemes, which might
have been usefully employed in attending our proper business.

On CHARITY.
The soul that feels for others woe,
From heaven its origin does show.

ZACCHOR and ESREFF, two youths, begged the Dervise Morat, their tutor, who was
a S^^^ and blessed by Mahomet with the knowledge of future events, to permit
them to visit the curiosities of Al^ppo, to which place they were but lately
come for the advantage of the wise and holy man's instructions, and who had
undertaken their education: he gave each of them a few aspers on going forth,
to expend on whatever their inclinations prompted to; and, on their return, he
inquired how they had disposed of the money? I, said Zacchor, cast my eyes on
some of the finest dates Syria ever produced; I laid out my aspers, and
indulged in what perhaps I shall never meet the like again. And I, said Esreff,
met a poor helpless wretch with an infant at her breast, whose cries pierced my
soul: she was reduced to the very utmost extremity: the angel of death seemed
to glare forth at her eyes, and she had scarce strength left to beg the
assistance my heart yearned to give her, and which our prophet commands all
Musselmen to bestow on misery like here is. ^he has my aspers, and I grieved I
had not more to bestow. The money, said Morat to Zacchor, which you exchanged
for the dates, will in a few hours be converted into the most odious of
substances, mere excrement: but, Esreff, said he, turning to the other, besides
the pleasure you must enjoy whenever you reflect on what you have done, ^^ow
that your well-bestowed aspers will produce a never-fading fruit, and
contribute to your happiness, both in this world and the world to come; and
moreover, know, that the infant whose life you have saved, and who, without
your assistance, must, with its mother, have per^^^ed, will (so Heaven has
decreed it) live to repay your goodness, by saving your life many years hence,
and res^^^ing you from the most imminent of dangers.

PROSPERITY and ADVERSITY.
An Allegory.
As physic's for the body's good assigned,
Misfortunes are the physic of the mind.
R.
PROSPERITY and ADVERSITY, the daughters of Providence, were sent to the house
of a rich Ph^^nician merchant, named Velasco, whose residence was at Tire, the
capital city of that kingdom.

Prosperity, the elder, was beautiful as the morning, and cheerful as the
spring; but Adversity was sorrowful and ill-favored.

Velasco had two sons, Felix and Uranio. They were both bred to commerce,
though liberally educated, and had lived together from their infancy in the
strictest harmony and friendship. But love, before whom all the affections of
the ^oul are as the t^aces of a ship upon the ocean, which remain only for a
moment, threatened, in an evil hour, to set them at variance; for both were
become enamoured with the beauties of Prosperity. The nymph, like one of the
daughters of men, gave encouragement to each by turns; but, to avoid a
particular declaration, she avowed a resolution never to marry, unless her
sister, from whom she said it was impossible for her to be long separate, was
married at the same time.

Velasco, who was no stranger to the passions of his sons, and who dreaded
every thing from their violence, to prevent consequences, obliged them by his
authority to decide their pretensions by lots; each previously engaging in a
solemn oath to marry the nymph that should fall to his share. The lots were
accordingly drawn; and Prosperity became the wife of Felix, and Adversity of
Urax^o.

Soon after the celebration of these nuptials, Velasco died, having bequeathed
to his eldest son Felix, the house wherein he dwelt, together with the greatest
part of his large fortune and effects.

The husband of Prosperity was so transported with the gay disposition and
enchanting beauties of his bride, that he clothed her in gold and silver, and
adorned her with jewels of inestimable value. He built a palace for her in the
wood; he made rivers in his gardens, and beautified their banks with temples
and pavilions. He entertained at his table the nobles of the land, delighting
their ears with music, and their eyes with magnificence. But his kindred he
beheld as strangers, and the companions of his youth passed by him unregarded.
His brother also became hateful in his sight, and, in process of time, he
commanded the doors of his house to be shut against him.

But as the stream flows from its channel, and loses itself among the valleys,
unless confined by mounds; so also will the current of fortune be dissipated,
unless bounded by Economy. In a few years the estate of Felix was wasted by
extravagance, his merchandise failed him by neglect, and his effects were
seized by the merciless hands of creditors. He applied himself for support to
the nobles and great men, whom he had feasted and made presents to: but his
voice was as the voice of a stranger, and they remembered not his face. The
friends whom he had neglected derided him in their turn; his wife also insulted
him, and turned her back upon him, and fled. Yet was his heart so bewitched
with her sorceries, that he pursued her with entreaties, till by her haste to
abandon him, her mask fell off, and discovered to him a face as withered and
deformed, as before it had appeared youthful and engaging.

What became of him afterward tradition does not relate with certainty. It is
believed that he fled into (...); and lived precariously on the scanty
benevolence of a few friends, who had not totally deserted him, and that he
died in a short time, wretched and an exile.

Let us now return to Uranio, who, as we have already observed, had been driven
out of doors by his brother ^elix. Adversity, though hateful to his heart, and
a spectre to his eyes, was the constant attendant upon his steps: and, to
aggravate his sorrow, he received certain intelligence that his richest vessel
was taken by a Sardinian pirate; that another was lost upon the Lybian Syrtes;
and, to complete all, that the banker with whom the greatest part of his ready
money was entrusted, had deserted his creditors, and retired into Sicily.
Collecting therefore the small remains of his fortune, he bade adieu to Tire;
and, led by Adversity, through unfrequented roads and forests overgrown with
thickets, he came at last to a small village at the foot of a mountain: here
they took up their abode some time; and Adversity, in return for all the
anxiety he had suffered, softening the severity of her looks, administered to
him the most faithful counsel, weaning his heart from the immoderate love of
earthly things, and teaching him to revere the gods, and to place his whole
trust and happiness in their government and protection. She humanized his soul,
made him modest and humble, taught him to compassionate the distresses of his
fellow creatures, and inclined him to ^^lieve them.

"I am sent, said she, by the gods, to those only whom they love: for I not
only train them up by my severe discipline to future glory, but also prepare
them to receive with greater relish all such moderate enjoyments as are not
inconsistent with this probationary state. As the spider, when assailed, seeks
shelter in its inmost web* so the mind which I afflict, contracts its wandering
thoughts and flies for happiness to itself. It was I who raised the characters
of Cato, Socrates, and Timoleon to so divine a height, and set them up as
guides and examples to every future age. Prosperity, my smiling, but
treacherous sister, too frequently delivers those whom she has seduced, to be
scourged by her cruel followers, anguish and despair: while Adversity never
fails to lead those who will be instructed by her, to the blissful habitations
of tranquillity and content."

Uranio listened to her words with great attention; and as he looked earnestly
on her face, the deformity of it seemed insensibly to decrease. By gentle
degrees his aversion to her abated; and at last he gave himself wholly up to
her counsel and direction. She would often repeat to him the wise maxims of the
philosopher* "That those who want the fewest things, approach nearest to the
gods, who want nothing." She admonished him to turn his eyes to the many
thousands beneath him, instead of gazing on the few who live in pomp and
splendour; and in his addresses to the gods, instead of supplicating for riches
and popularity, to pray only for a virtuous mind, a quiet state, an unblameable
life, and a hopeful death.

Finding him to be every day more and more composed, and resigned, though
neither enamoured of her face, nor delighted with her society, she at last
addressed him in the following manner:

"As the gold is purged and refined from the dross by the fire, so is Adversity
sent by Providence to try and improve the virtue of mortals. The end obtained,
my task is finished; and now I leave you to go and give an account of my
charge. Your brother, whose lot was Prosperity, and whose condition you so much
envied, after having experienced the error of his choice, is at last released
by death from the most wretched of lives. Happy has it been for Uranio that his
lot was Adversity, whom, if he remembers as he ought, his life will be
honorable, and his death happy."

As she pronounced these words, she vanished from his fight. But though her
features at that moment, instead of inspiring their usual horror, seemed to
display a kind of languishing beauty; yet as Uranio, in spite of his utmost
efforts, could not prevail on himself to love her, he neither regretted her
departure, nor wished for her return. But though he rejoiced in her absence, he
treasured up her counsels in his heart, and grew happy by the practice of them.

He afterward be took himself again to merchandise; and having in a short time
acquired a competency sufficient for a real enjoyment of life, he retreated to
a little farm, which he had bought for that purpose, and where he determined to
continue the remainder of his days. Here he employed his time in planting,
gardening, and husbandry, in quelling all disorderly passions, and in forming
his mind by the lessons of Adversity. He took great delight in a little cell or
hermitage in his garden, which stood under a tuft of trees, encompassed with
eglantine and honey-suckles. Adjoining it, was a cold bath, formed by a spring
issuing from a rock, and over the door was written in large characters, the
following inscription.

Beneath this moss-grown roof, within this cell,
Truth, liberty, content and virtue dwell.
Say, you who dare this happy place disdain,
What splendid palace boasts so fair a train?
He lived to a good old age; and died honored and lamented.

On CONVERSATION.
There are whom Heaven has blessed with store of wit,
Yet ^^ant as much again to manage it;
Words are like leaves, and where they most abound,
Much fruit of sense beneath is rarely found.
POPE.
THE faculty of interchanging our thoughts with one another, or what we express
by the word conversation, has always been represented by moral writers as one
of the noblest privileges of reason, and which more particularly sets mankind
above the brute part of the creation.

Though nothing so much gains upon the affections as this extempore eloquence
which we have constantly occasion for, and are obliged to practice every day,
we very rarely meet with any who excel in it.

The conversation of most men is disagreeable, not so much for want of wit and
learning, as of good-breading and discretion.

If you resolve to please, never speak to gratify any particular vanity or
passion of your own, but always with a design either to divert or inform the
company. A man who only aims at one of th^se, is always easy in his discourse.
He is never out of humor at being interrupted, because he considers that those
who hear him are the best (...) whether what he was saying could either divert
or inform them.

A modest person seldom fails to gain the good will of those he converses with,
because no body envies a man who does not appear to be pleased with himself.

We should talk extremely little of ourselves. Indeed what can we say? It would
be as imprudent to discover our faults, as ridiculous to count our fancied
virtues. Our private and domestic affairs are no less improper to be introduced
in conversation. What does it concern the company how many horses you keep in
your stable? Or whether your servant is more knave or fool?

A man may equally affront the company he is in, by engrossing all the talk, or
by observing a contemptuous silence.

Before you tell a story, it may be generally not amiss to draw a short
character, and give the company a true idea of the principal persons concerned
in it. The beauty of most things consists not so much in their being said or
done, as in their being said or done by such a particular person, or on such a
particular occasion.

Notwithstanding all the advantages of youth, few young people please in
conversation; the reason is, that want of experience makes them positive, and
what they say is rather with a design to please themselves than any one else.

It is certain that age itself will make many things pass well enough, which
would have been laughed at in the mouth of one much younger.

Nothing however is more insupportable to men of sense, than an empty formal
man, who speaks in proverbs, and decides all controversies with a short
sentence. This piece of stupidity is the more insufferable, as it puts on the
air of wisdom.

A prudent man will avoid talking much of any particular science, for which he
is remarkably famous. There is not, methinks, a handsomer thing said of Mr.
Cowley, in his whole life, than that none but his intimate friends ever
discovered that he was a great poet by his discourse: besides the decency of
this rule, it is certainly founded on good policy. A man who talks of any thing
he is already famous for, has nothing to get, but a great deal to lose. I might
add, that he who is sometimes silent on a subject where every one is satisfied
he could speak well, will often be thought no less knowing in other matters,
where perhaps he is wholly ignorant.

Women are frightened at the name of argument, and a^e sooner convinced by a
happy turn, or a witty expression, than by demonstration.

Whenever you commend, add your reasons for doing so; it is this which
distinguishes the approbation of a man of sense from the flattery of sycophants
and the admiration of fools.

Raillery is no longer agreeable than while the whole company is pleased with
it. I would least of all be understood to except the person railed at.

Though good humor, sense, and discretion can seldom fail to make a man
agreeable, it may be no ill policy sometimes to prepare yourself in a
particular manner for conversation, by looking a little farther than your
neighbors into whatever is become a reigning subject. If our armies are
besieging a place of importance abroad, or our House of Commons debating a bill
of consequence at home, you can hardly fail of being heard with pleasure, if
you have nicely informed yourself of the strength, situation, and history of
the former, or of the reasons for and against the latter. It will have the same
effect, if, when any single person begins to make a noise in the world, you can
learn some of the smallest incidents in his life or conversation; which, though
they are too fine for the observation of the vulgar, give more satisfaction to
men of sense, (as they are the best openings to a real character) than the
recital of his most glaring actions. I know but one ill consequence to be
feared from this method, namely, that coming full charged into company, you
should resolve to unload, whether a handsome opportunity offers itself or not.

Though asking of questions may plead for itself the specious name of modesty,
and a desire of information, it affords little pleasure to the rest of the
company who may not be troubled with the same doubts; besides which, he who
asks a question would do well to consider that he lies wholly at the mercy of
another before he receives an answer.

Nothing is more silly than the pleasure some people take in what they c^ll
speaking their minds. A man of this make will say a rude thing for the mere
pleasure of saying it, when an opposite behavior, full as innocent, might have
preserved his friend, or made his fortune.

It is not impossible for a man to form to himself as exquisite a pleasure in
complying with the humors and sentiments of others, as of bringing others over
to his own; since it is the certain sign of a superior genius, that it can take
and become whatever dress it pleases.

I shall only add, that besides what I have here said, there is something which
can never be learned but in the company of the polite. The virtues of men are
catching as well as their vices; and your own observations added to these, will
soon discover what it is that commands attention in one man, and makes you
tired and displeased with the discourse of another.

The PARTY-COLORED SHIELD.
A Story on the same Subject.
With hasty judgment never decide;
First hear what is said on either side.
R.
IN the days of knight-errantry and paganism, one of our old British princes
set up a statue to the goddess of Victory, in a point where four roads met
together. In her right hand she held a spear, and rested her left upon a
shield: the outside of this shield was of gold, and the inside of silver. On
the former was inscribed, in the old British language, To the goddess ever
favorable; and on the other, For four victories obtained successively over the
Picts, and other inhabitants of the Northern Islands.

It happened one day that two knights completely armed, the one in black
armor, and the other in white, arrived from opposite parts of the country at
this statue, just about the same time; and as neither of them had seen it
before, they stopped to read the inscriptions, and observe the excellence of
its workmanship. After contemplating it for some time, This golden shield, says
the black knight -- Golden shield, cried the White knight, (who was strictly
observing the opposite side) why, if I have my eyes, it is silver. I know
nothing of your eyes, replied the black knight; but if ever I saw a golden
shield in my life, this is one: yes, returned the White knight smiling, it is
very probable indeed, that they should expose a shield of gold in so public a
place as this: for my part, I wonder even a silver one is not too strong a
temptation for the devotion of some people that pass this way; and it appears
by the date, that this has been here above three years. The black knight could
not bear the smile with which this was delivered, and grew so warm in the
dispute, that it soon ended in a challenge; they both therefore turned their
horses, and rode back so far as to have sufficient space for their career, then
fixed their spears in their rests, and flew at each other with the greatest
fury and impetuosity. Their shock was so rude, and the blow on each side so
effectual, that they both fell to the ground, much wounded and bruised and lay
there for some time, as in a trance. A good Druid, who was traveling that way,
found them in this condition. The Druids were the physicians of those times, as
well as the priests. He had a sovereign balsam about him, which he had composed
himself, for he was very skilful in all the plants that grew in the fields, or
in the forests; he staunched their blood, applied his balsam to their wounds,
and brought them as it were from death to life again. As soon as they were
sufficiently recovered, he began to inquire into the occasion of their quarrel.
"Why, this man, cried the black knight, will have it, that that shield yonder
is silver." "And he will have it, replied the white knight, that it is gold;"
and then told him all the particulars of the affair. "Ah! said the Druid, with
a sigh, you are both of you, my brethren, in the right, and both of you in the
wrong: had either of you given himself time to look upon the opposite side of
the shield, as well as that which first presented itself to his view, all this
passion and bloodshed might have been avoided; however, there is a very good
lesson to be learned from the evils that have befallen you on this occasion.
Permit me therefore to entreat you, by all our gods, and by this goddess of
victory in particular, Never to enter into any dispute for the future, till you
have fairly considered both sides of the question."

On GAMING.
You Will find at least this maxim true,
Fools are the game which knaves pursue.
GAY.
IT is observable that Mahomet, in a particular manner, forbade gaming and
drunkenness to his followers, when at the same time he indulged them with
plurality of women. The last of which he looked upon as a passion, the seeds of
which are implanted as it were in our nature: whereas gaming and drunkenness he
absolutely forbade, as acquired and unnatural vices; as vices productive of the
most dreadful consequences. I will not at present examine the justness of the
compliment paid to amorous libertinism, which he certainly carried too far; but
shall observe, that his strict commands in regard to gaming and drunkenness,
have contributed more than any of his other injunctions to the happiness of his
followers.

Gaming (which I shall at present consider) seems to me of all vices the
greatest enemy of happiness: its inseparable attendants are envy, deceit,
profuseness, impiety, and a whole train of diabolical associates. Health, peace
of mind, love, family, friends, country, and in short every thing valuable or
desirable, are sacrificed to it. And to what then are they sacrificed? Why, to
avarice: avarice, the meanest of vices. The love of gaming is nothing more than
the love of other people's money. It is not the avarice of a miser; it is the
avarice of a thief, a robber; or rather the cowardly avarice of a pick-pocket.
It is avarice and profusion joined together; a most unnatural conjunction, and
productive of more terrible consequences than either of them singly can
possibly be: like Aaron's rod, it absorbs, it swallows up, and contains within
itself all other vices and may justly among vices be styled Legion; and of all
baits made use of by the grand enemy of mankind, to tempt us from our duty, and
make us unhappy here-after, gaming seems the most dangerous, and the best to
answer his diabolical ends.

It is ridiculous to hear the votaries of gaming term it an amusement, an
inoffensive relaxation, etc;. Those who so mis^al it, must notwithstanding
allow it to be an irrational, or unimproving diversion; and that at the best it
is but murdering time. But upon examination, every observer may find, that
dallying with the temptation draws on imperceptibly to the most destructive
consequences. But what shall be said of those who take no delight in gaming,
yet give into it on almost every occasion? Surely complaisance is a poor excuse
for doing a foolish or a wicked action, and that every gamester is a knave or a
fool, is a most palpable truth. A certain nobleman, hearing a gentleman spoken
of, who was said to be a great gamester: he is a most incorrigible blockhead,
cries my Lord. But on being assured he was a man of very brilliant parts: if
so, replies my Lord, he must be a rank scoundrel. Not so, my Lord, replies the
other, he bears the character of a gentleman of great worth and honor "That
cannot be, retorts the nobleman; every gamester is either a rogue or fool, pike
or gudgeon; and honor never makes a nearer approach to the heart of such a one
than the tip of his tongue."

All conversation, all improvement, is put a stop to the moment gaming
commences; friendship and society, benevolence and humanity cease, and nothing
further is thought of, but the ruin of those you are in company with; the ruin
of those you often make the strongest protestations of friendship to: the
gamester's happiness (like the devil's) depends on the misery of others; and,
like Satan too, he smiles on those whom in his heart he devotes to destruction.

The life of a gamester is a life of uncertainty (consequently of unhappiness;)
he can never properly call any thing his own, not being assured of its
possession one moment longer than till his next sitting down to the gaming
table. The thriving gamester, (how precarious is his thriving!) is the worst of
robbers; and the unfortunate, the worst of self-murderers: a murderer who
involves all those innocents, who unfortunately have any connection with him,
in the dismal gulf of beggary and wretched dependence.

If covetousness of another's property, and discontent with our own, be a
breach of the divine command, "Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's goods,
etc." the gamester is ever and superlatively guilty. The late Duke of A -- --
-- -- e, who had an aversion to all sorts of gaming, being urged to no purpose
by a nobleman to sport a little money: Sure, my Lord, cries the nobleman, you
must love your money vastly, to be afraid of venturing a trifle of it. It is
true, my Lord, (replies his Grace) I do love my own money; yet no person had
ever reason to say I was fond of another man's.

The male part of mankind who give into this vice, prostitute their talents to
the most vicious purposes; they become entirely absorbed by it; they stand like
slaves in the market, to be bought and sold; for necessity often glares them in
the face, and betrays them to venality.

If married, how can they reflect on the hazards they put the happiness of
wife, children, friends, etc;. to? And when ill fortune stares them in the
face, how often are they so cowardly as to have recourse to a pistol, and by
suicide leave those innocents to confront a danger they themselves were afraid
of facing? But when gaming, seizes the female breast, to all the above
mentioned misfortunes we may justly add, loss of beauty, which is ever the
consequence of late hours, ruffled passions, and a corroding heart. Her honor,
her chastity, can no longer be called her own, when she commences gamester. The
mansion of gracefulness and beauty is converted into a foul and darksome
dungeon. Attracting softness and modesty (the amiable characteristics of the
sex) are changed for unbecoming fierceness and acerbity of temper, and the
whole picture brings to our mind the different situation and figure of Satan
before and after the fall. These reflections (loose and undigested as they are)
were occasioned by the two following relations, which lately happened and which
probably several of my readers know to have but too much truth in them.

In one of the principal cities in England lived Lucius and Sapphira, blessed
with a moderate fortune. Health, love, peace of mind, and two little darlings,
a son and daughter. They seemed to want for nothing as an addition to their
happiness, nor were they insensible of what they enjoyed; but with gratitude to
Heaven, were instruments of good to all about them. Toward the close of last
summer, Lucius happening to be in company with some neighboring gentleman^ who
proposed to waste an hour or so at cards, he (...), more in compliance to
others' taste than his own. Like other sporters, he met with a variety of
fortune, (a variety more seducing than a continuance either of good or bad) and
warmed with liquor, he was inconsiderately drawn in before the company broke
up, to involve himself more than his fortune could bear. The next day, on sober
reflection, he could not support the thoughts of the distress his folly had
brought on his Sapphira and the little innocents; he had not courage to
acquaint her with what had happened; and whilst in the midst of pangs he had
hitherto been a stranger to, he was visited again, and again tempted by one of
the last night's company to try fortune once more. In order to drown
reflection, and in hopes of recovering his loss, he flew to the fatal place,
nor did he le^^^ it till he had lost his all. The consequence of which was,
that the next day, in despair indescribeable, after writing to acquaint
Sapphira with what had happened, he shot himself through the head; the news of
which deprived Sapphira of her senses: she is at present confined in a mad
house, and the two little innocents, destitute of parents and fortune, have a
troublesome world to struggle through, and are likely to feel all the miseries
that poverty and servile dependence entail on the wretched.

A young lady who lived in the North, was on the point of marriage with a young
gentleman whom she was doatingly fond of, and by whom she was as greatly
beloved: she was at the same time admired by a person of high rank, but whose
passion, as he was already married, was consequently dishonorable. He was
determined, however, at any rate to indulge his vicious flame; but as she was a
person of the strictest honor, he was obliged to act cautiously, and keep his
love a secret. Knowing her propensity to gaming, he laid a snare for her, into
which she fell, to the great diminution of her fortune. This he took care to
have represented with the most aggravating circumstances to the gentleman to
whom she was engaged. His friends painted to him the dreadful inconvenience of
his taking a gamester to wife: poverty, disease, and probably dishonor to his
bed, were the likely consequences; in a word, they managed matters so as to
break off the match. The villain who occasioned the breach between the lovers,
notwithstanding, missed his wicked ends; his addresses and proposals met with
contempt and abhorrence; yet though she preserved her chastity, (a circumstance
very uncommon among female gamesters) the loss of her intended spouse, whom she
was distractedly fond of, threw her into a decline, which in a few months put
an end to her life.

On DRUNKENNESS.
O that men should put an enemy into their mouths to steal away their brains!
SHAKESPEARE.
THE following is a letter from a father to his only son, in which he lays open
the detestable crime of drunkenness, and its shocking consequences, in striking
colors. As the subject of the letter is a vice not very uncommon in England, I
hope the inserting of it will need no further apology.

Dear Tom,
It is with the greatest concern I hear you have lately (more than once) been
guilty of getting fuddled in company with some of your youthful companions; you
can scarce think what a shock this account gave me. I know, my dear boy, you
have a great flow of spirits, a lively imagination, and great goodnature; but
those qualities, instead of guarding you against that odious fault, are, I am
afraid, most likely to hurry you into it: other vices generally have their
rise, and take deepest root in the meanest dispositions. Drunkenness on the
contrary, is often, too often observed to flourish in the richest and most
promising soils: this, Tom, is a principal reason why I feel for you. A social
good-natured youth is drawn in by degrees; if he is lively, smart, and witty,
his company is sought for by others; if wit in another captivates him, the
company he doats on draws him to the tavern, and though he steps cautiously at
first, he soon, from habit and example, loses all sense of what he is doing;
the sense of danger daily wears off; fondness for company by degrees draws on
fondness for liquor; he becomes more sottish, and consequently more stupid,
till at last his understanding, (an understanding that might have done honor
to his country, and benefited his fellow creatures) becomes clouded and
muddled, and instead of the promising expectations that his youth afforded, he
becomes a burden to himself, and despicable to all the world.

Drunkenness, Tom, stupifies the senses, destroys the memory, blunts the
understanding, fills men with diseases, and makes them incapable of business of
any kind: that this is the consequence of habitual drunkenness, too many
instances in every part of this kingdom will evidence. What a despicable
character that of a sot is I need not describe to you; and depend upon it,
every person who is fond of the company of topers, is in a fair way of becoming
a sot. If your inclination tends that way, check it immediately, nor deceive
yourself with the hopes of having the power to conquer it whenever you please;
in such a case, habit daily adds new strength to the vicious bent: the brute
part of us (appetite) soon possesses the whole man, and reason, which may be
called the angelic part, becomes quite s^^othered and destroyed: you know, my
lad, it is a common expression to say, He is as drunk as a beast. We do not
suppose that beasts get drunk; we mean by it, that man by inebriation drowns
his understanding; and when his reason is gone, he is upon a level with, nay
really far beneath the brute, irrational creation. Brutes are certainly equally
rational with such a wretch, if not more so, with the superior advantage of a
sound body, and an instinct to guide them.

I am not afraid of your giving into vices which flow from an illiberal genius
or stupidity; as swearing, for example, which shows a barrenness of
understanding, and a want of words; a want in reality of common sense in the
blasphemer. This, my dear boy, is far from being the case with you at present;
yet should you ever become an habitual drunkard, the company you must then be
often reduced to herd with, and the less of your understanding, will, you may
depend upon it, bring on that stupid vice as an additional od^^m on your
character.

I know the world is apt to laugh ^t the apprehension of any danger accruing
from getting fuddled now and then; they think the consequences innocent and
trifling, but they soon find themselves woefully mistaken. Getting fuddled is
the high road to habitual drunkenness; the oftener you are guilty of it, the
more you prejudice your health and understanding; and the less capable you are
to guard against that abominable vice: it steals upon you insensibly, and you
are seldom conscious of the danger till you are incapable of resisting it.

Consider, my dear lad, the first deviation from the level paths of virtue, is
the gradual imperceptible descent: the entrance is bewitching, as it lies
through the flowery regions of pleasure; but as you advance, the way soon
becomes rougher and less pleasing: the prospect by degrees grows dreary,
gloomy, and frightful: each step you advance grows steeper and steeper; your
power of resistance grows fainter and fainter; and you are hurried down, in
spite of the feeble efforts you are (...) capable of making, into the gulf of
shame and everlasting destruction.

A drunkard is the worst of suicides; he is a deliberate, determined self
murderer; he hurries himself out of the world; and for the short time he crawls
on the earth, he makes himself miserable, by loading himself with racking
distempers. Company, which he was so fond of, avoid and despise him, when he
can no longer contribute to their irrational mirth, (for you must never trust
to friendship commenced over a (...);) and the only faint glimmering of
pleasure he then enjoys, is when he is pouring down that liquid poison which
first occasioned, and still increases his disorder.

A certain people among the ancient Greeks (the L^^rians, I think) punished
with double rigor any crime committed in liquor; first, and principally, for
getting drunk; and, secondly, for the crime committed: for certainly he who
eradicates his reason deliberately, as drunkards do, is much more guilty of
what is committed for want of that reason, destroyed by his own fault, than he
whose reason is overcome by any accidental attack of passion.

You seem, Tom, to have some ambition in you, a laudable ambition, I hope, to
distinguish yourself, and cut a figure in the world: all that, my dear boy, is
over with you, if you once suffer drunkenness to become your master: that
emulation which might have made you illustrious, will of course be reversed
into an abasement that must degrade you below rationality; and scarce, as I
have hinted before, leave you on a level with the lowest order of grovelling
brutes.

Whenever you hear any person brag in company (which drunkards generally do
with great pleasure and self-consequence) that he got drunk, most damnably
drunk, set that fellow down for a fool at the best. It is a foolish, nay a
wicked way of priding himself, of what he should be ashamed of. What then must
we think of company, who by their behavior seem to approve such folly; and as
to the ridiculous custom of drinking healths, nothing certainly can be a
greater enemy to health than that is. I am sure it were as absurd to applaud a
person for eating to excess, as for drinking to excess; they are equally
despicable, gluttonous, mean, and hoggish.

A man may enjoy company infinitely to more advantage in walking, riding, etc;.
than in a tavern over a bottle. Moderate exercise contributes to health and
improvement of the faculties; and conversation at such times must be more
edifying from the variety of scenes that are continually presenting themselves
to the eye: or if the weather will not permit that, enjoy yourself in your own
or your friend's chamber, with an agreeable companion or two, which must be
much preferable to fuddling in a tavern, or an alehouse; where the longer you
remain, the less entertaining and improving must the conversation be. Besides,
I know you have a taste both for music and painting, and certainly any person
so endowed can never be at a los^ for a pleasing relaxation from study. I am
far, Tom, from being one of that rigid class of mortals, who decay cheerfulness
and mirth; I love mirth, you know I do: and cheerfulness (as the Spectator
says) is the very health of the soul; to preserve which, is one great reason
why I would have you avoid drinking; for drinking is in reality an enemy to
cheerfulness, goodnature, and mirth. In drinking, it is hard, nay almost
impossible, to stop at a certain mark; and when you once go beyond it, you are
hurried you know not whither; quarrelling, ga^ing, debauchery of all kinds, nay
often murder are the dreadful fruits of drinking; and in regard to
conversation, Tom, I would appeal to yourself, whether, from the little you
have seen of drinking (I sincerely hope it is but little) whether in your cool
moments you would not have been ashamed of the words and actions which you
applauded when warm with liquor: in a word, unless you most carefully guard
against drunkenness in your youth, it will insensibly steal on you; it will
make you miserable both in body and mind; it will prove an insuperable bar to
your becoming eminent in any profession; it will make you odious to yourself,
and despicable to others; it will afford a perpetual opening for the grand
tempter to make you miserable both here and hereafter; and indeed, and in
truth, I would rather hear of your being no more, than your becoming a
drunkard. You know I love you, Tom; yet the more I love you the more desirous I
would be of your descending to the grav^ than to hear of your giving way to
that scandalous, mean, detestable vice. I shall conclude my letter with a
little story I have somewhere read, and which I think much to the purpose.

"A certain young fellow had been drawn into a contract with the devil, that in
consideration of some important services from his diabolical majesty, the young
fellow was to comply with one of three requests the devil should think proper
to make him. It is to be observed, the devil had before tempted him in vain to
commit several crimes; but the young fellow had hitherto withstood his
temptations, and was still determined to refuse him in every thing but the one
request he was obliged by his contract to comply with: when it came to
Beelzebub's turn to command, he left it to the youth's choice, either to murder
his father, debauch his own sister, or get drunk. The young man chose the last,
as by far the least shocking; but when he had got drunk, the devil took that
opportunity of tempting him (which till he was drunk he never could effectually
do) to commit both the other crimes. Thus he was drawn in to commit all the
devil wanted; whereas if either of the other had been his choice, he would
probably have escaped so complicated guilt."


The HISTORY of SANTON BARSISA: showing the fatal Effects of encouraging bad
Thoughts.
Short is the course of every lawless pleasure;
Grief, like a shade, on all its footsteps waits,
Scarce visible in joy's meridian height;
But downwards, as its blaze declining spreads,
The dwarfish shadow to a giant grows.
MILTON.
THERE was formerly a Santon, whose name was Barsisa, who, for the space of an
hundred years, very frequently applied himself to prayer; and scarce ever went
out of the grotto in which he made his residence, for fear of exposing himself
to the danger of offending God. He fasted in the day time, and watched in the
night; all the inhabitants of the country had so great a veneration for him,
and so highly valued his prayers, that they commonly applied to him when ^hey
had any favors to beg of heaven. When he made vows for the health of a sick
person, the patient was immediately cured.

It happened that the daughter of the king of that country fell into a
dangerous distemper, the cause of which the physicians could not discover, yet
they continued prescribing remedies by guess; but instead of helping the
Princess, they only augmented her disease. In the mean time, the King was
inconsolable, for he passionately loved his daughter: wherefore one day,
finding all human assistance vain, he declared it as his opinion, that the
Princess ought to be sent to the Santon Barsisa.

All the Beys applauded his sentiment, and the King's officers conducted her to
to the Santon; who, notwithstanding his frozen age, could not see such a
beauty, without being sensibly moved. He gazed on her with pleasure; and the
devil taking this opportunity, whispered in his ears thus "Oh, Santon! do not
let slip such a fortunate minute: tell the King's servants, that it is
requisite for the Princess to pass this night in the grotto, to see whether it
will please God to cure her; that you will put up a prayer for her, and that
they need only come to fetch her tomorrow.

How weak is man! the Santon followed the devil's advice, and did what he
suggested to him. But the officers, before they would yield to leave the
Princess, sent one of their number to know the King's pleasure. That monarch,
who had an entire confidence in Barsisa, never in the least scrupled the
trusting of his daughter with him. I consent, said he, that she stay with that
holy man, and that he keep her as long as he pleases: I am wholly satisfied on
that head.

When the officers had received the King's answer, they retired, and the
Princess remained alone with the Hermit. Night being come, the devil presented
himself to the Santon, saying, "Can thou let slip so favorable an
opportunity with so charming a creature? Fear not her telling of the violence
you offer to her; if she were even so indiscreet as to reveal it, who will
believe her? The court, the city, and all the world are too much prepossessed
in thy favor, to give any credit to such a report. You may do any thing
unpunished, when armed by the great reputation for wisdom which you have
acquired." The unfortunate Barsisa was so weak as to hearken to the enemy of
mankind. He approached the Princess, took her into his arms, and in a moment
cancelled a virtue of an hundred years duration.

He had no sooner perpetrated the crime, than a thousand avenging horrors
haunted him night and day. He thus accosted the devil: "Oh wretch, says he, it
is thou who have destroyed me! thou have encompassed me for a whole age, and
endeavored to seduce me; and now thou have at last gained thy end." "Oh.
Santon! answered the devil, do not repro^ch me with the pleasures thou have
enjoyed. Thou may repent: but what is unhappy for thee is, that the Princess
is impregnate, and thy sin will become public: thou will become the
laughing stock of those who admire and reverence thee at present, and the King
will put thee to an ignominious death."

Barsisa, terrified by this discourse, says to the devil, "What shall I do to
prevent the publication of my shame?" "To hinder the knowledge of your crime,
you ought to commit a fresh one, answered the devil. Kill the Princess, bury
her in a corner of the grotto, and when the King's messengers come tomorrow,
tell them you have cured her, and that she went from the grotto very early in
the morning: they will believe you, and search for her all over the city and
country; and the King her father will be in great pain for her; but after
several vain searches, it will wear off."

The Hermit, abandoned by God, pursuant to this advice; killed the Princess,
buried her in a corner of the grotto, and the next day told the officers what
the devil bade him say. They made diligent inquiry for the King's daughter; but
not being able to hear of her, they despaired of finding her, when the devil
told them that all their searches for the Princess were in vain; and relating
what had passed betwixt her and the Santon, he told them the place where she
was interred. The officers immediately went to the grotto, seized Barsisa, and
found the Princess's body in the place to which the devil had directed them;
whereupon they took up the corpse, and carried it and the Santon to the palace.

When the King saw his daughter dead, and was informed of the whole event, he
broke out into tears and bitter lamentations; and assembling the doctors, he
laid the Santon's crime before them, and asked their advice how he should be
punished. All the doctors condemned him to death; upon which the gibbet was
erected. When the Hermit went up the ladder, and was going to be turned off,
the devil whispered in his ear these words, O Santon! if you will worship me, I
will extricate you out of this difficulty, and transport you two thousand
leagues from hence, into a country where you shall be reverenced by men, as
much as you were before this adventure." "I am content, says Barsisa; deliver
me, and I will worship thee." "Give me first a sign of adoration," replied the
devil; whereupon the Santon bowed his head, and said, "I give myself to you."
Then the devil raising his voice, said, "O, Barsisa, I am satisfied; I have
obtained what I desired:" and with these words, spitting in his face, he
disappeared; and the deluded Santon was hanged.

From this may be inferred, that evil thoughts will sometimes start up even in
the best of minds, which, when checked as soon as noticed, can never be deemed
criminal, but ought to be carefully stified in embrio, as the first incitements
to sin; for vice naturally begets vice, and the least digression from virtue is
frequently succeeded by such a train of evils, as leads on imperceptibly to
certain ruin.

On the imperceptible Deviation to VICE, and the Remonstrances of CONSCIENCE.
Story of AMURATH -- An Eastern Monarch.
When conscience pleads, turn not away,
It Is Heaven that speaks and points the way.
R.
BY which of the Indian sages of antiquity the following story was written, or
whether the people of the East have any remote tradition upon which it is
founded, is not known; but it was probably related in the first person, to give
it an air of greater dignity, and render its influence more powerful: nor would
it, perhaps, appear altogether incredible to people among whom the
Metempsychosis is an article of faith, and the visible agency of superior
beings admitted without scruple.

Amurath, Sultan of the East, the judge of nations, the disciple of adversity,
records the wonders of his life; let those who presumptuously question the ways
of Providence, blush in silence and be wise, let the proud be humble, and
obtain honor; and let the sensual reform^ and be happy.

The angel of death closed the eyes of the Sultan Abradin, my father, and his
empire descended to me in the eighteenth year of my age. At first my mind was
awed to humility, and softened with grief; I was insensible to the splendour of
dominion; I heard the addresses of flattery with disgust, and received the
homage of dependent greatness with indifference. I had always regarded my
father, not only with love, but reverence; and I was now perpetually
recollecting instances of his tenderness, and reviewing the solemn scene, in
which he recommended me to heaven in imperfect language, and grasped my hand in
the agonies of death.

One evening, after having concealed myself all day in my chamber, I visited
his grave: I prostrated myself on his tomb; sorrow overflowed my eyes, and
devotion kindled in my bosom. I felt myself, suddenly smitten on the shoulder
as with a rod; and looking up, I perceived a man whose eyes were piercing as
light, and his beard whiter than snow. "I am, said he, the Genius Syndarac, the
friend of thy father Abradin, who was the fear of his enemies, and the desire
of his people; whose smile diffused gladness like the luster of the morning,
and whose frown was dreadful as the gathering of a tempest: resign thyself to
my influence, and thou shall be like him." I bowed myself to the earth in token
of gratitude and obedience, and he put a ring on the middle finger of my left
hand, in which I perceived a ruby of a deep color and uncommon brightness.
"This ring, said he, shall mark out to thee the boundaries of good and evil;
that, without weighing remote consequences, thou may know the nature and
tendency of every action. Be attentive therefore to the silent admonition; and
when the circle of gold shall, by a sudden contraction, press thy finger, and
the ruby shall grow pale, desist immediately from what thou shall be doing, and
mark down that action in thy memory as a transgression of the rule of right:
keep my gift as a pledge of happiness and honor, and take it not off for a
moment." I received the ring with a sense of obligation which I strove to
express, and an astonishment that compelled me to be silent. The Genius
perceived my confusion, and turning from me with a smile of complacency,
immediately disappeared.

During the first moon I was so cautious and circumspect, that the pleasure of
reflecting that my ring had not once indicated a fault, was lessened by a doubt
of its virtue. I applied myself to the public business. My melancholy
decreased, as my mind was diverted to other objects; and, lest the youth of my
court should think that recreation was too long suspended, I appointed to ^eat
the lion. But though I went out to the sport to gratify others rather than
myself, yet my usual ardour returned in the field; I grew warm in the pursuit,
I continued the chase, which was unsuccessful, too long, and returned fatigued
and disappointed.

As I entered the seraglio, I was met by a little dog that had been my
father's, who expressed his joy at my return by jumping round me, and
endeavoring to reach my hand: but as I was not disposed to receive his
caresses, I struck him, in the fretfulness of my displeasure, so severe a blow
with my foot, that it left him scarce power to crawl away, and hide himself
under a sofa in the corner of the apartment. At this moment I felt the ring
press my finger, and looking upon the ruby, I perceived the glow of its color
abated.

I was at first struck with surprise and regret; but surprise and regret
quickly gave way to disdain. "Shall not the Sultan Amurath, said I, to whom a
thousand kings pay tribute, and in whose hand is the life of nations, shall not
Amurath strike a dog that offends him, without being reproached for having
transgressed the rule of right?" My ring again pressed my finger, and the ruby
became more pale: immediately the palace shock with a burst of thunder, and the
Genius Syndarac again stood before me.

"Amurath, said he, thou have offended against thy brother of the dust; a being
who, like thee, has received from the ALMIGHTY a capacity of pleasure and pain:
pleasure which caprice is not allowed to suspend, and pain which justice only
has a right to inflict. If thou art justified by power in afflicting inferior
beings, I should be justified in afflicting thee: but my power yet spares thee,
because it is directed by the laws of sovereign goodness, and because thou
may yet be reclaimed by admonition. But yield not to the impulse of quick
resentment, nor indulge in cruelty the forwardness of disgust, lest by the laws
of goodness I be compelled to afflict thee; for he that (...) reproof, must be
reformed by punishment, or lost for ever."

At the presence of Syndarac I was troubled, and his words covered me with
confusion: I fell prostrate at his feet, and heard him pronounce with a milder
accent, "Expect not henceforth that I should answer the demands of arrogance,
or gratify the curiosity of speculation; confide in my friendship, and trust
implicitly to thy ring."

As the chase had produced so much infelicity, I did not repeat it, but invited
my nobles to a banquet, and entertained them with dancing and music. I had
given leave that all ceremony should be suspended, and that the company should
treat me, not as a sovereign, but an equal, because the conversation would
otherwise be incumbered or restrained; and I encouraged others to pleasantry,
by indulging the luxuriancy of my own imagination. But though I affected to
throw off the trappings of royalty, I had not sufficient magnanimity to despise
them. I enjoyed the voluntary deference which was paid me, and was secretly
offended at Alibeg, my vizier, who endeavored to prevail upon the assembly to
enjoy the liberty that had been given them, and was himself an example of the
conduct that he recommended. I singled out as the object of my raillery the man
who alone deserved my approbation: he believed my condescension to be sincere,
and imagined that he was securing my favor by that behavior which incurred my
displeasure; he was, therefore, grieved and confounded to perceive that I
labored to render him ridiculous and contemptible: I enjoyed his pain, and was
elated at my success; but my attention was suddenly called to my ring, and I
perceived the ruby change color. I desisted for a moment; but some of my
courtiers having discovered and seconded my intention, I felt my vanity and
resentment gratified; I endeavored to wash away the remembrance of my ring
with wine; my satire became more bitter, and Alibeg discovered yet greater
distress. My ring again reproached me; but I still persevered. The vizier was
at length roused to his defense; probably he had discovered and despised my
weakness: his replies were so poignant, that I became outrageous, and descended
from raillery to invectives: at length, disguising the anguish of his mind with
a smile, " Amurath, said he, If the Sultan should know, that after having
invited your friends to festivity and merriment, you had assumed this
authority, and insulted those who were not aware that you disdained to be
treated with the familiarity of friendship, you would certainly fall under his
displeasure." The severity of this sarcasm, which was extorted by long
pr^^ocations from a man warmed with wine, stung me with intolerable rage: I
started up, and spurning him from the table, was about to draw my poignard;
when my attention was again called to my ring, and I perceived with some degree
of regret, that the ruby had fallen almost to a perfect white.

But instead of being resolved to be more watchful against whatever might bring
me under the silent reproof, I comforted myself, that the Genius would no more
alarm me with his presence. The irregularities of my conduct increased almost
imperceptibly, and the intimations of my ring became proportionably more
frequent, though less forcible; till at last they were so familiar, that I
scarce remarked when they were given and when suspended.

It was soon discovered that I was pleased with servility; servility therefore
was practiced, and I rewarded it sometimes with a pension, and sometimes with a
place. Thus the government of my kingdom was left to petty tyrants, who
oppressed the people to enrich themselves. In the mean time I filled my
seraglio with women, among whom I abandoned myself to sensuality, without
enjoying the pure delight of that love which arises from esteem. But I had not
yet stained my hands with blood, (...) dared to ridicule the laws which I had
neglected to fulfill.

My resentment against Alibeg, however unjust, was inflexible, and terminated
in the most perfect hatred. I degraded him from his office; but I still kept
him at court, that I might embitter his life by perpetual indignities, and
practice against him new schem^ of malevolence.

Selima, the daughter of this Prince, had been intended by my father for my
wife, and the marriage had been delayed only by his death: but the pleasure and
the dignity that Alibeg would derive from this alliance had now changed with my
purpose. Yet such was the beauty of Selima, that I gazed with desire; and such
was her wit, that I listened with delight. I therefore resolved, that I would,
if possible, seduce her to voluntary prostitution; and that when her beauty
should yield to the charms of variety, I would dismiss her with marks of
disgrace. But in this attempt I could not succeed; my solicitations were
rejected sometimes with tears, and sometimes with reproaches. I became every
day more wretched, by seeking to bring calamities upon others; I considered my
disappointment as the triumph of a slave, whom I wished, but did not dare to
destroy; and I regarded his daughter as the instrument of my dishonor. Thus
the tenderness, which before had shaken my purpose, was weakened; my desire for
beauty became (...) selfish and as sordid an appetite, as my desire for foo^^
and as I had no hope of obtaining the complete gratification of my lust and my
revenge, I determined to enjoy Selima by force, as the only expedient to
alleviate my torment.

She resided by my command in an apartment of the seraglio, and I entered her
chamber at midnight by a private door, of which I had the key; but with
inexpressible vexation I found it empty. To be thus disappointed in my last
attempt, at the very moment in which I thought I had insured success,
distracted me with rage; and instead of returning to my chamber, and concealing
my design, I called for her women. They ran in pale and trembling; I demanded
the lady; they gazed at me astonished and terrified, and then looking upon each
other, stood silent: I repeated my demand with fury and execration, and to
enforce it, called aloud for the ministers of death: they then fell prostrate
at my feet, and declared with one voice that they knew not where she was; that
they had left her, when they were dismissed for the night, sitting on a sofa,
pensive and alone; and that no person had since, to their knowledge, passed in
or out of her apartment.

The Story of AMURATH continued.
Of mortal justice, if thou scorn the rod, Believe and tremble -- thou art
judged of God.
P
IN this account, however incredible, they persisted without variation; and
having filled the palace with alarm and confusion, I was obliged to retire,
without gaining any intelligence by what means I had been baffled, or on whom
to turn my resentment. I reviewed the transactions of the night with anguish
and regret, and bewildered myself among the innumerable possibilities that
might have produced my disappointment. I remembered that the windows of
Selima's apartments were open, and I imagined that she might that way have
escaped into the gardens of the seraglio. But why should she escape who had
never been confined? If she had designed to departed, she might have departed
by day. Had she an assignation? And did she intend to return, without being
known to have been absent? This supposition increased my torment; because, if
it was true, Selima had granted to my slave that which she refused to me. But
as all these conjectures were uncertain, I determined to make her absence a
pretense to destroy her father.

In the morning, I gave orders that he should be seized and brought before me;
but while I was yet speaking, he entered, and prostrating himself, thus
anticipated my accusation: "May the Sultan Amurath, in whose wrath the angel of
death goes forth, rejoice for ever in the smiles of heaven! let the wretched
Alibeg perish; but let my Lord remember Selima with mercy; let him dismiss the
slave in whom he ceases to delight." I heard no more, but cried out, "Dare
thou ^o mock me with a request, to dismiss thy daughter whom thou have stolen?
Thou, whose life, that has been so often forfeited, I have yet spared I restore
her within an hour, or affronted mercy shall give thee (...) "O! said he, let
not the mighty sover^^^ of the East sport with the misery of the ^^ax. If thou
(...) doomed us to death, let us die tog^^^."

Though I was now convinced that Alibeg believed I had confined Selima, and
decreed her death, yet I resolved to persist inquiring her in his hands; and
therefore dismissed him (...) a repetition of my command, to produce her with^^
(...), upon (...) of death.

My ring, which during this series of events had given perpetual intimation of
guilt, and which was always disregarded, now pressed my finger so forcibly,
that it gave me great pain, and compelled my notice. I immediately retired, and
gave way to the discontent that swelled my bosom. "How wretched a slave is
Amurath to an invisible tyrant! a being, whose malevolence or envy has
restrained me in the exercise of my authority as a Prince, and whose cunning
has contrived perpetually to insult me, by intimating that every action of my
life is a crime! how long shall I groan under this intolerable oppression? This
accursed ring is the badge and the instrument of my subjection and dishonor:
he who gave it, is now perhaps in some remote region of the air; perhaps he
rolls some planet in its orbit, agitates the southern ocean with a tempest, or
shakes some distant region with an earthquake: but wherever he is, he has
surely a more important employ than to watch my conduct. Perhaps he has
contrived this talisman, only to restrain me from the enjoyment of some good,
which he wishes to withhold; I feel that my desires are controuled; and to
gratify these desires is to be happy." As I pro^^^^^ed these words I drew off
the ring, and threw it to the ground with disdain and indignation: immediately
the air grew dark; a cloud burst in thunder over my head, and the eye of
Syndarac was upon me. I stood before him motionless and silent: horror thrilled
in my veins, and my hair stood upright. I had neither power to deprecate his
anger, nor to confess my faults. In his countenance there was a calm serenity;
and I heard him pronounce these words: "thou have now, as far as is in thy own
power, thrown off humanity, and degraded thy being; thy form therefore shall no
longer conceal thy nature. nor thy example render thy vices contagious." He
then touched me with his rod; and while the sound of his voice yet vibrated in
my ears, I found myself in the midst of a desert, not in the form of a man, but
of a monster, with the sore parts of my body like a wolf, and the hinder parts
like a goat. I was still conscious to every event of my life, and my
intellectual powers were continued, though my passions were irritated to
frenzy. I now rolled in the sand in an agony not to be described; and now
hastily traversed the desert, impelled only by the vain desire of flying from
myself: I now bellowed with rage, and now howled in despair; this moment I
breathed execrations against the Genius, and the next reproached myself for
having forfeited his friendship.

By this violent agitation of mind and body, the powers of both were soon
exhausted: I crawled into a den which I perceived near me, and immediately sunk
down in a state of insensibility. I slept; but sleep, instead of prolonging,
put an end to this interval of quiet. The Genius still terrified me with his
presence; I heard his sentence repeated, and felt again all the horrors of my
transformation. When I awaked, I was not refreshed: calamity, though it
compelled me to admit slumber, yet could exclude fest. But I was now roused
with hunger; for hunger, like sleep, is irresistible.

I went out in search of prey; and if I felt any alleviation of misery, besides
the hope of satisfying my appetite, it was in the thought of ^earing to pieces
whatever I should meet, and inflicting some part of the evil which I endured;
for though I regretted my punishment. I did not ^epent of my crimes; and as I
imagined Syndarac would now neither mitigate nor increase my sufferings, I was
not restrained, either by hope or fear, from indulging my disposition to
cruelty and revenge. But while I was thus meditating the destruction of others,
I trembled, left by some stronger savage I should be destroyed myself.

In the midst of this variety of torment I heard the cry of dogs, the trampling
of horses, and the shouts of the hunters, and such is the love of life, however
wretched, that my heart sunk within me at the sound. To hide my, self was
impossible, and I was too much enfeebled either to fly or resist. I stood still
till they came up. At first they gazed at me with wonder, and doubted whether
they should advance; but at length a slave threw a net over me, and I was
dragged to the city.

I now entered the metropolis of my empire, amidst the noise and tumult of the
rabble, who the day before would have hid themselves at my presence. I heard
the sound of music at a distance; the heralds approached and Alibe^ was
proclaimed in my stead. I was now deserted by the multitude, whose curiosity
was diverted by the pomp of the procession; and was conducted to the place
where other savages are kept, which custom has considered as part of the
regalia.

My keeper was a black slave, whom I did not remember ever to have seen, in
whom it would (...) have been a fatal presumption to have stood before me.
After he (...) given me food, and the vigor of nature was restored, he (...)
covered in me such tokens of ferocity, that he suffered me to fast many hours
before I was again fed. I was so enraged at this delay, that, forgetting my
dependence, I roared horribly when he again approached me; so that he found it
necessary to add blows to hunger, that he might gain such an ascendency over me
as was, suitable to his office. By this slave, I was alternately beaten and
famished, till the fierceness of my disposition being suppressed by fear and
langour, a mild temper insensibly stole upon me and a demeanor that was begun
by constraint was continued by habit.

I was now treated with less severity, and strove to express something like
gratitude, that might encourage my keeper to yet greater kindness. His vanity
was flattered by my submission; and, to show as well his courage as the success
of his discipline, he ventured sometimes to caress me in the presence of those
whose curiosity brought them to see me. A kind of friendship thus imperceptibly
grew between us, and I felt some degree of the affection I had feigned. It
happened that a tiger which had been lately ^^ken, broke one day into my den,
while my keeper was giving me my provision, and leaping upon him, would
instantly have torn him to pieces, if I had not seized the savage by the
throat, and dragged him to the ground: the slave instantly dispatched him with
his dagger, and turned about to caress his deliverer; but starting suddenly
backward, he stood motionless with astonishment, perceiving that I was no
longer a monster, but a dog.

I was myself conscious of the change which had again passed upon me, and
leaping out of my den, escaped from my confinement. This transformation I
considered as a reward for my fidelity, and was perhaps never more happy than
in the first moments of my escape; for I reflected, that as a dog, my liberty
was not only restored, but insur^^ I was no longer suspected of qualities which
rendered me unfit for society; I had some faint resemblance of human virtue,
which is not found in other animals, and therefore hoped to be more generally
caressed. But it was not long before this joy subsided in the remembrance of
that dignity from which I had fallen, and from which I was still at an
immeasurable distance. Yet I lifted up my heart in gratitude to the power who
had once more brought me within the circle of nature. As a brute, I was more
thankful for a ^^^igation of punishment, than as a King I had been for offers
of the highest happiness and honor: and who, that is not taught by affliction,
can justly estimate the bounties of heaven?

As soon as the first tumult of my mind was past, I felt an irresistible
inclination once more to visit the apartments of my seraglio. I placed myself
behind an emir, whom I knew to have been the friend of Alibeg, and was
permitted to follow him into the presence. The persons and the place, the
retrospection of my life which they produced, and the comparison of what I was
with what I had been, almost over whelmed me. I went unobserved into the
garden, and lay down under the shade of an almond-tree, that I might indulge
those reflections which, though they oppressed me with melancholy, I did not
wish to lose.

I had not been long in this place before a little dog, which I knew to be the
same I had spurned from me when he caressed me at my return from hunting, came
and fawned at my feet. My heart smote me, and I said to myself, "Do thou know
me under this disguise? Is thy fidelity to thy Lord unshaken? Cut off as I am
from the converse of mankind, have thou preserved for me an affection, which I
once so slightly esteemed, and requited with evil? This forgetfulness of
injury, and this steady friendship, are they less than human, or are they
more?" I was not prevented by these reflections from returning those caresses
that I received; and Alibeg, who just entered the garden, took notice of me,
and ordered that I should not be turned out.

In the seraglio, I soon learned, that a body which was thought to be mine was
found dead in the chamber; and that Alibeg had been chosen to succeed me, by
the unanimous voice of the people. But I gained no intelligence of Selima,
whose apartment I found in the possession of another, and for whom I had
searched every part of the palace in vain. I became restless; every place was
irksome; a desire to wander prevailed; and one evening I wont out at the
garden-gate, and traveling till midnight, I lay down at the foot of a sycamore
tree and slept.

In the morning, I beheld with surprise a wall of marble that seemed to reach
to heaven, and gates that were sculptured with every emblem of delight. Over
the gate was inscribed in letters of gold, "Within this wall liberty is
unbounded, and felicity complete: nature is not oppressed by the tyranny of
religion, nor is pleasure awed by the frown of virtue The gate is obedient to
thy wish, whosoever thou art: enter therefore, and be happy."

When I read this inscription, my bosom throbbed with tumultuous expectation:
but my desire to enter was repressed by the reflection that I had lost the form
in which alone I could gratify the appetites of a man. Desire and curiosity
were notwithstanding predominants, The door immediately opened inward: I
entered, and it closed after me.

The Story of AMURATH concluded.
Scarcely an ill to human life belongs,
But what our ^ullies cause, or mutual Wrongs;
Or if some stripes from Providence We feel,
He strikes with pity, and but wounds to heal.
DODSLEY.
BUT my ears were now stunned with the dissonance of riot, and my eyes sickened
at the contortions of misery: disease was visible in every countenance, however
impressed with the character of rage, of drunkenness, or of lust; rape and
murder, revelling and strife, filled every street and every dwelling.

As my retreat was cut off, I went forward with timidity and circumspection;
for (...) imagined that I could not otherwise escape injury, than by eluding
the notice of wretches whose propensity to ill was restrained by no law; and I
perceived too late, that to punish vice is to promote happiness.

It was now evening; and that I might pass the night in greater security. I
quitted the public way; and perceiving a house that was incircled by a moat, I
swam over to it, and chose an obscure corner of the area for my asylum. I heard
from within, the sound of dancing and music; but after a short interval, was
alarmed with the menaces of rage, the shrieks of terror, and the wailings of
distress. The window of the banqueting room flew open, and some venison was
thrown out which fell just at my feet. As I had eaten nothing since my
departure from the seraglio, I regarded this as a fortunate accident: and after
the pleasure of an unexpected repast, I again lay down in expectation of the
morning, with hope and fear: but in a short time many persons rushed from the
house with lights, and seemed solicitons to gather up the venison which had
been thrown out; but not being able to find it, and at the same time perceiving
me, they judged I had devoured it. I was immediately seized, and led into the
house: but as I could not discover that I was the object either of malignity or
kindness, I was in a doubt what would be the issue of the event. It was not
long before this doubt was solved; for I soon learned from the discourse of
those about me, that I was suspected to have eaten poison which had been
intended for another, and was secured, that the effect might either remove or
confirm the suspicion. As it was not expected that the poison would immediately
operate. I was locked up in a room by myself, where I reflected upon the cause
and event of my confinement with inexpressible anguish, anxiety, and terror.

In this gloomy interval a sudden light shone round me, and I found myself once
more in the presence of the Genius; I crawled toward him trembling and
confound^^, but not utterly without hope. "Yet a few moments, said he, and the
angel of death shall teach thee, that the wants of nature cannot be supplied
with safety, where the inordinate appetites of vice are not restrained. Thy
hunger required food; but the lust and revenge of others have given thee
poison." My blood grew chill as he spoke, I discovered and abhorred my folly:
but while I wished to express my contrition, I fell down in an agony; my eyes
failed me, I shivered, was convulsed, and expired.

That spark of immaterial fire, which no violence (...) quench, rose up from
the dust which had thus been restored to the earth, and now animated the form
of a dove. On this new state of existence I entered with inexpressible delight:
I imagined that my wings were not only a pledge of safety, but of the favor of
Syndarac whom I was now more than ever solicitous to please. I flew immediately
from the window, and turning toward the wall through which I entered, I
endeavored to rise above it, that I might quit for ever a place in which guilt
and wretchedness were complicated in every object, and which I now detested as
much as before I had desired. But over this region a sulphurous vapor hovered
like a thick cloud, which I no sooner entered than I fell down panting for
breath, and had scarce strength to keep my wings sufficiently extended to break
my fall. It was now midnight, and I alighted near the mouth of a cave, in which
I thought there appeared some faint glimmerings of light. Into this place I
entered without much apprehension: as it rather appeared to be the retreat of
penitence, than the recess of luxury: but lest the noise of my wings should
discover me to any hateful or mischievous inhabitant of this gloomy solitude, I
entered in silence, and upon my feet. As I went forward the cave grew wider;
and by the light of a lamp which was suspended from the roof, I discovered a
Hermit listening to a young lady, who seemed to be greatly affected with the
events which she was relating. Of the Hermit I had no knowledge; but the lady I
discerned to be Selima. I was struck with amazement at this discovery; I
remembered with the deepest contrition my attempts upon her virtue, and I now
secretly rejoiced that she had rendered them ineffectual: I watched her lips
with the utmost impatience of curiosity, and she continued her narrative thus.

"I was sitting on a sofa one evening, after I had been caressed by Amurath,
and my imagination kindled as I mused. Why, said I aloud, should I give up the
delights of love with the splendour of royalty? Since the presumption of my
father has prevented my marriage, why should I not accept the blessings that
are still offered? Why is desire restrained by the dread of shame? And why is
the (...) of virtue offended by the softness of nature? Immediately a thick
cloud surrounded one; I felt myself lifted up, and conveyed through the air
with incredible rapid^y. I descended, the cloud dissipated, and I found myself
sitting in an alcove, by the side of a canal that encircled a stately edifice
and a spacious garden. I saw many persons pass along; but discovered in all
either something dissolute or wretched, something that alarmed my fear, or
excited my pity. I suddenly perceived many men with their swords drawn,
contending for a woman, who was forced almost irresistibly by the crowd, which
moved directly toward the place in which I was sitting. I was terrified, and
looked round me with eagerness to (...) where I could retreat for safety. A
person richly dressed perceived my distress, and invited me into the house,
which the canal surrounded. This invitation I hastily accepted with gratitude
and joy; but I soon remarked several incidents which filled me with now
perplexity and apprehension. I was welcomed to a place in which infamy and
honor were equally unknown; where every wish was indulged without the
violation of my law, and where the will was therefore determined only by
appetite. I was presently surrounded by women, whose behavior covered me with
blushes; and though I rejected the caresses of the person into whose power I
was delivered, yet they became jealous of the distinction with which he treated
me. My expostulations were not heard, and my tears were treated with merriment:
preparations were made for revelling and jollity: I was invited to join the
dance, and upon my refusal was entertained with music. In this dreadful
situation, I sighed thus to myself: how severe is that justice which transports
those who form licentious wishes, to a society in which they (...) indulged
without restraint! who shall deliver me from the effects of my own folly? Who
shall defend me against the vices of others? At this moment I was thus ^^raged
by the voice of some invisible being: tho friends of virtue are mighty; reject
not their protection, and thou art safe. "As I renounced the presumptuous wish
which had once polluted my mind, I exulted in this intimation with assurances
of relief; and when supper was set before me, I suffered the principal lady to
serve me with some venison; but the friendly voice having warned me that it was
poisoned, I fell back in my seat, and turned pale: the lady inquired earnestly
what had disordered me; but instead of making a reply, I threw the venison from
the window, and declared that she had intended my death. The master of the
table, who perceived that the lady to whom I spoke changed countenance, was at
once convinced that she had indeed attempted to poison me, to preserve that
interest which as a rival she feared I should subvert. He rose up in a rage,
and commanded the venison to be produced: a dog that was supposed to have eaten
it was brought in; but before the event could be known the (...) was become
general; and my rival, after having suddenly stabbed her patron, plunged the
same poignard in her bosom.

"In the midst of this confusion I found means to escape, and wandered through
the city in search of some obscure recess, where, if I received not the
assistance which I hoped, death at last might secure my person from violence,
and close mine eyes on those scenes which, wherever I turned, filled me not
only with disgust, but with horror. By that benevolent power, who, as a
preservative from misery has placed in us a secret and irresistible
disapprobation of vice, my feet have been directed to thee, whose virtue has
participated in my distress, and whose wisdom may effect my deliverance."

I gazed upon Selima, while I thus learned the ardour of that affection which I
had abused, with sentiments that can never be conceived but when they are felt.
I was touched with the most bitter remorse, for having produced one wish that
could stain so amiable a mind; and abhorred myself for having used the power
which I derived from her tenderness, to effect her destruction. My fondness was
not less ardent, but it was more chaste and tender; desire was not
extinguished, but it was almost absorbed in esteem. I felt a (...), to which
till now I had been a stranger; and the moment love was kindled in my breast, I
resumed the proper form of the nature in which alone it can subsist, and Selima
beheld Amurath at her feet. At my sudden and unexpected appearance, the color
faded from her cheeks, the powers of life were suspended, and she sunk into my
arms. I clasped her to my breast, and looking toward the Hermit for
assistance, I beheld in his stead the friendly Genius who had taught me
happiness by affliction. At the same instant Selima recovered, "Arise, said
Syndarac, and look round." We looked round; the darkness was suddenly
dissipated, and we ^^received ourselves in the road to Gol^onda, and the spires
of the city sparkling before us. "Go, said he, Amurath, henceforth the husband
of Selima, and the father of thy people! I have revealed thy story to Alibeg in
a vision: he expects thy return, and the chariots are come out to meet thee.
Go, and I will proclaim before thee, Amurath the Sultan of the East, the judge
of nations, the taught of heaven: Amurath, whose ring is equal to the ring of
Colomon, returns to reign with wisdom, and diffuse felicity." I now lifted up
my eyes, and beheld the chariots coming forward. We were received by Alibeg
with sentiments which could not be uttered, and by the people with the loudest
acclamations: Syndarac proclaimed our return in thunder, that was heard through
all the nations of my empire; and has prolonged my reign in prosperity and
peace.

For the world I have written, and by the world let what I write be remembered:
for to none who hears of the ring of Amurath shall its influence be wanting. Of
this, is not thy heart a witness, thou whose eye drinks instruction from my
pen? Have thou not a monitor, who reproaches thee in secret, when thy foot
deviates from the path of virtue? Neglect not the first whispers of this friend
to thy soul: it is the voice of a greater than Syndarac, to resist whose
influence is to invite destruction.

On the VANITY of HUMAN LIFE.
The Vision of MIRZA.
O, what is life, that thoughtless wish of all!
A drop of honey, and a draught of gall.
R.
ON the fifth day of the moon, which, according to the custom of my
forefathers, I always kept holy, after having washed myself, and offered up my
morning devotions, I ascended the high hills of Bagdad, in order to pass the
rest of the day in meditation and prayer. As I was there airing myself on the
top of the mountains, I fell into a profound contemplation on the vanity of
human life; and passing from one thought to another, Surely, said I, man is but
a shadow, and life a dream. Whilst I was thus musing, I cast my eye toward the
summit of a rock that was not far from me, where I discovered one in the habit
of a shepherd, with a musical instrument in his hand. As I looked upon him, he
applied it to his lips, and began to play upon it. The sound of it was
exceeding sweet, and wrought into a variety of tones that were inexpressibly
melodious, and altogether different from any thing I had ever heard. This put
me in mind of those heavenly airs that are played to the departed souls of good
men upon their first arrival in Paradise, to wear out the impressions of their
agonies, and to qualify them for the pleasures of that happy play. My heart
melted away in secret rapture.

I had often been told that the rock before me was the haunt of a Genius; and
that several had been entertained with music who had passed by it, but never
heard that the musician had before made himself visible. When he had raised my
thoughts by those transporting air which he played, to taste the pleasures of
his conversation, as I looked upon him like one astonished, he beckoned to me,
and by the waving of his hand directed me to approach the place where he sat. I
drew near with that reverence which is due to a superior nature; and as my
heart was entirely subdued by the captivating strains I had heard, I fell down
at his feet, and wept. The Genius smiled upon me with a look of compassion and
affability, that familiarized him to my imagination, and at once dispelled all
the fears and apprehensions with which I approached him. He lifted me from the
ground, and taking me by the hand, Mirza, said he, I have heard thee in thy
soliloquies, follow me*

He then led me to the highest pinnacle of the rock, and placed me on the top
of it: cast thine eye eastward, said he, and tell me what thou see. I see,
said I, a huge valley, and a prodigious tide of water rolling through it. The
valley that thou see, said he, is the vale of misery; and the tide of water
that thou see is part of the great tide of eternity. What is the reason, said
I, that the tide I see rises out of a thick mist at one end, and again ^oses
itself in a thick mist at the other? What thou see, said he, is that portion
of eternity which is called Time, measured out by the sun, and ^^^^hing from
the beginning of the world to its consum^^tion^^ Examine now, said he, this sea
that is thus bounded with darkness on both ends, and ^^ll me what thou
discoverest in it. I see a bridge, ^ai^ I standing in the midst, of the tide.
The bridge thou see, said he, is human life; consider it attentively. Upon a
more deliberate survey of it, I found that it consisted of threescore and ten
entire arches, with several (...) ^rches, which added to those that were
entire, ma^^ to the number about an hundred. As I was counting (...), the
Genius told me, that this bridge consisted (...) of a thousand arches; but that
a great flood swept (...) the rest, and left the bridge in the ruinous
condition I now beheld it. But tell me further, said he, what that discoverest
on it. I see multitudes of people passing over it, said I, and a black cloud
hanging on each end of it^. As I looked more attentively, I saw several of the
passengers dropping through the bridge into the great tide that flowed under
it; and, upon further examination, perceived there were innumerable trap-doors
that lay concealed in the bridge, which the passengers no sooner trod upon,
but they fell through them into the tide, and immediately disappeared. These
hidden pit-falls were set very thick at the entrance of the bridge, so that
throngs of people no sooner broke through the cloud, but many of them fell into
them. They grew thinner toward the middle, but multiplied and lay closer
toward the end of the arches that were entire.

There were indeed some persons, but their numbers were very small, that
continued a kind of hobbling march on the broken arches, but fell through one
after another, being quite tired and spent with so long a walk.

I passed some time in the contemplation of this wonderful structure and the
great variety of objects which it presented. My heart was filled with a deep
melancholy, to see several dropping unexpectedly in the midst of mirth and
jollity, and catching at every thing that stood by them to save themselves.
Some were looking upwards toward the heavens in a thoughtful posture, and in
the midst of a speculation stumbled and fell out of sight. Multitudes were very
busy in the prospect of bubbles that glittered in their eyes, and danced before
them; but often, when they thought themselves within the reach of them, their
footing failed, and down they sunk. In this confusion of objects, I observed
some with scymeters in their hands, and others with urinals, who ran to and fro
upon the bridge, thrusting several persons on trap-doors, which did not solemn
to lie in their way, and which they might have escaped had they not thus been
forced upon them.

The Genius seeing me indulge myself in this melancholy prospect, told me I had
dwelt long enough upon it: take thine eye off the bridge, said he and tell me
if thou see any thing thou do not comprehend. Upon looking up, What mean,
said I, these great flights of birds that are perpetually hovering about the
bridge, and settling upon it, from time to time? I see vultures, harpies,
ravens, cormorants, and among many other feathered creatures, several little
winged boys, that perch in great numbers upon the middle arches. These, said
the Genius, are envy, avarice, superstition, despair, love, with the like cares
and passions that infest human life.

I here fetched a deep sigh: alas, said I, man was made in vain! how is he
given away to misery and mortality, tortured in life, and swallowed up in
death! the Genius being moved with compassion toward me, bid me quit to
uncomfortable a prospect. Look no more, said he, on man in the first stage of
his existence, in his setting out for eternity; but cast thine eye on that
thick mist into which the tide bears the tide bears the several generations of
mortals that fall into it. I directed my sight as I was ordered, and (whether
or not the good Genius strengthened it with any supernatural force, or
dissipated part of the mist that was before too thick for the eye to penetrate)
I saw the valley opening at the further end, and spreading forth into an
immense ocean, that had a huge rock of adamant running through the midst of it,
and dividing it into two equal parts. The clouds still rested on one half of
it, insomuch that I could discover nothing in it: but the other appeared to me
a vast ocean, planted with innumerable islands that were covered with fruits
and flowers, and interwoven with a thousand little shining seas that ran among
them. I could see persons dressed in glorious habits, with garlands upon their
heads, passing among the trees, lying down by the sides of fountains, or
resting on beds of flowers: and could hear a confused harmony of singing birds,
falling waters, human voices, and musical instruments. Gladness grew in me upon
the discovery of so delightful a scene. I wished for the wings of an eagle that
I might fly away to those happy seas: but the Genius told me there was no
passage to them, except through the gates of death, that I saw opening every
moment upon the bridge. The islands, said he, that lie so fresh and green
before thee, and with which the whole face of the ocean appears spotted as far
as thou can see, are more in number than the sands of the sea shore. There
are myriads of islands beyond those which thou here discoverest reaching
farther than thine eye, or even thine imagination can extend itself. These are
the mansions of good men after death, who, according to the degrees and kinds
of virtue in which they excelled, are distributed among those several islands,
which abound with pleasures of different kinds and degrees, suitable to the
relishes and perfections of those who are settled in them: every island is a
paradise accommodated to its respective inhabitants. Are not these, O Mirza,
habitations worth contending for? Does life appear miserable, that gives thee
opportunities of earning such a reward? Is death to be feared, that will convey
thee to so happy an existence? Think not man was made in vain, who has such an
eternity reserved for him. I gazed with inexpressible pleasure on these happy
islands. At length, said I, show me now, I beseech thee, the secrets that he
hid under those dark clouds which cover the ocean on the other side of the rock
of adamant. The Genius making me no answer, I turned about to address myself to
him a second time, but I found that he had left me; I then turned again to the
vision which I had been so long contemplating, but instead of the rolling tide,
the arched bridge, and the happy islands, I saw nothing but the low hollow
valley of Bagdad, with oxen, sheep, and camels grazing upon the sides of it.

On SICKNESS.
Our life is nothing but our death begun;
As tapers waste the instant they take fire.
YOUNG.
IT has been observed by many writers, that nothing makes a more ridiculous
figure in a man's life, than the disparity we often find in him, sick and well.
Thus one of an unfortunate constitution is perpetually exhibiting a miserable
example of the weakness of his mind, or of his body, in their turns. I have had
frequent opportunities of late to consider myself in these different views, and
hope I have received some advantage by it. If what Mr. Waller says be true,
that The soul's dark cottage, battered and decoyed,
Lets in new lights, through chinks that time has made,
Then surely sickness, contributing no less than old age to the shaking down
this scaffolding of the body, may discover the enclosed structure more plainly
-- Sickness is a sort of early old age; it teaches us a diffidence in our
earthly state, and inspires us with the thoughts of a future, better than a
thousand volumes of philosophers and divines. It gives so alarming a concussion
to those props of our vanity, our strength and youth, that we think of
fortifying ourselves within, when there is so little dependence on our
outworks. Youth, at the very best, is but a betrayer of human life in a gentler
and smoother manner than age. It is like a stream that nourishes a plant upon
its bank, and causes it to flourish and blossom to the sight, but at the same
time is undermining it at the root in secret. My youth has dealt more fairly
and openly with me; it has afforded me several prospects of my danger, and
given an advantage not very common to young men, so that the attractions of the
world have not dazzled me very much; and I began when most people end, with a
full conviction of the emptiness of all sorts of ambition, and the
unsatisfactory nature of all human pleasures.

When a smart fit of sickness tells me this scurvy tenement of my body will
fall in a little time, I am even as unconcerned as was that honest Hibernian,
who (being in bed in a great storm some years ago, and told that the house
would tumble over his head) made answer, What care I for the house, I am only a
lodger. I fancy it is the best time to die when one is in the best humor; and
so excessively weak as I now am, I may say with conscience, that I am not at
all uneasy at the thought, that many men, whom I never had any esteem for, are
likely to enjoy this world after me. When I reflect what an inconsiderate
little atom every single, man is with respect to the whole creation, methinks
it is a shame to be concerned at the removal of so trivial an animal as I am.
In the morning after my (...) the sun will rise as bright as ever, the flowers
smell as sweet, the plants spring as green, the world will proceed in its old
course, people will laugh as heartily, and marry as fast as they used to do.
The memory of (...) (as it is elegantly expressed in the wisdom of Solomon)
passes away as the remembrance of a guest that tarrieth but one day. There are
reasons enough, in the (...) chapter of the same book to make any young man
contented with the prospect of death. For honorable age is not that which
stand^th in length of time, or is measured by a number of years. But wisdom is
the gray hair to men, and an unspotted life is old art. He was taken away
speedily, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit
beguile his soul.

RELIGION and SUPERSTITION contrasted.
A VISION.
Religion with a graceful mein,
All lovely, smiling, and serene.
R.
I HAD lately a very remarkable dream, which made so strong an impression on
me, that I remember it every word; and if you are not better employed, you may
read the relation of it as follows:

Methought I was in the midst of a very entertaining set of company, and
extremely delighted in attending to a lively conversation; when on a sudden I
perceived one of the most shocking figures imagination can frame, advancing
toward me. She was dressed in black; her skin was contracted into a thousand
wrinkles; her eyes deep sunk in her head; and her complexion pale and livid as
the countenance of death. Her looks were filled with terror and unrelenting
severity; and her hands armed with whips and scorpions. As soon as she came
near with a horrid frown, and a voice that chilled my very, blood, she bade me
follow her. I obeyed; and she led me through rugged paths, beset with briars
and thorns, into a deep solitary valley. Wherever she passed, the fading
verdure withered beneath her steps, her pestilential breath infected the air
with malignant vapors, obscured the luster of the sun, and involved the fair
face of heaven in universal gloom. Dismal howlings resounded through the
forest; from every baleful tree the night-raven uttered his dreadful note, and
the prospect was filled with desolation and horror. In the midst of this
tremendous scene, my execrable guide addressed me in the following manner:

"Retire with me, O rash, unthinking mortal! from the vain allurements of a
deceitful world, and learn that pleasure was not designed the portion of human
life. Man was born to mourn and to be, wretched: this is the condition of all
below the stars; and whoever endeavors to oppose it, acts in contradiction to
the will of heaven. Fly then from the fatal enchantments of youth and social
delight, and here consecrate the solitary hours to lamentation and woe. Misery
is the duty of all sublunary beings; and every enjoyment is an offense to the
Deity, who is to be worshipped only by the mortification of every sense of
pleasure, and the everlasting exercise of sighs and tears."

This melancholy picture of life quite sunk my spirits, and seemed to
annihilate every principle of joy within me. I threw myself beneath a blasted
yew, where the winds blew cold and dismal round my head, and dreadful
apprehensions chilled my heart. Here I resolved to lie till the hand of death,
which I impatiently invoked, should put an end to the miseries of a life so
deplorably wretched. In this sad situation, I espied on one hand of me a deep
muddy river, whose heavy waves rolled on in slow, sullen murmurs. Here I
determined to plunge; and was just upon the ^rink, when I found myself suddenly
drawn back. I turned about, and was surprised by the sight of the loveliest
object I had ever beheld. The most engaging charms of youth and beauty appeared
in all her form; effulgent glories sparkled in her eyes, and their awful
splendors were softened by the gentlest looks of compassion and peace. At her
approach, the frightful spectre, who had before tormented me, vanished away,
and with her all the horrors she had caused. The gloomy clouds brightened into
cheerful sunshine, the groves recovered their verdure, and the whole region
looked gay and blooming as the garden of Eden. I was quite transported at this
unexpected change, and reviving pleasure began to gladden my thoughts; when,
with a look of inexpressible sweetness, my beauteous deliverer thus uttered her
divine instructions:

"My name is Religion. I am the offspring of Truth and Love, and the parent of
Benevolence, Hope, and Joy. That monster, from whose power I have freed you, is
called Superstition: she is the child of Discontent, and her followers are Fear
and Sorrow. Thus, different as we are, she has often the insolence to assume my
name and character, and seduces unhappy mortals to think us the same, till she
at length drives them to the borders of despair, that dreadful abyss into which
you were just going to sink.

"Look round, and survey the various beauties of this globe, which heaven has
destined for the seat of the human race; and consider whether a world, thus
exquisitely framed, could be meant for the abode of misery and pain. For what
end has the lavish hand of Providence diffused such innumerable objects of
delight, but that all might rejoice in the privilege of existence, and be
filled with gratitude to the beneficent Author of it? Thus to enjoy the
blessings he has sent, is virtue and obedience; and to reject them merelyas
means of pleasure, is pitiable ignorance, or absurd perverseness. Infinite
goodness is the source of created existence. The proper tendency of every
rational being, from the highest order of raptured seraphs, to the meanest rank
of men, is to rise incessantly from lower degrees of happiness to higher. They
have each faculties assigned them for various orders of delights."

"What! (cried I) is this the language of religion? Does she lead her votaries
through flowery paths, and bid them pass an unlaborious life? Where are the
painful toils of virtue, the mortifications of penitents, and the self-denying
exercises of saints and heroes?"

"The true enjoyments of a reasonable being (answered she, mildly) do not
consist in unbounded indulgence, or luxurious ease, in the tumult of passions,
the languor of indolence, or the flutter of light amusements. Yielding to
immoral pleasure corrupts the mind; living to animal and trifling ones, debases
it; both in their degrees disqualify it for its genuine good, and consign it
over to wretchedness. Whoever would be really happy, must make the diligent and
regular exercise of his superior powers his chief attention; adoring the
perfections of his Maker, expressing good will to his fellow creatures, and
cultivating inward rectitude. To his lower faculties he must allow such
gratifications as will, by refreshing them, invigorate his nobler pursuits. In
the regions inhabited by angelic natures, unmingled felicity for ever blooms;
joy flows there with a perpetual and abundant stream, nor needs there any mound
to check its course. Beings conscious of a frame of mind originally diseased,
as all the human race has cause to be, must use the regimen of a stricter
self-government. Whoever has been guilty of voluntary excesses, must patiently
submit both to the painful workings of nature, and needful severities of
medicines, in order to his cure. Still he is entitled to a moderate share of
whatever alleviating accommodations this fair mansion of his merciful Purent
affords, consistent with his recovery. And in proportion as his recovery
advances, the liveliest joy will spring from his secret sense of an amended and
improved heart. So far from the horrors of despair is the condition even of the
guilty. Shudder, poor mortal, at the thought of the gulf into which thou wast
just now going to plunge.

"While the most faulty have every encouragement to mend, the more innocent
soul will be supported with still sweeter consolations under all its experience
of human infirmities; supported by the gladdening assurances, that every
sincere endeavor to outgrow them shall be assisted, accepted, and rewarded. To
such a one, the lowest self-abasement is but a deep-laid foundation for the
most elevated hopes; since they who faithfully examine and acknowledge what
they are, shall be enabled, under my conduct, to become what they desire. The
Christian and the hero are inseparable; and to the aspirings of unassuming
trust and filial confidence, are set no bounds. To him who is animated with a
view of obtaining approbation from the Sovereign of the universe, no difficulty
is insurmountable. Secure in his pursuit of every needful aid, his conflict
with the severest pains and trials is little more than the vigorous exercises
of a mind in health. His patient dependence on that Providence which looks
through all eternity, his silent resignation, his ready accommodation of his
thoughts and behavior to its inscrutable ways, is at once the most excellent
sort of self-denial, and source of the most exalted transports. Society is the
true sphere of human virtue. In social active life, difficulties will
perpetually be met with; restraints of many kinds will be necessary; and
studying to behave right in respect of these, is a discipline of the human
heart, useful to others, and improving to itself. Suffering is no duty, but
where it is necessary to avoid guilt, or to do good; nor pleasure a crime, but
where it strengthens the influence of bad inclinations, or lessens the generous
activity of virtue. The happiness allotted to man in his present state, is
indeed faint and low, compared with his immortal prospects and noble
capacities: but yet, whatever portion of it the distributing hand of heaven
offers to each individual, is a needful support and refreshment for the present
moment, so far as it may not hinder the attaining his final destination.

"Return then with me from continual misery, to moderate enjoyment, and
grateful alacrity; return from the contracted views of solitude, to the proper
duties of a relative and dependent being. Religion is not confined to cells and
closets, nor restrained to sullen retirement. These are the gloomy doctrines of
superstition, by which she endeavors to break those chains of benevolence and
social affection, that link the welfare of every particular with that of the
whole. Remember, that the greatest honor you can pay the Author of your being,
is such a cheerful behavior as discovers a mind satisfied with his own
dispensations."

Here my preceptress paused; and I was going to express my acknowledgments for
her discourse, when a ring of bells from the neighboring village, and the
newly-risen sun darting his beams through my windows awaked me.

To begin NOTHING of which you have not well considered the END.
Think well, ere you resolve; weigh each event,
Left, when too late, in sorrow you repent.
R.
A CERTAIN Cham of Tartary going a progress with his nobles, was met by a
Dervise, who cried with a loud voice, Whoever will give me an hundred pieces of
gold, I will give him a piece of advice. The Cham ordered him the sum: upon
which the Dervise said, Begin nothing of which thou have not well considered
the end.

The courtiers, upon hearing this plain sentence, smiled, and said with a
sneer, "The Dervise is well paid for his maxim." But the King was so well
satisfied with the answer, that he ordered it to be written in golden letters
in several places of his palace, and engraved on all his plate. Not long after,
the King's surgeon was bribed to kill him with a poisoned lancet at the time he
let him blood. One day, when the King's arm was bound, and the fatal lancet in
the surgeon's hand, he read on the basin, Begin nothing of which thou have not
well considered the and, -- He immediately started, and let the lancet fall out
of his hand. The King observed his confusion, and inquired the reason: the
surgeon fell prostrate, confessed the whole affair, and was pardoned, and the
conspirators died. The Cham turning to his courtiers who heard the advice with
contempt, told them, "That counsel could not be too much valued which had saved
a King's life."

On the FOLLY of being dissatisfied with our present CIRCUMSTANCES.
Fortune a goddess is to fools alone,
The wise are always masters of their own.
DRYDEN.
FOR the benefit of those who are dissatisfied with their present situations,
and to illustrate the folly and madness of their ambition, I beg leave to offer
the narrative of my own life.

I am the son of the younger brother of a good family, who at his decease left
me a little fortune of a hundred a year. I was put early to Eaton school, where
I learned Latin and Greek, from whence I went to the University, where I
learned not totally to forget them. I came to my fortune when I was at the
college; and having no inclination to follow any profession, I removed myself
to town, and lived for some time, as most young fellows do, by spending four
times my income. But it was my happiness, before it was too late, to fall in
love with, and marry a very amiable young creature, whose fortune was just
sufficient to repair the breach made in my own. With this agreeable companion I
retreated to the country, and endeavored, as well as I was able, to square my
wishes to my circumstances. In this endeavor I succeeded so well, that,
excepting a few private hankerings after a little more than I possessed, and
now and then a sigh when a coach and six happened to drive by me in my walks, I
was a happy man.

I can truly assure you, Sir, that though our family-economy was not much to be
boasted of, and in consequence of it we were frequently driven to great straits
and difficulties, I experienced more real satisfaction in this humble
situation, than I have ever done since in more enviable circumstances. We were
sometimes indeed a little in debt, but when money came in, the pleasure of
discharging what we owed was more than an equivalent for these pains it put us
to; and though the narrowness of our circumstances subjected us to many cares
and anxieties, it served to keep the body in action as well, as the mind: sor
as our garden was somewhat large, and required more hands to keep it in order
than we could afford to hire, we labored daily in it ourselves, and drew
health from our necessities.

I had a little boy, who was the delight of my heart, and who probably might
have been spoiled by nursing, if the attention of his parents had not been
otherwise employed. His mother was naturally of a sickly constitution, but the
affairs of her family, as they engrossed all her thoughts, gave her no time for
complaint. The ordinary troubles of life, which to those who have nothing else
to think of, are almost insupportable, were less terrible to us than to persons
of easier circumstances; for it is a certain truth, however your readers may
please to receive it, that where the mind is divided among many cares, the
anxiety is lighter than when there is only one to contend with. Or even in the
happiest situation, in the midst of ease, I health, and affluence, the mind is
generally ingenious at tormenting itself, losing the immediate enjoyment of
those invaluable blessings, by the painful suggestion that they are too great
for continuance.

These are the reflections that I have made since; for I do not attempt to deny
that I sighed frequently for an addition to my fortune. The death of a distant
relation, which happened five years after our marriage, gave me this addition,
and made me for a time the happiest man living. My income was now increased to
six hundred a year; and I hoped, with a little economy, to be able to make a
figure with it. But the ill health of my wife, which in less easy circumstances
had not touched me so nearly, was now constantly in my thoughts, and soured all
my enjoyment. The consciousness too of having such an estate to leave my boy,
made me so anxious to preserve hire, that instead of suffering him to run at
pleasure when he pleased, and to grow hardy by exercise, I almost destroyed him
by confinement. We now did nothing in our garden, because we were in
circumstances to have it kept by others: but as the air and exercise were
necessary for our healths, we resolved to abridge ourselves in some unnecessary
articles, and set up an equipage. This in time brought with it a train of
expenses, which we had neither prudence to foresee, nor courage to prevent. For
as it enabled us to extend the circuit of our visits, it greatly increased our
acquaintance, and subjected us to the necessity of making continual
entertainments at home, in return for all those to which we were invited
abroad. The charges that attended this new manner of living were much too great
for the income we possessed; insomuch that we found ourselves in a very short
time more necessitous than ever. Pride would not suffer us to lay down our
equipage; and to live in a manner suitable to it, was what we could not bear to
think of. To pay the debts I had contracted, I was soon forced to mortgage, and
at last to sell the best part of my estate; and as it was utterly impossible to
keep up the parade any longer, we thought it advisable to remove of a sudden,
to sell our coach in town, and to look out for a new situation, at a greater
distance from our acquaintance.

But, unfortunately for my peace, I carried the habit of expense along with me,
and was very near being reduced to absolute want, when, by the unexpected death
of an uncle and his two sons, who died within a few weeks of each other, I
succeeded to an estate of seven thousand pounds a year.

And now, Sir, both you and your readers will call me a very happy man; and so
indeed I was; I set about the regulation of my family with the most pleasing
satisfaction: the splendor of my equipages, the magnificence of my plate, the
crowd of servants that attended me, the elegance of my house and furniture, the
grandeur of my park and gardens, the luxury of my table, and the court that was
every where paid me, gave me inexpressible delight, so long as they were
novelties, but no sooner were they become habitual to me, than I lost all
manner of relish for them; and discovered, in a very little time, that by
having nothing to wish for, I had nothing to enjoy. My appetites grew pallid by
satiety, a perpetual crowd of visitors robbed me of all domestic enjoyment, my
servants plagued me, and my steward cheated me.

But the curse of greatness did not end here. Daily experience convinced me
that I was compelled to live more for others than for myself. My uncle had been
a great party man, and a zealous opposer of all ministerial measures; as his
estate was the largest of any gentleman in the county, he supported an interest
in it beyond any of his competitors. My father had been greatly obliged by the
court party, which determined me, in gratitude, to declare myself on that side;
but the difficulties I had to encounter were too many and too great for me;
insomuch that I have been baffled and defeated in almost every thing I have
undertaken. To desert the cause I have embarked in, would disgrace me; and to
go greater lengths in it will almost undo me. I am engaged in a perpetual state
of warfare with the principal gentry of the county, and am cursed by my tenants
and dependants, for compelling them at every election to vote (as they are
pleased to tell me) contrary to their consciences.

My wife and I once pleased ourselves with the thoughts of being useful to the
neighborhood, by dealing out our charity to the poor and Industrious; but the
perpetual hurry in which we live, renders us incapable of looking out for
objects ourselves; and the agents we entrust are either pocketing our bounty,
or bestowing it upon the undeserving. At night, when we retire to rest, we are
venting our complaints on the miseries of the day, and praying heartily for the
return of that peace, which was the only companion of our humblest situation.

Where pain, sickness, and absolute want are out of the question, no external
change of circumstances can make a man more lastingly happy than he was before.
It is to an ignorance of this truth, that the universal dissatisfaction of
mankind is principally to be ascribed. Care is the lot of life; and he that
aspires to greatness, in hopes to get rid of it, is like one who throws himself
into a furnace to avoid the shivering of an ague.

The only satisfaction I can enjoy in my present situation is, that it has not
pleased heaven in its wrath to make me a King.

On GENEROSITY, and disinterested HONESTY.
How far that little candle darts its beams;
So shines a good deed in this naughty world.
SHAKESPEARE.
A CERTAIN Cardinal, who for the multitude of his generous actions was styled
the Patron of the Poor, had a constant custom, once or twice a week, to give
public audience to all indigent people in the hall of his palace, and to
relieve every one according to their various necessities, or the motives of his
own bounty.

One day a poor woman, encouraged by the fame of his generosity, came into the
hall of this Cardinal with her only daughter, a beautiful maid about fifteen
years of age. When her turn came to be heard among the crowd of petitioners,
the Cardinal discerning the marks of an extraordinary modesty in her face and
carriage, as also in her daughter's encouraged her to tell her wants freely.
She blushing, and not without tears, thus addressed herself to him: "My Lord, I
owe for the rent of my house five crowns, and such is my misfortune, that I
have no other means to pay it, save what would break my heart, since my
landlord threatens to force me to it; that is, to prostitute this my only
daughter, whom I have hitherto with great care educated in virtue, and an
abhorrence of that odious crime. What I beg of your Eminence is, that you would
be pleased to interpose your sacred authority, and protect us from the violence
of this cruel man, till by our honest industry we can procure the money for
him."

The Cardinal, moved with admiration of the woman's virtue and innocent
modesty, bid her be of good courage. Then he immediately wrote a billet, and
giving it into the widow's hands, "Go, said he, to my steward with this paper,
and he shall deliver thee five crowns to pay the rent."

The poor woman overjoyed, and returning the Cardinal a thousand thanks, went
directly to the steward, and gave him the note; which, when he had read, he
told her out fifty crowns. She astonished at the meaning of it, and fearing
this was only the steward's trick to try her honesty, refused to take above
five, saying, "She asked the Cardinal for no more, and she was sure it was a
mistake."

On the other hand, the steward insisted on his master's order, not daring to
call it in question. But all the arguments he could use were insufficient to
prevail on her to take any more than five crowns. Whereupon, to end the
controversy, he offered to go back with her to the Cardinal, and refer it to
him. When they came before that munificent Prince, and he was fully informed of
the business, "It is true, said he, I mistook in writing fifty crowns; give me
the paper and I will rectify it." Thereupon he wrote again, saying thus to the
woman: "So much candor and virtue deserve a recompense; here I have ordered
you five hundred crowns; what you can spare of it, lay it up as a dowry to give
with your daughter in marriage."

If I mistake not, this Cardinal was called Farnese. But, whatever his name
was, this was an action truly heroic, and which has but few parallels.

The Story of FLAVILLA.
Though all is innocence within,
It Is guilt to wear the garb of sin.
GAY.
THE following is so striking an instance of the dreadful consequences which
often attend female levity, that we hope our fair readers will peruse it with
more than common attention.

FLAVILLA, just as she had entered her fourteenth year, was left an orphan to
the care of her mother, in such circumstances as disappointed all the hopes
which her education had encouraged. Her father, who lived in great elegance
upon the salary of a place at court, died suddenly, without having made any
provision for his family, except an annuity of one hundred pounds, which he had
purchased for his wife with part of her marriage portion; nor was he possessed
of any property, except the furniture of a large house in one of the squares,
an equipage, a few jewels, and some plate.

The greater part of the furniture and the equipage were sold to pay his debts;
the jewels, which were not of great value, and some useful pieces of the plate,
were reserved; and Flavilla removed with her mother into lodgings.

But notwithstanding this change in their circumstances, they did not
immediately lose their rank. They were still visited by a numerous and polite
acquaintance; and though some gratified their pride, by assuming an appearance
of pity, and rather insulted than alleviated their distresses by the whine of
condolence, and a minute comparison of what they had lost with what they
possessed; yet from others they were continually receiving presents, which
still enabled them to live with a genteel frugality; they were still considered
as people of fashion, and treated by those of a lower class with distinct
respect.

Flavilla thus continued to move in a sphere to which she had no claim; she was
remarkably tall for her age, and was celebrated not only for her beauty, but
her wit: these qualifications she considered, not only as securing whatever she
enjoyed by the favor of others, but as a pledge of possessing them in her own
right by an advantageous marriage.

There was a fashionable levity in her carriage and discourse, which her
mother, who knew the danger of her situation, labored to restrain, sometimes
with anger, and sometimes with tears, but always without success. Flavilla was
ever ready to answer, That she neither did nor said any thing of which she had
reason to be ashamed; and therefore did not know why she should be restrained,
except in mere courtesy to envy, which it was an honor to provoke; or to
slander which it was a disgrace to fear. In proportion as Flavilla was more
flattered and caressed, the influence of her mother became less; and though she
always treated her with respect from a point of good-breeding, yet she secretly
despised her maxims, and applauded her own conduct.

Flavilla at eighteen was a celebrated toast; and among other gay visitants who
frequented her tea table was Clodio, a young Baronet, who had just taken
possession of his title and estate. There were many particulars in Clodio's
behavior, which encouraged Flavilla to hope that she should obtain him for a
husband; but she suffered his assiduities with such apparent pleasure, and his
familiarities with so little reserve, that he soon ventured to disclose his
intention, and make her what he thought, a very genteel proposal of another
kind: but, whatever were the artifices with which it was introduced, or the
terms in which it was made, Flavilla rejected it with the utmost indignation
and disdain. Clodio, who notwithstanding his youth, had long known, and often
practiced the art seduction, gave way to the storm, threw himself at her feet,
imputed his offense to the frenzy of his passion, flattered her pride by the
most abject submission, and extravagant praise, entreated her pardon,
aggravated his crime, but made no mention of atonement by marriage. This
particular, which Flavilla did not fail to remark, ought to have determined her
to admit him no more: but her vanity and her ambition were still predominant,
she still hoped to succeed in her project. Clodio's offense was tacitly
forgiven, his visits were permitted, his familiarities were again suffered, and
his hopes revived. He had long entertained an opinion that she loved him, in
which, however, it is probable, that his own vanity and her indiscretion
concurred to deceive him; but this opinion, though it implied the strongest
obligation to treat her with generosity and tenderness, only determined him
again to attempt her ruin, as it encouraged him with a probability of success.
Having therefore resolved to obtain her as a mistress, or at once to give her
up, he thought he had little more to do ^han to convince her that he had taken
such a resolution, justifying it by some plausible sophistry, and give her some
time to deliberate upon a final determination. With this view he went a short
journey into the country; having put a letter into her hand at parting, in
which he acquainted her, "That he had often reflected, with inexpressible
regret upon her resentment to his conduct in a late instance; but that the
delicacy and the ardour of his affections were insuperable obstacles to his
marriage. That where there was no liberty there could be no happiness: that he
should become indifferent to the endearments of love, when it could no longer
be distinguished from the officiousness of duty: that while they were happy in
the possession of each other, it would be absurd to suppose they would part:
and if this happiness should cease, it would not only ensure, but aggravate
their misery to be inseparably united: that this event was less probable, in
proportion as their cohabitation was voluntary; but that he would make such
provision for her upon the contingency, as a wife would expect upon his death."

Flavilla had too much understanding as well as virtue to deliberate a moment
upon this proposal. She gave immediate orders that Clodio should be admitted no
more. But his letter was a temptation to gratify her vanity, which she could
not resist; she showed it first to her mother, and then to the whole circle of
her female acquaintance, with all the exultation of a hero who exposes a
vanquished enemy at the wheels of his chariot in triumph; she considered it as
an indisputable evidence of her virtue, as a reproof to all who had dared to
censure the levity of her conduct, and a license to continue it without apology
or restraint.

It happened that Flavilla, soon after this accident, was seen in one of the
boxes of the playhouse by Mercator, a young gentleman who had just returned
from his first voyage, as a captain of a large ship in the Levant trade, which
had been purchased for him by his father, whose fortune enabled him to make a
genteel provision for five sons, of whom Mercator was the youngest, and who
expected to share his estate, which was personal, in equal proportion at his
death.

Mercator was captivated with her beauty, but discouraged by the splendour of
her appearance, and the rank of her company. He was urged, rather by curiosity
than hope, to inquire who she was; and he soon gained such a knowledge of her
circumstances, as relieved him from despair.

As he knew not how to get admission into her company, and had no design upon
her virtue, he wrote in the first ardour of his passion to her mother; giving a
faithful account of his fortune and dependence, and entreating that he might be
permitted to visit Flavilla, as a candidate for her affections. The old lady,
after having made some inquiries, by which the account that Mercator had given
her was confirmed, sent him an invitation, and received his first visit alone.
She told him, that as Flavilla had no fortune, and as a considerable part of
his own was dependent upon his father's will, he ought therefore to obtain his
consent before any other step was taken. To this counsel, so salutary, Mercator
was hesitating what to reply, when Flavilla came in, an accident which he was
now only solicitous to improve. Flavilla was not displeased either with his
person or address; the frankness and gaiety of her disposition soon made him
forget that he was a stranger; a conversation commenced, during which they
became yet more pleased with each other; and having thus surmounted the
difficulties of a first visit, he thought no more of the old lady, as he
believed her auspices were not necessary to his success.

His visits were often repeated, and he became every hour more impatient of
delay: a thought of his father would now and then indeed intervene; but being
determined to gratify his wishes at all events, he concluded with a sagacity
almost universal upon these occasions, that of two evils, to marry without his
consent, was less than to marry against it; and one evening, after the lovers
had spent the afternoon by themselves, they went out in a kind of frolic, which
Mercator had proposed in the vehemence of his passion, and to which Flavilla
had consented in the giddiness of her indiscretion, and were married at
May-Fair.

In the first interval of recollection after this precipitate step, Mercator
considered, that he ought to be the first who acquainted his father of the new
alliance which had been made in his family. But as he had not fortitude enough
to do it in person, he expressed it in the best terms he could conceive by a
letter; and after such an apology for his conduct as he had been used to make
for himself, he requested that he might be permitted to present his wife for
the parental benediction, which alone was wanting to complete his felicity.

The old gentleman, whose character I cannot better express than in the
fashionable phrase which has been contrived to palliate false principles and
dissolute manners, had been a gay man, and was well acquainted with the town.
He had often heard Flavilla toasted by rakes of quality, and had often seen her
at public places. Her beauty and her dependence, the gaiety of her dress, and
the multitude of her admirers, the levity of her conduct, and all the
circumstances of her situation, had concurred to render her character
suspected; and he was disposed to judge of it with less charity, when she had
offended him by marrying his son, whom he considered as disgraced and
impoverished, and whose misfortune, as it was irretrievable, he resolved not to
alleviate, but increase; a resolution by which fathers, who have foolish and
disobedient sons, usually display their own kindness and wisdom* As soon as he
had read Mercator's letter, he cursed him for a fool, who had been gulled by
the artifice of a strumpet, to screen her from public infamy, by fathering her
children, and securing her from a prison by appropriating her debts. In an
answer to his letter, which he wrote only to gratify his resentment, he told
him, that "if he had taken Flavilla into keeping, he would have overlooked it;
and if her extravagance had distressed him, he would have satisfied his
creditors; but that his marriage was not to be forgiven; that he never should
have another shilling of his money; and that he was determined to see him no
more."

Mercator, who was more provoked by this outrage than grieved at his loss,
disdained to reply; and believing that he had now most reason to be offended,
could not be persuaded to solicit a reconciliation.

He hired a genteel apartment for his wife of an upholsterer, who, with a view
to let lodgings, had taken and furnished a large house near Leicester Fields,
and in about two months left her to make another voyage.

He had received visits of congratulation from her numerous acquaintance, and
had returned them, as a pledge of his desire that they should be repeated. But
a remembrance of the gay multitude, which while he was at home had flattered
his vanity, as soon as he was absent alarmed his suspicion: he had, indeed, no
particular cause of jealousy; but his anxiety arose merely from a sense of the
temptations to which she was exposed, and the impossibility of his
superintending her conduct.

In the mean time, Flavilla continued to flutter round the same giddy circle in
which she had shone so long; the number of her visitants was rather increased
than diminished; the gentlemen attended her with greater assiduity, and she
continued to encourage their civilities by the same indecent familiarity: she
was one night at the masquerade, and another at the opera; sometimes at a rout,
and sometimes rambling in a party of pleasure in short excursions from town;
she came home sometimes at midnight, sometimes in the morning, and sometimes
she was absent several nights together.

This conduct was the cause of much speculation and uneasiness to the good man
and good woman of the house. At first they suspected that Flavilla was no
better than a woman of pleasure; and that the person who had hired the lodgings
for her as his wife, (and had disappeared upon presence of going a voyage to
sea) had been employed to impose upon them, by concealing her character, in
order to obtain such accommodations for her as she could not so easily have
procured had it been known: but as these suspicions made them watchful and
inquisitive, they soon discovered, that many ladies by whom she was visited
were of good character and fashion. Her conduct, however, supposing her to be a
wife, was still inexcusable, and still endangered her credit and subsistence:
hints were often dropped by the neighbors to the disadvantage of her
character; and an elderly maiden lady, who lodged in the second floor, had
given warning; the family was disturbed at all hours of the night, and the door
was crowded all day with messengers and visitants to Flavilla.

One day, therefore, the good woman took an opportunity to remonstrate, though
in the most distant and respectful terms, and with the utmost diffidence and
caution, she told Flavilla, "That she was a fine young lady; that her husband
was abroad; that she (...) a great deal of company; and that the world was
censo^ious: she wished that less occasion for scandal was given; and hoped to
be excused the liberty she had taken, as she might be ruined by those slanders
which could have no influence upon the great, and which therefore, they were
not solicitous to avoid."

This address, however ambiguous, and however gentle, was easily understood,
and fiercely resented. Flavilla, proud of her virtue, and impatient of
control, would have despised the counsel of a philosopher, if he had implied
an impeachment of her conduct: before a person so much her inferior, therefore,
she was under no restraint; but answered with a mixture of contempt and
indignation, "That those only who did not know her would dare to take any
liberty with her character; and warned her to propagate no scandalous report,
at her peril." Flavilla immediately rose from her seat, and the woman departed
without reply, though she was scarce less offended than her lodger; and from
that moment she determined when Mercator returned, to give her warning.

Mercator's voyage was prosperous, and after an absence of about ten months, he
came back. The woman, to whom her husband left the whole management of the
lodgings, and who persisted in her purpose, soon found an opportunity to put it
in execution. Mercator, as his part of the contract had been punctually
fulfilled, thought he had some cause to be offended, and insisted to know her
reasons for compelling him to leave her house. These, his hostess, who was
indeed a very friendly woman, was very unwilling to give; and as he perceived
that she evaded his question, he became more solicitous to obtain an answer.
After much hesitation, which perhaps had a worse effect than any tale which
malice could have invented, she told him, that, "Madam kept a great deal of
company, and had often staid out very late: that she had always been used to
quietness and regularity: and was determined to let her apartments to some
person in a more private station."

At this account Mercator changed countenance; for he Inferred from it just as
much more than truth as he believed it to be less. After some moments of
suspense, he conjured her to conceal nothing from him, with an emotion which
convinced her she had already said too much. She then assured him, "That he had
no reason to be alarmed; for that she had no exception to his lady, but those
gaieties which her station and the fashion sufficiently authorized." Mercator's
suspicions, however, were not wholly removed; and he began to think he had
found a confidante, whom it would be his interest to trust: he therefore, in
the folly of his jealousy, confessed, "That he had some doubts concerning his
wife, which it was of the utmost importance to his honor and his peace to
resolve: he entreated her that he might continue in the apartment another year:
that as he should again leave the kingdom in a short time, she would suffer no
incident, which might confirm either his hopes or fears, to escape her notice
in his absence; and that at his return, she would give him such an account as
would at least deliver him from the torment of suspense, and determine his
future conduct."

Mercator, however, concealed his suspicions from his wife; and, indeed, in her
presence they were forgotten. Her manner of life he began seriously to
disapprove; but being well acquainted with her temper, in which great sweetness
was blended with a high spirit, he would not embitter the pleasure of a short
stay by altercation, chiding, and tears: but when her mind was melted into
tenderness at his departure, he clasped her in an ecstasy of fondness to his
bosom, and entreated her to behave with reserve and circumspection: "because,
said he, I know that my father keeps a watchful eye upon your conduct, which
may, therefore, confirm or remove his displeasure, and either intercept or
bestow such an increase in our fortune, as will prevent the pangs of
separation, which must otherwise so often return, and in a short time unite us
to part no more." To this caution she had then no power to reply; and they
parted with mutual protestations of unalterable love.

The Story of FLAVILLA concluded.
FLAVILLA, soon after she was thus left in a kind of widowhood a second time,
found herself with child; and within somewhat less than eight months after
Mercator's return from his first voyage, she happened to stumble as she was
going up stairs, and being immediately taken ill, she was brought to bed before
the next morning. The child, though its birth had been precipitated more than a
month, was not remarkably small, nor had any infirmity which endangered its
life.

It was now necessary that the vigils of whists, and the tumults of balls and
visits should, for a while, be suspended; and in this interval of languor and
retirement, Flavilla first became thoughtful. She often reflected upon
Mercator's caution when they last parted, which had made an indelible
impression upon her mind, though it had produced no alteration in her conduct:
notwithstanding the manner in which it was expressed, and the reason upon which
it was founded, she began to fear that it might have been secretly prompted by
jealousy. The birth, therefore, of her first child in his absence, at a time
when, if it had not been premature, it could not possibly have been his, was an
accident which greatly alarmed her: but there was yet another, for which it was
still less in her power to account, and which therefore alarmed her still more.

It happened that some civilities which she received from a lady who sat next
her at an opera, and whom she had never seen before, introduced a conversation,
which so greatly delighted her, that she gave her a pressing invitation to
visit her: this invitation was accepted, and in a few days the visit was paid.
Flavilla was not less pleased at the second interview than she had been at the
first; and without making any other inquiry concerning the lady, than where she
lived, took the first opportunity to wait upon her. The apartment in which she
was received, was the ground-floor of an elegant house, at a small distance
from St. James's. It happened that Flavilla was placed near the window; and a
party of the horse -- guards riding through the streets, she expected to see
some of the royal family, and hastily threw up the fash. A gentleman who was
passing by at the same instant, turned about at the noise of the window, and
Flavilla no sooner saw his face, than she knew him to be the father of
Mercator. After looking first steadfastly at her, and then glancing his eye at
the lady whom she was visiting, he affected a contemptuous sneer, and went on.
Flavilla, who had been thrown into some confusion, by the sudden and unexpected
sight of a person who she knew considered her as the disgrace of his family,
and the ruin of his child, now changed countenance, and hastily retired to
another part of the room: she was touched both with grief and anger at this
silent insult, of which, however, she did not then suspect the cause. It is,
indeed, probable, that the father of Mercator would no where have looked upon
her with complacency; but as soon as he saw her companion, he recollected that
she was the favorite mistress of an old courtier, and that this was the house
in which he kept her in great splendour, though she had been by turns a
prostitute to many others. It happened that Flavilla, soon after this accident,
discovered the character of her new acquaintance; and never remembered by whom
she had been seen in her company, without the utmost regret and apprehension.

She now resolved to move in a less circle, and with more circumspection. In
the mean time her little boy, whom she suckled, grew very fast; and it could no
longer be known by his appearance that he had been born too soon. His mother
frequently gazed on him till her eyes overflowed with tears; and though her
pleasures were now become domestic, yet she feared lest that which had
produced, should destroy them. After much deliberation, she determined that she
would conceal the child's age from its father, believing it prudent to prevent
a suspicion, which, however ill founded, it might be difficult to remove, as
her justification would depend wholly upon the testimony of her dependants; and
her mother's and her own would necessarily become doubtful, when every one
would have reason to conclude, that it would still have been the same,
supposing the contrary to have been true.

Such was the state of Flavilla's mind, and her little boy was six months old
when Mercator returned. She received him with joy indeed, but it was mixed with
a visible confusion; their meeting was more tender, but on her part it was less
cheerful; she smiled with inexpressible complacency, but at the same time the
tears gushed from her eyes, and she was seized with an universal tremor.
Mercator caught the infection; and caressed first his Flavilla, and then his
boy, with an excess of fondness and delight that before he had never
experienced. The sight of the child made him more than ever wish a
reconciliation with his father; and having heard at his first landing that he
was dangerously ill, he determined to go immediately and attempt to see him,
promising that he would return to supper. He had in the midst of his caresses
more than once inquired the age of his son, but the question had been always
evaded; of which, however, he took to notice, nor did it produce any suspicion.

He was now hastening to inquire after his father; but as he passed through the
hall, he was officiously laid hold of by the landlady. He was not much disposed
to inquire how she had fulfilled his charge; but perceiving by her looks that
she had something to communicate, which at least in her own opinion was of
importance, he suffered her to take him into her parlour. She immediately shut
the door, and reminded him, that she had undertaken an office with reluctance
which he pressed upon her; and that she had done nothing in it to which he had
not bound her by a promise; that she was exceeding sorry to communicate her
discoveries; but that he was a worthy gentleman indeed, and ought to know them.
She then told him, That the child was born within less than eight months after
his last return from abroad; that it was said to have come before its time, but
that having pressed to see it, she was refused. This indeed was true, and
confirmed the good woman in her suspicion; for Flavilla, who had still resented
the freedom which she had taken in her remonstrance, had kept her at a great
distance; and the servants, to gratify their mistress, treated her with the
utmost insolence and contempt.

At this relation Mercator turned pale. He now recollected that his question
concerning the child's birth had been evaded; and concluded, that he had been
shedding tears of tenderness and joy over a strumpet and a bastard, who had
robbed him of his patrimony, his honor, and his peace. He started up with the
furious wildness of sudden frenzy; but she with great difficulty prevailed upon
him not to leave the room. He sat down, and remained some time motionless, with
his eyes fixed on the ground, and his hands locked in each other. In proportion
as he believed his wife to be guilty, his tenderness for his father revived;
and he resolved, with yet greater zeal, to prosecute his purpose of immediately
attempting a reconciliation.

In this state of confusion and distress, he went to the house, where he
learned that his father had died early in the morning, and that his relations
were then assembled to read his will. Fulvius, a brother of Mercator's mother,
with whom he had always been a favorite, happening to pass from one room to
another, heard his voice. He accosted him with great ardour and friendship; and
soothing him with expressions of condolence and affection, insisted to
introduce him to the company. Mercator tacitly consented: he was received at
last with civility by his brothers, and sitting down among them, the will was
read. He seemed to listen like the rest; but was indeed musing over the story
which he had just heard, and lost in the speculations of his own wretchedness.
He awaked as from a dream, when the voice of the person who had been reading
was suspended; and finding that he could no longer contain himself, he started
up, and would have left the company.

Of the will which had been read before him, he knew nothing: but his uncle
believing that he was moved with grief and resentment at the manner in which he
had been mentioned in it, and the bequest only of a shilling, took him into
another room; and, to apologize for his father's unkindness, told him, "That
the resentment which he expressed at his marriage, was every day increased by
the conduct of his wife, whose character was now become notoriously infamous,
for that she had been seen at the lodgings of a known prostitute, with whom she
appeared to be well acquainted." This account threw Mercator into another
agony: from which he was, however, at length recovered by his uncle, who, as
the only expedient by which he could retrieve his misfortune, and sooth his
distress, proposed that he should no more return to his lodgings, but go home
with him; that he would himself take such measures with his wife as would
scarce fail of inducing he^ to 'accept a separate maintenance, assume another
name, and trouble him no more. Mercator, in the bitterness of his affliction,
consented to his proposal, and they went away together.

Mercator, in the mean time, was expected by Flavilla with the most tender
impatience. She had put her little boy to bed, and decorated a small room in
which they had been used to sup by themselves, and which she had shut up in his
absence; she counted the moments as they passed, and listened to every carriage
and every step that she heard. Supper was now ready. Her impatience was
increased; terror was at length mingled with regret, and her fondness was only
busied to afflict her: she wished, she feared, she accused, she apologized, and
she wept. In the height of these eager expectations, and this tender distress,
she received a billet which Mercator had been persuaded by his uncle to write,
in which he upbraided her in the strongest terms with abusing his confidence,
and dishonouring his bed: "Of this, he said, he had now obtained sufficient
proof to do justice to himself, and that he was determined to see her no more."

To those whose hearts have not already acquainted them with the agony which
seized Flavilla upon the sight of the billet, all attempts to describe it would
not only be ineffectual, but absurd. Having passed the night without sleep, and
the next day without food, disappointed in every attempt to discover what was
become of Mercator, and doubting, if she could have found h^^, whether it would
be possible to convince him of her innocence: the violent agitation of her mind
produced a slow fever, which, before she considered as a disease, she
communicated to the child while she cherished it at her bosom, and wept over it
as an orphan whose life she was sustaining with her own.

After Mercator had been absent about ten days, his uncle, having persuaded him
to accompany some friends, to a country-seat at the distance of near sixty
miles, went to his lodgings in order to discharge the (...) and try what terms
he could make with Flavilla, whom he hoped to intimidate with threats of a
prosecution and divorce; but when he came, he found that Flavilla was sinking
very fast under the disease, and that the child was dead already. The woman of
the house, into whose hands she had just put her repeating-watch and some other
ornaments, as a security for her rent, was so touched with her distress, and so
firmly persuaded of her innocence by the manner in which she had addressed her,
and the calm solemnity with which she absolved those by whom she had been
traduced, that as soon as she had discovered Fulvius's business, she threw
herself on her knees, and entreated, that if he knew where Mercator was to be
found, he would urge him to return, that, if possible, the life of Flavilla
might be preserved, and the happiness of both be restored by her justification.
Fulvius, who still suspected appearances, or at least was in doubt of the cause
that had produced them, would not discover his nephew; but after much entreaty
and expostulation, at last engaged upon his honor for the conveyance of a
letter. The woman, as soon as she obtained his promise, ran up and communicated
it to Flavilla, who, when she had recovered from the surprise and tumult which
it occasioned, was supported in her bed, and in about half an hour, after many
efforts, and many intervals, wrote a short billet, which was sealed, and put
into the hands of Fulvius.

Fulvius immediately enclosed and dispatched it by the post, resolving that in
a question so doubtful and of such importance, he would no farther interpose.
Mercator, who the moment he cast his eye upon the letter, knew both the hand
and seal, after pausing a few moments in suspense, at length tore it open, and
read these words:

"Such has been my folly, that perhaps I should not be acquitted of guilt in
any circumstances but those in which I write. I do not, therefore, but for your
sake, with them otherwise than they are. The dear infant, whose birth has
undone me, now lies dead at my side, a victim to my indiscretion and your
resentment. I am scarce able to guide my pen. But I most earnestly entreat to
see you, that you at least may have the satisfaction to hear me attest my
innocence with the last sigh, and seal our reconciliation on my lips, while
they are yet sensible of the impression".

Mercator, whom an earthquake would less have affected than this letter, felt
all his tenderness revive in a moment, and reflected with unutterable anguish
upon the rashness of his resentment. At the thought of his distance from
London, he started as if he had felt a dagger in his heart: he lifted up his
eyes to heaven, with a look that expressed at once an accusation of himself,
and a petition for her; and then rushing out of the house without taking leave
of any, or ordering a servant to attend him, he took posthorses in a
neighboring inn, and in less than six hours was in Leicester Fields. But
notwithstanding his speed, he arrived too late; Flavilla had suffered the last
agony, and her eyes could behold him no more. Grief and disappointment, remorse
and despair, now totally subverted his reason. It become necessary to remove
him by force from the body, and after a confinement of two years in a
mad-house, he died.

May every lady on whose memory compassion shall record these events, tremble
to assume the levity of Flavilla! for perhaps it is not in the power of any man
in Mercator's circumstances to be less jealous than Mercator.

MIRTH and FALSEHOOD inconsistent.
Who, for the poor renown of being smart,
Would stick a dagger to his brother's heart?
YOUNG.
DURING the last war, a seafaring man courted a young woman at Lime-house,
whom he got with child; soon after he went to sea and left her: he saved some
money in the West Indies, where he stayed about two years, but could not be
easy in his mind on account of ruining the young woman. He left the ship and
some wages that were due to him, and came home with a design to marry her:
going into a public house at Lime-house, which he had formerly frequented, and
inquiring after the young woman, the landlord said she was alive and well, and
had a charming boy; but (by way of hum, as it is called) told him too, that she
was married. -- Immediately on this, the poor seaman left the house, rambling
about he knew nor cared not whither, and was picked up by a press-gang, and
sent aboard a tender, where he hanged himself the very first night. -- The news
of this affected the young woman so much, that she died soon after, and the
poor child was left upon the parish; nor did the landlord, who was in reality a
good-natured man, ever enjoy a moment's peace of mind during the few years he
lived.

On DISINGENUITY.
With soothing wile, he won my easy heart;
He sighed and vowed -- but, ah! he feigned the smart.
Sure, of all fiends, the blackest we can find
Are those ingrates who stab our peace of mind.
R.
IF penitence can lay claim to pardon, and if to confess our crimes be any kind
of atonement for them, the following true narrative may plead in my behalf to
an injured woman, reconcile me to myself, and restore that tranquillity of mind,
which I have so lately forfeited by my own folly and indiscretion.

You must know that I am the son of an honest tradesmen, was by him brought up
at a public school, and from thence went to the university. Soon after my
arrival there, a gentleman came down with his family to enter his son, who had
been my school-fellow, at one of the colleges: they sent for me, and desired I
would show them the university; a request which I readily complied with, as it
gratified my vanity of being seen with his daughter, a young lady of great
beauty and fortune; advantages which often supply the want of every other real
good, but served in her only to adorn the superior qualities of the mind, and
set off the charms of virtue.

I strove to make their time as agreeable as possible, by that assiduity which
never fails to please, and all those little services which are sure to
conciliate affection: I united on my fair visitor, as you may imagine, with
more than ordinary diligence, gratified her curiosity by the fight of every
thing that I thought worthy of her attention, and endeavored by being useful,
to make myself agreeable. I succeeded so well, in short, with the whole family,
that when they left the place, I received a pressing invitation from the father
to spend a week with them in London. Accordingly I waited on them, and was
received with great politeness; the morning we chiefly spent in diversions
within doors, and in the evening went to the play. This gave me an opportunity
of frequent interviews with the young lady, in which I could not help paying
that tribute of praise to her accomplishments which I know she deserved, and
which I imagined she expected; I spoke the language of love, without feeling
the power of it, and insensibly raised a passion in her breast, which was yet a
stranger to my own. Little did I indeed at that time imagine, that with an
intention merely to amuse, I was laying snares to deceive; and that whilst I
thought myself only playing the innocent Art of a fine gentleman, I was
undermining the peace of an amiable woman, and destroying the future happiness
of a whole family.

When I took my leave, my friends told me they would not consent to part with
me so soon, unless I would promise, on the first leisure I had, to return; with
which proposal I readily acquiesced. As I had no great desire to change a scene
of gaiety and pleasure for the gloom of a college, the reflection of it threw a
melancholy on my features, which the lady attributed to a different cause. I
fetched a deep sigh at parting, and retired from her with a silent sorrow,
which I afterward found had left a stronger impression on her heart than all
the fine things I had said; and confirmed her in the opinion she had conceived
of my inviolable attachment to her. I returned to the university, where my
attention was soon called off to other views, and my thoughts fixed on objects
of a different nature: nor should I, perhaps, from that hour, have called to
mind the now forgotten fair one, had not a letter, which I received from her
about three months afterward, greatly surprised and disturbed me.

"She would not, she there informed me, have broken through the prescribed
forms of her sex, but that, as she well knew my designs were honorable, and
nothing but my own diffidence had concealed them, she looked on herself as
bound in honor to let me know that it would be acceptable to her; and that it
would appear like affectation in her to suppose I had meant merely to flatter
and amuse her; and as she had spared me the confusion of first mentioning this,
she hoped I would soon come to a more clear explanation." In a postscript, she
added, "That her father was a man who had, what we call, seen the world, was
determined to marry her at all events, up to her rank; and chose rather to see
her splendidly miserable, than obscurely happy: that unless I saved her, she
was ruined; and that a short time must determine her late."

I need not tell you how I was confounded to find myself involved in an
intrigue, before I had so much as once seriously thought upon it; I therefore
answered her in the most submissive manner I could; represented to her, that it
would be the highest ingratitude in me to marry the daughter of a man who had
shown me such uncommon civilities, without his consent; besides, that the
disparity of our fortunes must be an unsurmountable object to a thinking
person; that she might one (...) or other reproach me with breach of trust
herself, or insult me on account of that very inequality which she now seemed
to disregard; that, in such a case, the desire of pleasing must sink into the
fear of offending, and thus put an end to all visionary schemes of lasting
happiness; that I was sorry she had so mistaken my behavior as to attribute
that to love which is but the effect of gallantry. I then talked to her of a
priest and marriage in the language of Lothario; and concluded by advising her,
for both our sakes, to think no more of it.

This, you may imagine, was an answer, which, whilst my hand wrote it, my heart
very severely reproached me for. I could not but tacitly blame myself for that
particular regard and attachment to her which I had formerly expressed, and was
not determined, whether I should not make a little serious love to her the very
next opportunity; when, in the midst of these reflections, I received the
following letter, which best can tell the story of her misfortune, and expose
the weakness of my past conduct.

"It is over; and I am a slave! yet the only hour that I can call my own I give
to you, the only one that a husband's authority has no right to interrupt. To
sum up all my miseries, in a word, know, my father has this morning given me up
to sorrow and Mr. --. Alas! what delusive visions of felicity did not your
flattering tongue once give me leave to form! such as no turn of fortune can
again recall. I tremble to think what a husband's rage may inflict, when he
finds, instead of the happiness he expected, so poor an entertainment as love
compelled will afford him. It is impossible for different masters to share one
poor heart. With me he may enjoy as much as the unwilling victim to brutal
violence, and have as warm a return of fondness from the sheeted dead. But what
am I saying, and to whom? To him that has robbed me of my peace! can he now dry
up those tears which himself alone could bid to flow? Or can he heal those
wounds which himself has made? But the worst is past; all the passions that
have racked me since I received you last are hushed; and what little spirit
remains will soon give way to the silent eating sorrow after this. Think that
you have robbed me of what not all my fortune can purchase for me, nor the
whole world beside has power to bestow. Ever since I was taught to form a
wish, it was that of being a happy mother, and a tender wife. I may now have a
child whom its father's vices will exclude from that excess of fondness which I
would otherwise have poured over it; and you know too well his character to
hope any alteration in him: and yet this man my religion henceforth binds me to
be true to, and obey. Farewell! and know, however I condemn your conduct, that
would my brother, jealous of this honor as he is, this moment revenge me, I
had rather forgive than resent it. Live then, and be happy; and may that
happiness never be suspended a moment by the remembrance of her whom your
falsehood has made for ever miserable."

If your heart has not already informed you what I felt on this, it will be
needless to tell you how severely I now accuse my own weak conduct; nor can I
soon forgive myself the wanton sacrifice of youth, innocence, beauty and
virtue, to fashionable levity, and polite perfidiousness. It is I that have
given the wound inflicted by her father a deeper smart, though it is himself
who has made that misery lasting. I can only wish this may be a useful lesson,
to warn all young gentlemen, my fellow profligates, never to express a
particular regard where they have not serious thoughts of love; and to teach
parents whom heaven has blessed with dutiful children, rather to make them happy
than great; or by their authority never to violate those hearts which they have
only a right to guide.

On the JUSTICE of PROVIDENCE.
All nature is but art unknown to thee,
All chance direction which thou can not see;
All discord harmony not understood,
All partial evil universal good:
And, spite of pride, in erring reason's spite,
One truth is clear -- whatever is, is right.
POPE.
BOZALDAB, Caliph of Egypt, had dwelt securely for many years in the silken
pavilions of pleasure, and had every morning anointed his head with the oil of
gladness, when his only son Aboram, for whom he had crowded his treasures with
gold, extended his dominions with conquests, and secured them with impregnable
fortresses, was suddenly wounded, as he was hunting, with an arrow from an
unknown hand, and expired in the field.

Bozaldab, in the distraction of grief and despair, refused to return to his
palace, and retired to the gloomiest grotto in the neighboring mountains: he
there rolled himself in the dust, tore away the hairs of his hoary head, and
dashed the cup of consolation, that Patience offered him, to the ground, He
suffered not his minstrels to approach his presence; but listened to the
screams of the melancholy birds of midnight, that flirt through the solitary
vaults and echoing chambers of the pyramids.

"Can that God be benevolent, he cried, who thus wounds the soul, as from an
ambush, with unexpected sorrows, and crushes his creatures in a moment with
irremediable calamity? Ye lying Imans, prate to us no more of the justness and
kindness of an all-directing and all-loving Providence! he, whom ye pretend
reigns in heaven, is so far from protecting the miserable sons of men, that he
perpetually delights to blast the sweetest flowerets in the garden of hope;
and, like a malignant giant, to beat down the strongest towers of happiness
with the iron mace of anger. If this being possessed the goodness and the power
with which flattering priests have invested him, he would doubtless be inclined
and enabled to banish those evils which render the world a dungeon of distress,
a vale of vanity and woe. I will continue in it no longer.

At this moment he furiously raised his hand, which despair had armed with a
dagger, to strike deep into his bosom; when suddenly thick flashes of lightning
shot through the cavern, and a being of more than human beauty and magnitude,
arrayed in azure robes, crowned with amaranth, and waving a branch of palm in
his right hand, arrested the arm of the trembling and astonished Caliph, and
said with a majestic smile, "Follow me to the top of this mountain."

"Look from hence, said the awful conductor: I am Color, the angel of Peace;
look from hence into the valley."

Bozaldab opened his eyes, and beheld a barren, sultry, and solitary island, in
the midst of which sat a pale, meagre, and ghastly figure: it was a merchant
just starving with famine, and lamenting that he could find neither wild
berries nor a single spring in this forlorn uninhabited desert; and begging the
protection of Heaven against the tigers that would now certainly destroy him,
since he had consumed the last fuel he had collected to make nightly fires to
affright them. He then cast a casket of jewels on the sand as trifles of no
use; and crept feeble and trembling to an eminence, where he was accustomed to
sit every evening to watch the setting sun, and to give a signal to any ship
that might happily approach the island.

"Inhabitant of heaven, cried Bozaldab, suffer not this wretch to perish by the
fury of wild beasts." "Peace, said the angel, and observe."

He looked again, and beheld a vessel arrived at the desolate isle. What words
can paint the rapture of the starving merchant, when the captain offered to
transport him to his native country, if he would reward him with half the
jewels of his casket. No sooner had this pitiful commander received the
stipulated sum, than he held a consultation with the crew, and they agreed to
seize the remaining jewels, and leave the unhappy exile in the same helpless
and lamentable condition in which they discovered him. He wept and trembled,
entreated and implored in vain.

"Will Heaven permit such injustice to be practiced?" exclaimed Bozaldab. "Look
again, said the angel, and behold the very ship in which, short-sighted as thou
art, thou wishedst the merchant might embark, dashed in pieces on a rock: do
thou not hear the cries of the sinking sailors? Presume not to direct the
Governor of the Universe in the disposal of events. The man whom thou have
pitied shall be taken from this dreary solitude, but not by the method thou
would prescribe. His vice was avarice, by which he became not only
abominable, but wretched: he fancied some mighty charm in wealth, which, like
the wand of Abdiel, would gratify every wish, and obviate every fear. This
wealth he has now been taught not only to despise but to abhor: he cast his
jewels upon the sand, and conf^ssed them to be useless; he offered part of them
to the mariners, and perceived them to be pernicious; he has now learned, that
they are rendered useful or vain, good or evil, only by the situation and
temper of the possessor. Happy is he whom distress has taught wisdom! but turn
thine ayes to another and more interesting scene." -- The Caliph instantly
beheld a magnificent palace, adorned with statues of his ancestors wrought in
jasper; the ivory doors of which turning on hinges of the gold of Golconda,
discovered a throne of diamonds, surrounded by the rajas of fifty nations, and
with ambassadors in various habits, and of different complexions; on which sat
Aboram, the much-lamented son of Bozaldab, and by his side a princess fairer
than a Houri.

"Gracious Alla! -- It is my son! cried the Caliph, O let me hold him to my
heart!" "Thou can not grasp an unsubstantial vision, replied the angel: I am
now showing thee what would have been the destiny of thy son, had he continued
longer on the earth." "And why, returned Bozaldab, why was he not permitted to
continue? Why was he not suffered to be a witness of so much felicity and
power?" "Consider the sequel," replied he that dwells in the fifth heaven.
Bozaldab looked earnestly, and saw the countenance of his son, on which he had
been used to behold the placid smile of simplicity, and the vivid blushes of
health, now distorted with rage, and now fixed in the insensibility of
drunkenness: it was again animated with disdain, it became pale with
apprehension, and appeared to be withered with intemperance; his hands were
stained with blood, and he trembled by turns with fury and terror. The palace
so lately shining with Oriental pomp, changed suddenly into the cell of a
dungeon, where his son lay stretched out on a cold pavement, gagged and bound,
and his eyes put out. Soon after he perceived the favorite sultana, who before
was seated by his side, enter with a bowl of poison, which she compelled Aboram
to drink, and aftewards married the successor to his throne.

"Happy, said Coloc, is he whom Providence has, by the angel of death, snatched
from guilt! from whom that power is withheld, which, if he had possessed, would
have accumulated upon himself yet greater misery than it could have done upon
others."

"It is enough, cried Bozaldab; I adore the inserntable schemes of omniscience!
-- From what dreadful evils has my son been rescued, by a death which I rashly
bewailed as unfortunate and premature! a death of innocence and peace, which
has blessed his memory on earth, and transmitted his spirit to the skies."

"Cast away the dagger, replied the heavenly messenger, which thou wast
preparing to plunge into thine own heart. Exchange complaint for silence, and
doubt for adoration. Can a mortal look down without giddiness and stupefaction
into the vast abyss of eternal wisdom? Can a mind that sees not infinitely,
perfectly comprehend any thing among an infinity of objects mutually relative?
Can the channels, which thou command to be cut to receive the annual
inundation of the Nile, contain the waters of the ocean? Remember, that perfect
happiness cannot be conferred on a creature; for perfect happiness is an
attribute as incommunicable as perfect power and eternity."

The angel, while he was speaking thus, stretched out his pinions to fly back
to the empyreum, and the slutter of his wings was like the rushing of a
cataract.

NO FRIENDSHIP among the WICKED.
The bliss of friendship vice can never Know;
From virtue's fount alone that stream must flow.
R.
THREE villains, having made a considerable booty at a small distance from a
country town, agreed (as it was not expedient for all three to enter the town
together) that one of them should go and buy provisions, and bring them to a
place of rendezvous in a wood. Whilst he was gone, the two who were left
consulted together, and, in order to enlarge their share of the booty,
determined to kill their comrade as soon as he should return with their food.
This was executed; but their murdered companion, who had formed precisely the
same design against them, had, after satisfying his own appetite, poisoned the
food he brought them. Thus they ^ll died by the treachery of each other.

SELECT THOUGHT^.
FEW take care to live well; but many to live long, though it is in every
body's power to do the former, but in no man's to do the latter.

The first requisite in conversation is truth; the second, sense; the third,
good humor; and the fourth, wit.

Slanderous are like flies; they pass over the good parts of a man, and indulge
on his sores.

Keen glances of censure proceed generally from a dark involved temper, like
flashes of lightning from a gloomy sky.

Those who blow the coals (...) others strife, may chance to have the sparks
fly in their own faces.

Words are like arrows, and should not be shot at random.

The poor are seldomer sick for want of food, than the rich are from excess of
it.

Those who are of opinion that money will do every thing, may reasonably be
suspected to do every thing for money.

A good conscience is to the soul what health is to the body.

Content is natural wealth, and luxury is artificial poverty.

A liar is a coward to man, and a bravo to his God.

King Henry the fourth of France (to recommend affability and good nature) used
to say, that one drop of honey attracted more flies than a spoo^^^ of vinegar.

It is easier to praise people into (...), than rail them out of vice.

A sure way to please in company, is to seem pleased with your company.

Politeness consists in being easy yourself, and making others so.

We may be as good as we please, if we please to be good.

None are so empty, as those who are full of themselves.

Despise not advice even of the meanest: the cackling of geese preserved the
Roman state.

Ill habits are easier conquered today than tomorrow.

A knave may gain more than an honest man for a day; but the honest man will
gain more than the knave in the year.

If a coat be ever so fine that a fool wears, it is still but a fool's coat.

Despise not an enemy though ever so weak: but consider that a lion may perish
by the puncture of an asp.

In courts and cities we are entertained with the works of men, in the country
with the works of God. One is the province of (...) the other of nature.

They worship God best, who resemble him most.

Passions are the gales of life; and it is our part to take care they do not
rise into a tempest.

To be angry, is to revenge the faults of others upon ourselves.

Point (...) at the sauits of others with a foul finger.

If the devil catches a man idle, he generally sets him to work.

If we did not (...) ourselves, flattery from others would have no effect.

When (...) virt^^ns in their old age, they only make a sacrifice to God of the
devil's leavings.

The caresses of had men resemble the fawning of a gray hound, which, while he
show his love, fouls you with his paws.

Envy is a certain acknowledgment of superiority in the person envied: of all
vices, it is the basest and meanest: and the breast of the envious ever contains
a ^ell.

We should never despise people for want of natural parts, but for making a
wrong use of them; thus, if a man walks lame, he is to be pitied; if he dances
^^me, he is to be laughed at.

Some persons are so very obliging, that they never oblige.

A malignant praise has always been the most successful vehicle to insinuate
slander, as poison is never more art^^lly conveyed than in perfume.

[ Part of on epitaph] What I possessed is left to others; what I gave to the
poor remains with me.

Wisdom's best school is adversity: prosperity was painted by the ancients,
like a harlot, quite blind, on the brink of a frightful precipice.

The voluptuous man stands in the market to be bought and sold.

Procrastination is the thief of time.

Industry is the true philosopher's stone.

He that injures one, threatens an hundred.

Tongues are like race horses, which run the faster the less weight they carry.

When Socrates was told that his judges had sentenced him to death. And has
not nature (said he) passed the same sentence upon them?

Every person has just as much pride as he wants sense.

He who swears, tells us his bare word is not to be credited.

True modesty is ashamed of every thing that is criminal; false modesty, of
every thing that is unfashionable.

When compliments were less in fashion, sincerity was more esteemed.

Nature has wisely furnished us with two ears, and but (...) tongue; a most
useful lesson, if rightly attended to.

Those who fear God the most, fear men the least.

Living high brings men low.

A desire of appearing witty is the most certain method of preventing it.

He keeps the best table who has the most valuable company at it.

A head, like a house, when crammed too full, and no regular order observed in
the placing what is in it, is only latered, instead of being furnished.

The ancient Grecians used to punish with double severity crimes done in
drunkenness; first, for debasing themselves below the brute creation; and,
sec^^^y, for the crime committed.

It is remarkable that the most docile and sensible of all animals (the
elephant) is the most temperate and abstemious, as, on the contrary, the most
stupid and forbidding (the swine) is the most gluttonbus and voracious.

Those who boast of the light within, are generally dark and gloomy without;
and may justly be compared to dark (...).

There is a great difference between praying and saying one's prayers.

I never knew a proud man that was not ill-natured, nor an ill-natured man that
was not proud.

Bigots of all kinds, whether professors of the Christian, Jewish, or Mohammedan
religion, differ in nothing but the name; for though at first setting out they
seem to take different ways; yet, like travelers in a circle, notwithstanding
they set forward back to back, they soon meet and join in the opposite part of
the circle.

It is usual in Turkey, by way of reproach, to blacken the front of those
persons houses who are notorious for (...)-bearing, or propagating falsehood if
that were the case with us, what a dismal figure would most of the towns in
(...) make?

Nothing can be honorable that is not virtuous: among the Romans, the entrance
of the temple of honor always lay through the temple of virtue.

Example is a lesson all can read.

No man can be said to die suddenly who has lived long. If we do not govern our
passions, we may be sure our passions will govern us.

Those who are given to tell all they know, generally tell more than they know.

The man who loves not praise, will scarce do any thing to deserve it.

We should not talk to please ourselves, but those who hear us.

Obstinate people are never so much so, as when they are in the wrong.

Of all brutes, none are so very brutish as human brutes.

To please, we must resemble the willow, and not the oak.

He who is fond of giving advice, wants it himself.

Advice should fall as the dew, not overwhelm is a shower.

We sometimes feel what we fear, much more than that we really suffer.

Hard to be pleased, and easy to be displeased, is an odious character.

The meanest way of praising ourselves is finding fault with others.

The man who is ashamed of being poor, would be proud if he were rich.

When we speak of the dead, we should tread softly over their graves.

Praise children for being pretty, and they will endeavor to be beautiful
praise them for being good, and they will endeavor to he virtues.

Avarice is of all characters the most opposite to that of the Almighty; whose
alone it is to give, and not to receive.

Those who give no body a good word, deserve no body's good word.

An affected gravity that covers folly, is like a washed shilling that passes
for a guinea, till it comes to be tried.

THE HERMIT.
-- I may assert eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to man.
MILTON.
FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age a reverend Hermit grew;
The moss his bed -- the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well.
Remote from man, with God he passed his days,
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise.
And (...) sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed (...) itself, till one suggestion rose;
That vie^ should triumph, virtue vice obey;
This sprung some doubts of Providence's sway.
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost.
So when a smooth expanse receives impressed
Calm nature's image on it is w^t'ry breast,
(...) bend the banks, the trees impending grow,
and skies beneath with answering colors glow.
But if a stone the gentle sea divine,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side;
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun;
Banks, trees, and skies in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
To find if books or swains report it right,
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
He quits his cell; the Pilgrim's staff he bore,
And ^ix'd the scallop in his hat before;
Then with the sun a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass;
But when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And soft in graceful ringlets waved his hair.
Then near approaching, Father, hail! he cried;
And, hail, my son! the reverend sire replied;
Words followed words, from question answer flowed,
And talk of various kinds deceived the road;
Till each with other pleased, and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart:
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound,
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around.
But here the youth enjoined the eager sire,
Who into hidden truths did much inquire,
If he would in silence each event behold,
He would to him some wondrous things unfold.
Agreed; -- and now the closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray;
Nature in silence bids the world repose;
When near the road a stately palace rose:
There by the moon, through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their sloping sides with grass.
It cha^^o'd, ^he noble master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home.
Yet still his kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease.
The pair arrive, the livery'd servants wait;
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate;
The table groans with costly piles of food,
And all is more than hospitably good.
Then led to rest, the day's long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk, and heaps of down.
At length it is morn, and at the dawn of day
Along the wide canals the zephyrs play;
Fresh over the gay parterres the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call;
An early banquet decked the splendid hall;
Rich, luscious wine, a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced his guests to taste:
Then pleased and thankful from the porch they go,
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe;
His cup was vanished! for in secret guise
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
Now on they pass -- when far upon the road,
The wealthy spoil the wily partner showed.
As one who spies a serpent in his way,
Glist'ning and basking in the summer ray,
Disordered stops, to shun the danger near.
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear:
So seemed the fire, he walked with trembling heart:
And much he wished, but durst not ask to part: On account of the promise at
first setting our.

Murmuring, he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard,
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pass, the sun his glory shrouds,
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds;
A sound in air presaged approaching rain,
And beasts to coverts scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs, the wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat:
'Twas built by turrets on a rising ground,
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around:
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy door they drew,
Fierce rising gusts with sudden fury blew;
The nimble lightning mixed with showers began,
And over their heads loud rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
Driven by the wind, and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast:
('T was then his threshold first received a guest.)
Slow creaking turns the door with jealous care,
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair:
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And nature's fervor through their limbs recals.
Bread of the coarsest fort, with dead small beer,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to cheer;
And when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark the pondering Hermit viewed
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
And why should such (within himself he cried)
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But what new marks of wonder soon took place
In every setting feature of his face!
When from his vest the young companion bore
That cup, the generous landlord owned before;
And paid profusely with the precious bowl
The stinted kindness of his churlish soul.
Just sunk to earth, the miser in surprise,
Received the glittering gift with startled eyes:
But ere he could recover from his fright,
The generous guests were gone quite out of sight.
Now the brisk clouds in airy tumults fly,
The sun emerging opes another sky;
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the day.
While hence they walk, the Pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travel of uncertain thought:
His partner's acts without their cause appear, To steal the cup from the
generous man, and give it to a wretch that would scarce admit them within his
gate.

'Twas there a vice, but seemed a madness here.
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes.
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shades again involve the sky,
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie,
Again they search, and find a mansion nigh.
The soil improved around, the mansion neat,
And neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind,
Content, and (not for praise, but virtue) kind.
Hither the walkers turn their weary feet,
Then bless the mansion, and the master greet:
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain, without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part:
From him you come, from him accept it here,
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer.
He spoke, and bid the welcome table spread,
Then talk of virtue till the time of bed;
When the grave household round the hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hour with prayer.
At length the world, renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil, the dapple morn arose:
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept
Near the closed cradle, where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck! the landlord's little pride,
O strange return! grew black, and gasp'd, and died,
Horror of horrors! what! his only son?
How looked our Hermit when the fact was done!
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assail his heart:
Confused and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies -- but trembling fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues; the country lay
Perplexed with roads, a servant showed the way;
A river crossed the path: the passage over
Was nice to find, the servant went before:
Long arms of oak an open bridge supplied,
And deep the waves beneath them bending glide:
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in:
Plunging he falls, and rising lifts his head,
Then flashing turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild sparkling rage inflames the Hermit's eyes,
He bursts the bands of fear, and wildly cries,
Detested wretch! -- but scarce his speech beg^n,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man:
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet,
His robes turned white, and flowed about his feet:
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odoars breathe in purpled air;
And wings, whose colors glittered like the day,
Wide ^t his back their dazzling plumes display,
The form etherial bursts upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud at first the Pilgrim's passion grew;
Sudden he gazed, and wist ^ot what to do:
Surprise in secret chains his words suspends,
And in a calm his settling temper ends.
But silence here the beauteous angel broke,
(The voice of music ravished as he spoke:)
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial rise before the throne;
Their charms success in our bright regions find,
And forced an angel down to calm thy mind:
For this commissioned, (...) the sky;
^ay, cease to kneel -- thy fellow servants ^.
Then know the truth of government divine,
And let the scruples be no longer thine.
The master justly claims that world he made;
In this the right of Providence is laid;
Its sacred majesty through all depends
On using second means Second means -- God often appoints Wicked and abandoned
wretches to be his instruments of justice upon others. for some ends tending to
public good, though unperceived by human eyes.
to works his ends:
It Is thus withdrawn in state from human eye,
The power exerts its attributes on high;
Your actions uses, nor controuls your will,
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes?
Yet taught by these, confess the Almighty just,
And, where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust.
The great vain man, who fared on costly food,
Whose life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine,
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine,
Has, with the cup, the graceless custom lost,
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean suspicious wretch, whose belted door
Never moved in pity to the wandering poor;
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind,
That heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind;
Conscious of wanting worth, he views the bowl,
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen ore of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head;
In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,
And loose from dross the silver runs below.
Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But now the child half-wean'd his soul from God;
(Child of his age Child of his age -- A child born to him when in years, (...)
whom he douted too fondly.
) for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again
To what excesses had his dotage run!
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all but thee, in fits he seemed to go,
(And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.)
The poor fond parent humbled in the dust,
Now owns in tears the punishment was just.
But how had all his fortune felt a wreck,
Had the false servant sped in safety back!
This very night, (by secret plot contrived)
Of life and we (...) his master he would deprived;
Had he in this conspiracy prevailed,
What funds of charity would then have failed? He gave largely to the poor.

Thus heaven instructs thy mind: this trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On ^ounding pinions here the youth withdrew,
The sage stood wondering as the seraph slew.
Thus looked Elisha, when, to mount on high
His master took the chariot of the sky:
The fiery pomp ascending, left the view;
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending Hermit here a prayer begun,
"Lord, as in heaven, on earth thy will be done:"
Then gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And spent a life of piety and peace.
TRUTH and FALSEHOOD.
A Fable.
SOON as the iron age on earth began,
And vice found easy entrance into man:
While from his towering height the flaming sun
Fierce on the pendant globe directly shone,
Forth from her cave infernal Falsehood came;
Falsehood, the hate of gods, of men the shame.
A silken robe she wore of various hue,
Its color changing with each different view,
Studious to cheat, and eager to beguile,
She mimick'd Truth, and ap'd her heavenly smile;
But mimick'd Truth in vain: the v^ry'd vest
To every searching eye the fiend confessed.
At length she saw celestial Truth appear,
Serene her brow, and cheerful was her air:
Her silver looks with shining fillets bound,
With laurel wreaths her peaceful temples crowned:
A lily robe was girded round her waist,
And over her arms a radiant mantle cast;
With decent negligence it hung behind,
And loosely flowing wantoned in the wind:
Thus Truth advanced, unknowing of deceit,
And Falsehood, bowing low, began the cheat.
Hail, charming maid! bright as the morning star,
Daughter of Jove, and Heaven's peculiar care;
It Is thine to weigh the world in equal scales,
And chide the conscious soul when vice prevails;
Dispensing justice with impartial hand,
The mightiest powers submit to thy command;
Even gods themselves, though in their actions free,
Consult, resolve, and act as you decree.
Great sovereign Jove, the first etherial name,
Advised with thee to form the heavenly frame:
As Truth approved, he bid the fabric rise,
And spread the azure mantle of the skies;
Placed every planet in its proper sphere,
Nor rolls this orb too wide, nor that too near;
But why thus walk we mindless of our ease,
Exposed beneath the sun's meridian blaze:
Better retire, and shun the scorching ray,
'Till fanning zephyrs cool our evening way.
Hear how (...) limpid streams run murmuring by,
And tuneful birds their sylvan notes apply:
See fragrant shrubs along the border grow,
And waving shades beneath the poplar bough.
All these invite us to the river side,
To bathe the limbs, and sport within the tide:
So cool the stre^m, the flowery banks so sweet,
Di^^tu's s^f ^ight covet the retreat;
Nor can a short diversion check your haste;
Fresh strength will soon succeed such welcome rest:
As rapid currents held a while at bay,
With swifter force pursue their liquid way.
So sp^k^ the phanton, and with friendly look,
Supporting what she said, approached the brook:
Truth followed, artless, ^^suspicious maid,
And, in an evil hour, the voice obeyed;
Both at the crystal stream arrived unbound
Their different robes; both ^^st them on the ground,
The fiend upon the margin (...)'ring stood;
The naked goddess leapt into the flood;
Sporting she swims the liquid (...) face over,
Unmindful of the matchless ro^e she wore.
Not Falsehood so -- she, hasty, seized the vest,
And with the beauteous spoils herself she dressed,
Then winged with joy, outflew the swiftest wind,
Her own infernal robe far left behind.
Straight she aspires above her former state,
And gains admission to the rich and great:
Nay, such he^ ^^^ing pride, that some report,
When thus (...), she boldly went to court;
There spoke (...) looked with such a graceful air,
Mistaken fame ^^onounc'd her wise and fair.
She filled the wanton's tongue with specious names,
To deal in wounds and deaths, his darts and flames
She prefac'd at her lewd attempts with love,
And fraud prevailed where reason could not move;
At length she mingled with the learned throng,
And tuned the muse's mercenary song.
In all the labyrinths of logic skilled,
She taught the subtle reasoner not to yield:
Instructed how to puzzle each dispute,
And boldly baffle men -- though not confute:
Now at the bar she played the lawyer's part,
And shaped out wrong and right by rules of art;
Now in the senate raised her pompous tone,
Talked much of public good, but meant her own.
Often to the Olympian field she turned her eyes,
And taught the racers how to gain the prize.
In schools and temples too she claimed a share,
While Falshood's self admired her influence there.
Deluded Truth observed the fraud too late,
Nor knew she to repair the loss so great:
In vain her heavenly robes she sighing seeks,
In vain the humid pearls bedew her cheeks;
In vain she tears the laurel from her hair,
While Nature seems to sympathize her care:
The glowing flowers that crown the enameled meads,
Weep fragrant dews, and hang their drooping heads:
The sylvan choirs, as conscious of her pains,
Deplore the loss in melancholy strains:
Thus pensive and unclothed, upon the shore
She stands, and sees the robe which Falsehood wore:
Detested sight! no longer now she mourns,
But, grief to rage transformed, with anger burns;
In^^ the stream the hellish robe she cast,
And scorned a habit so unlike the last.
Hence Truth now naked roves, as in disgrace;
None but the wise and virtuous see her face:
From cities far she modestly retreats,
From busy scenes of life, to peaceful seats;
Is chiefly found in lonely fields and cells,
Where silence reigns, and contemplation dwells.
Hence Falsehood cheats us in the fair disguise,
And seems Truth's self to all unwary eyes;
Thrives and triumphs, in power, and wealth, and fame,
And builds her glory on her rival's name:
With safety dares to flatter, fawn, and sooth;
For who knows Falsehood when arrayed like Truth?
LUXURY and WANT. A VISION.
AS late I mused on Fortune's ebb and flow,
Life's airy pleasures, and substantial woe,
The thoughtless mirth that laughs in pleasure's eye,
The boast of vice and pride of vanity;
Over ^odding reason downy slumbers stole,
And fancy's visions opened on my soul:
Aloft, on proud Ionic columns reared,
A sumptuous dome in ruined pomp appeared;
A baseless pillar here, with moss o'ergrown,
Pressed earth's green bosom with a length of stone;
There, a tall portal, sculptured once so gay,
Records no story but its own decay.
I entered -- Crowds, who blush to be descried,
With famished looks, through mouldering arches glide;
I paused, and curious as I gazed around,
^^w a lean hag lie stretched along the ground;
Round either arm a tattered rag she drew,
Her shame concealed with rags of various hue;
A cloth her forehead bound, her legs were bare,
And foul and clotted was her grizzled hair.
"Whence, and what art thou, wretch?" surprised, I cried;
"Want is my name, well known, the wretch replied;
The work of luxury, this lofty dome,
So righteous Jove ordains, is now my home.
Time was, this roof returned the dulcet voice
Of music, blended with a critic's choice.
Dependent thence a thousand tapers glowed.
The vine's rich juice from silver fountains flowed;
An hundred dainties over the board were spread,
And all Arabia's spicy fragrance shed.
The velvet couches and the cushion'd chair,
Swelled high with down, as soft as summer's air;
And female beauty, smiling over the scene,
Spread joy around, of every joy the queen!
"Then at these doors, by hunger and by grief
Oppressed, with suppliant voice I sought relief:
Relief I sought, alas! but sought in vain,
With poignant taunt rebuked, and sour disdain.
The unfeeling priest, with supercilious face,
Inferred from indigence the want of grace.
The lawyer, in quaint terms, with looks demure,
Gave hints of statutes against vagrant poor.
Unmoved and cool the g^rter'd statesman cried,
For me, fit refuge colonies supplied.
I sighed in secret and to heaven my heart
Ascending, heaven in pity took my part.
Loud thunder rolled -- the fabric from its base
Shook, and proud Luxury vanished from the place.
The astonished crowd their patron's fall deplore,
And pale and trembling issue from the door.
I entered, prompted by a voice divine,
Which thrice repeated -- Want! this pile is thine;
For know, by Jove and fate it stands decreed,
Where Lux'ry riots, thou shall still succeed.
Here unmolested from that hour I reign,
And all the court of Lux'ry forms my train;
Here still received by me, as hither driven,
By keen necessity, the scourage of heaven:
These are the wretches which around me throng;
To me the lawyer, statesman, priest belong".
She ceased; her words such strong emotions bred,
They waked me trembling, and the vision sied.
Save me from Lux'ry, gracious heav'n^^d (...),
That Want's drear haunts my steps may ^^er invade.
The HUSBANDMAN'S Meditation in the FIELD.
WITH tollsome steps when I pursue,
Over breaking clods, the plougshare's way,
Lord, teach my mental eye to view
My native dissoluble clay.
And when with seed I strew the earth,
To thee all praises let me give;
Whose hand prepared me for the birth,
Whose breath informed, and bade me live.
Pleased, I behold the stately stem
Support its bearded honor's load:
Thus, Lord, sustained by thee, I came
To manhood, through youth's dangerous road,
Purging from noxious herbs the grain,
Oh! may I learn to purge my mind
From sin, rank weed of deepest stain,
Nor leave one baneful root behind.
When blast destroys the opening ear,
Life, thus replete with various woe,
Warns me to shun with studious care
Pride, my most deadly, latent foe.
When harvest comes, the yellow crop
Prone to the reaper's sickle yields;
And I beneath Death's scythe must drop,
And soon or late forsake these fields.
When future crops in silent hoards,
Sleep for a while, to service dead;
Thy emblem this, O Grave! affords
The path of life, which all must tread.
ODE to SPRING.
YOUTH of the year, delightful Spring!
Thy blessed return on genial wing
Inspires my languid lays:
No more I sleep in sloth supine,
When all creation at thy shrine
Its annual tribute pays.
Escaped from Winter's freezing power,
Each blossom greets thee, and each flower;
And, foremost of the train,
By nature -- (artler handmaid) -- dressed,
The snowdrop comes in lily'd vest,
Prophetic of thy reign.
The lark now serains her tuneful throat,
And every loud and sprightly note
Calls Echo from her cell;
Be warned, (...) maids, that listen round,
A beauteous nymph became a sound,
The nymph, who loved too well.
The bright-hair'd sun, with warmth benign
Bids trees, and shrubs, and swelling vine,
Their infant buds display:
Again the streams refresh the plains,
Which Winter bound in icy chains,
And sparkling bless his ray.
Life-giving zephyrs breathe around,
And instant glows the enameled ground
With nature's varied hue;
Not so returns our youth decayed,
Alas! nor air, nor sun, nor shade
The springs of life renew.
The sun's too quick revolving beam
Apace dissolves the human dream,
And brings the appointed hour;
Too late we catch his parting ray,
And mourn the idly wasted day
No longer in our power.
Then happiest he, whose lengthened sight
Pursues, by virtue's constant light,
A hope beyond the skies;
Where frowning Winter never shall come,
But rosy Spring for ever bloom,
And suns eternal rise.
AN ELEGY.
Written in a Country Churchyard.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds;
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
Or drowsy tinkling lulls the distant folds:
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as, wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient -- solitary reign.
Beneath these rugged elms -- that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the Hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twi^t'ring from her straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care;
No children run to lisp their fire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Their harrow often the stubborn globe had broke,
How jocund did they drive their team a-field!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure,
Nor grandeur here, with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty -- all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour;
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to those the fault,
If memory over their tombs no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can story'd urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid,
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hinds that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village Hampden, who with dauntless breast
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute, inglorious Milton, here may rest;
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood,
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined,
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind.
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool-sequester'd vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes, and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of same and elegy supply;
And many a holy text around she strews,
To teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing, lingering look behind!
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate,
If chance by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate:
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
"Often have we seen him at the peep of dawn
Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
There, at the foot of yonder nodding beach,
That wreaths its old fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noontide would be stretch,
And pore upon the brook that bubbles by.
Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
Mutt'ring his way ward fancies he would rove;
Now drooping, woeful, wan, like one forlorn,
Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
One morn I missed him on the accustomed hill,
Along the heath, and near his favorite tree:
Another came, nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he:
The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
Slow through the church way path we saw him borne;
Approach and read (for thou can read the lay)
Engraved on the stone beneath you aged thorn.
There scattered often, the earliest of the year,
By hands unseen are showers of violets found;
The redbreast loves to build and warble there,
And little footsteps lightly print the ground."
THE EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune, and to fame unknown:
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth,
And melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send;
He gave to misery (all he had) a tear:
He gained from heaven ('it was all be wished) a friend,
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their drear abode,
(I here they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
The PANTHER, the HORSE, and other BEASTS, A FABLE.
THE man who seeks to win the fair,
(So custom says) must truth forbear;
Must sawn and flatter, cringe and lie,
And raise the goddess to the sky;
For truth is hateful to her ear,
A rudeness which she cannot bear --
A rudeness? -- Yes -- I speak my thoughts;
For truth upbraids her with her faults.
How wretched, Chloe, then am I,
Who love you, and yet cannot lie;
And still to make you less my friend,
I strive your errors to amend.
But shall the senseless fop impart
The softest passion to your heart,
While he who tells you honest truth,
And points to happiness your youth,
Determines, by his care, his lot,
And lives neglected and forgot?
Trust me, my girl, with greater ease,
Your taste for flattery I could please;
And similes in each dull line,
Like glowworms in the dark, should shine.
What if I say your lips disclose
The freshness of the opening rose;
Or that your cheeks are beds of flowers,
Enripen'd by refreshing showers.
Yet certain as these flowers shall fade,
Time every beauty will invade.
The butterfly, of various hue,
More than the flower resembles you:
Fair, fluttering, fickle, busy thing,
To pleasure ever on the wing,
Gaily coquetting for an hour,
To die, and never be thought of more.
Would you the bloom of youth should last?
It Is virtue that must bind it fast;
An easy carriage, wholly free
From sour reserve, or levity;
Good natured mirth, an open heart,
And looks unskilled in any art;
Humility enough to own
The frailties which a friend make known;
And decent pride, enough to know
The worth that virtue can bestow.
These are the charms which never decay,
Though youth and beauty fade away;
And time, which all things else removes,
Still heightens virtue and improves.
You Will frown, and ask to what intent
This blunt address to you is sent?
I Will spare the question, and confess
I Would praise you, if I loved you less;
But rail, be angry, or complain,
I will be rude when you are vain.
Beneath a Lion's peaceful reign,
When beasts met friendly on the plain,
A Panther of majestic port,
(The vainest female of the court)
With spotted skin and eyes of fire,
Filled every bosom with desire:
Wherever she moved, (...) servile crowd
Of fawning creatures cring'd and bowed;
Assemblies every week she held,
(Like modern belles with coxcombs filled)
Where noise, and nonsense, and grimace,
And scandal echoed round the place.
Behold the gay, fantastic thing,
Encircled by the spacious ring:
Low bowing, with important look,
As first in rank, the Monkey spoke:
Gad take me, Madam, but I swear
No angel ever looked so fair --
Forgive my rudeness, but I vow
You were not quite divine 'till now;
Those limbs! that shape! and then those eyes!
O, close them, or the gazer dies!
Nay, gentle Pug, for goodness hush,
I vow and swear you make me blush!
I shall be angry at this rate --
It Is so like flattery -- which I hate.
The Fox in deeper cunning versed,
The beauties of her mind rehearsed,
And ta^k'd of knowledge, taste, and sense,
To which the fair have vast pretense;
Yet well he knew them always vain
Of what they strive not to attain;
And played so cunningly his part,
That Pug was rivall'd in his art.
The Goat avowed his amorous flame,
And burnt -- for what he durst not name;
Yet hoped a meeting in the wood
Might make his meaning understood.
Half angry at the bold address,
She frowned; but yet she must confess,
Such beauties might inflame his blood,
But still his phrase was some what rude.
The Hog her neatness much admired;
The formal Ass her sweetness fired;
Thus all to feed her folly strove,
And by their praises shared her love.
The Horse, whose generous heart disdained
Applause, by servile flattery gained,
With graceful courage silence broke,
And thus with indignation spoke:
"When flattering monkeys sawn and prate,
They justly raise contempt or hate:
For merit's turned to ridicule,
Applauded by the grinning fool.
The artful fox your wit commends,
To lure you to his selfish ends;
From the vile flatt'rer turn away,
For knaves make friendship to betray.
Dismiss the train of fops and fools,
And learn to follow Wisdom's rules;
Such beauties might the lion warm,
Did not your folly break the charm;
For who would court that lovely shape,
To be the rival of an ape?"
He said, and snorting in disdain,
Spurned at the crowd, and sought the plain.
The SPIDER and the BE. A FABLE.
THE nymph who walks the public streets,
And sets her cap at all she meets,
May catch the fool who turns to stare;
But men of sense avoid the snare.
As on the margin of the flood,
With silken line my Lydia stood,
I smiled to see the pains you took,
To cover over the fraudful book.
Along the forest as we strayed,
You saw the boy his lime-twig spread;
Guess you the ^eason of his fear,
Lest, heedless, we approach too near;
For as behind the bush we lay,
The linnet fluttered on the spray.
Needs there such caution to delude
The scaly fry and feathered brood?
And think you with inferior art,
To captivate the human heart?
The maid who modestly conceals
Her beauties, while she hides, reveals;
Give but a glimpse, and fancy draws
Whatever the Grecian Venus was.
From Eve's first fig-leaf to brocade,
All dress was meant for fancy's aid,
Which evermore delighted dwells
On what the bashful nymph conceals.
When Celia struts in man's attire,
She shows too much to raise desire;
But from the hoop's bewitching round,
Her very shoe has power to wound.
The roving eye, the bosom bare,
The forward laugh, the wanton air,
May catch the sop; for gudgeons strike
At the bare hook and bait alike,
While salmon play regardless by;
It Is art, like nature, forms the fly.
Beneath a peasant's homely thatch,
A spider long had laid her watch;
From morn to night with restless care,
She spun her web, and wove her snare:
Within the limits of her reign,
Lay many heedless captives slain,
Or fluttering struggled in the toils,
To burst the chains, and shun her wiles.
A straying be that perched hard by,
Beheld her with disdainful eye,
And thus began: mean thing, give over,
And lay thy slender threads no more:
A thoughtless fly or two at most,
Is all the conquest thou can boast;
For bees of sense thy arts evade,
We see so plain the nets are laid.
The gaudy tulip that displays
Her spreading foliage to the gaze,
That points her charms at all she sees,
And pields to every wanton breeze,
Attracts me not. Where blushing grows,
Guarded with thorns, the modest rose,
Enamored, round and round I fly,
Or on her fragrant bosom lie;
Reluctant she my ardour meets,
And, bashful, renders up her sweets.
To wiser heads attention lend,
And learn this lesson from a friend:
She who with modesty retires,
Adds fuel to her lover's fires;
While such incautious jilts as you,
By folly your own schemes undo.
Advice to BELINDA.
THE counsels of a friend, Belinda, hear,
Too roughly kind to please a lady's ear;
Unlike the flatt'ries of a lover's pen,
Such truths as women seldom learn from men.
Nor think I praise you ill, when thus I show
What female vanity might fear to know;
Some merit's mine, to dare to be sincere,
But greater yours sincerity to bear.
Hard is the fortune that your sex attends;
Women, like princes, find few real friends:
All who approach them, their own ends pursue,
Lovers and ministers are never true.
Hence often from reason, heedless beauty strays,
And the most trusted guide the most betrays:
Hence by fond dreams of fancied power amused,
When most you have tyrannized, you're most abused.
What is your sex's earliest, latest care,
Your heart's supreme ambition? -- To be fair.
For this the toilet every thought employs,
Hence all the toils of dress, and all the joys:
For this hands, lips, and eyes are put to school,
And each instructed feature has its rule:
And yet how few have learned, when this is given,
Not to disgrace the partial boon of heaven?
How few with all their pride of form can move?
How few has lovely nature framed for love;
Do you, my fair, endeavor to possess
An elegance of mind, as well as dress;
Be that your ornament, and know to please
By graceful Nature's unaffected ease.
Nor make to dangerous wit a vain pretense,
But wisely rest content with modest sense;
For wit, like wine, intoxicates the brain,
Too strong for seeble women to sustain;
Of those who claim it more than half have none,
And half of those who have it, are undone.
Be still superior to your sex's arts,
Nor think dishonesty a proof of parts;
For you, the plainest is the wisest rule;
A cunning woman is a knavish fool.
Be good yourself, nor think another's shame
Can raise your merit, or adorn your fame;
Prudes rail at whores, as statesmen in disgrace
At ministers, because they wish their place.
Virtue is amiable, mild, serene,
Without all beauty, and all peace within;
The honor of a prude is rage and storm,
It Is ugliness in its most frightful form:
Fiercely it stands defying gods and men,
As fiery monsters guard a giant's den.
Seek to be good, but aim not to be great,
A woman's noblest station is retreat;
Her fairest virtues fly from public sight,
Domestic worth still shuns too strong a light.
To rougher man ambition's task resign;
It Is ours in senates or in courts to shine:
To labor for a sunk, corrupted state,
Or dare the rage of envy, and be great.
One only case your gentle breasts should move,
The important business of your life is love:
To this great point direct your constant aim,
This makes your happiness, and this your fame.
Be never cool reserve with passion joined;
Love not at all, or else be fondly kind;
In this, extremes alone can truly bless.
The virtue of a lover is excess.
Contemn the little pride of giving pain.
Nor think that conquest justifies disdain;
Short is the period of insulting power:
Offended Cupid finds his vengeful hour,
Soon will resume the empire which he gave,
And soon the tyrant shall become the slave.
Blessed is the maid, and worthy to be blessed,
Whose soul's entire by him she loves posses^;
Feels every vanity i^ fondness lost,
And asks no power but that of pleasing most:
Here Is is the bliss in sweet return to prove,
The honest warmth of undissembled love:
For her inconstant man might cease to range,
And gratitude forbid desire to change.
Thus I, Belinda, would your charms improve,
And form your heart to all the arts of love.
The task were harder to secure my own,
Against the power of those already known;
For well you twist the secret chains that bind
With gentle force the captivated mind;
Skilled every soft attraction to employ,
Each flattering hope, and each alluring joy;
I own your genius, and from you receive
The rules of pleasing, which to you I give.
The Story of PALEMON and LAVINIA.
THE lovely young Lavinia once had friends,
And fortune smiled, deceitful, on her birth;
For in her helpless years deprived of all,
Of every stay, save innocence and heaven,
She with her widowed mother, feeble, old
And poor, lived in a cottage, far retired
Among the windings of a woody vale;
By solitude and deep surrounding shades,
But more by bashful modesty concealed.
Together thus they shunned the cruel scorn
Which virtue, sunk to poverty, would meet
From giddy fashion and low-minded pride:
Almost on Nature's common bounty fed,
Like the gay birds that sung them to repose,
Content, and careless of tomorrow's fare.
Her form was fresher than the morning rose
When the dew wets its leaves; unstained and pure
As is the lily, or the mountain snow,
The modest virtues mingled in her eyes;
Still on the ground dejected, darting all
Their humid beams into the blooming flowers:
Or when the mournful tale her mother told,
Of what her faithless fortune promised once,
Thrilled in her thought, they like the dewy star
Of evening, shone in tears. A native grace
Sat fair proportioned on her polished limbs,
Veiled in a simple robe, their best attire,
Beyond the pomp of dress; for loveliness
Needs not the foreign aid of ornaments
But is, when unadorned adorned the most:
Thoughtless of beauty, she was beauty's self,
Recluse amid the close-embowering woods,
As in the hollow breast of Appenine,
Beneath the shelter of encircling hills,
A myrtle rises far from human eye,
And breathes its balmy fragrance over the wild;
So flourished, blooming and unseen by all,
The sweet Lavinia; till at length compelled
By strong necessity's supreme command,
With smiling patience in her looks, she went
To glean Palemon's fields. The pride of swains
Palemon was -- the generous, and the rich,
Who led the rural life in all its joy
And elegance; such as Arcadian song
Transmits from ancient^ uncorrupted times,
When tyrant custom had not shackled man,
But free to follow Nature was the mode.
He then, his fancy with autumnal scenes
Amusing, chanced beside his reaper train
To walk, when poor Lavinia drew his eye
Unconscious of her power, and turning quick
With unaffected blushes from his gaze
He saw her charming, but he saw not half
The charms her down cast modesty concealed.
That very moment, love and chaste desire
Sprung in his bosom, to himself unknown;
For still the world prevailed, and its dread laugh,
Which scarce the first philosopher can scorn,
Should his heart own a gleaner in the field:
And thus in secret to his soul he sighed:
"What pity! that so delicate a form,
By beauty kindled, where enlivening sense,
And more than vulgar goodness seem to dwell,
Should be devoted to the rude embrace
Of some indecent clown! she looks, methinks,
Of old Acasto's line; and to my mind
Recals that patron of my happy life,
From whom my liberal fortune took its rise,
Now to the dust gone down; his houses, lands,
And once fair spreading family dissolved.
It Is said that in some lone obscure retreat,
Urged by remembrance sad, and decent pride,
Far from those scenes which knew their better days,
His aged widow and his daughter live,
Whom yet my fruitless search could new and:
Romantic wish, would this the daughter were!"
When, strict inquiring from herself, he found
She was the same, the daughter of his friend,
Of bountiful Acasto; who can speak
The mingled passions that surpised his heart,
And through his nerves in shivering transports ran?
Then blazed his smothered flame, avowed and bold;
And as he viewed her ardent over and over,
Love gratitude, and pity wept at once.
Confused and frightened at his sudden tears,
Her rising beauties flushed a higher bloom,
And thus Palemon, passionate and just,
Poured out the pious raptured of his soul:
"And art thou then Acasto's dear remains;
She whom my restless gratitude has sought
So long in vain? O, yes! the very same,
The softened image of my noble friend;
Alive his every feature, every look,
More (...) touched. Sweeter than spring?
Thou sole surviving blossom from the root
That nourished up my fortune, say, ah where,
In what sequestered desert have thou drawn
The kindest aspect of delighted heaven,
Into such beauty spread, and blown so fair,
Though poverty's cold winds, and crushing rain,
Beat keen and heavy on thy tender years?
O let me now, into a richer soil
Transplant thee safe! where vernal suns and showers
Diffuse their warmest, largest influence:
And of my garden (...) the pride and joy!
It ill! esit, thee (...) ^^ll befit;
Acasto's daughter his, who^ open stores,
Though vast, (...) to his ample heart,
The father of (...) country, th^^ to pick.
The very refuse of those harvest fields,
Which from his courteous friendship I enjoy.
Then throw that shameful pittance from thy hand,
But ill applied to such a rugged task;
These fields, the master, all, my fair, are thine;
If to the various blessings which thy house
Has on me lavished, thou will add that bliss,
The dearest bliss, the power of blessing thee!"
Here ceased the youth; yet still his speaking eye
Expressed the sacred triumph of his soul,
With conscious virtue, gratitude, and love,
Above the vulgar joy divinely raised;
Nor waited he reply. Won by the charm
Of goodness irresistible, and all
In sweet disorder lost, she blushed consent,
The news immediate to her mother brought,
While, pierced with anxious thought, she pined away
The lonely moments for Lavinia's fate:
Amazed, and scarce believing what she heard,
Joy seized her withered veins, and one bright gleam
Of setting life shone on her evening hours:
Not less enraptured than the happy pair,
Who flourished long in tender bliss, and reared
A numerous offspring, lovely like themselves
And good -- the grace of all the country round.
The Lady's LOOKING-GLASS.
CELIA and I, the other day,
Walked over the sandhills to the sea;
The setting sun adorned the coast,
His beams entire, his sierceness lost;
And on the surface of the deep
The winds lay only not asleep;
The nymph did like the scene appear.
Serenely pleasant, calmly fair;
Soft fell her words, as flew the air.
With secret joy I heard her say,
That she would never miss one day
A walk so fine, a ^ight so gay.
But, O the change! the winds grew high;
Impending tempests charge the sky;
The lightning flies, the thunder roars,
And big waves lash the frightened shores,
Struck with the horror of the sight,
She turns her head, and wings her slight:
And trembling vows, she will never again
Approach the shore, to view the main.
Once more at least look back, said I;
Thyself in that large glass descry:
When thou art in good humor dressed,
When gentle reason rules thy breast,
The sun upon the calmest sea
Appears not half so bright as thee:
It Is then that with delight I rove
Upon the boundless deep of love;
I bless my chain, I hand my oar,
Nor think on all I left on shore.
But when vain doubts and groundless seas
Do Celia's lovely bosom tear;
When the big lip and watery eye
Tell me the rising storm is nigh;
It Is then thou art yon angry main,
Deformed by winds, and dashed by rain;
And the poor sailor, that must try
Its fury, labors less than I.
Shipwrecked, in vain to land I make,
While love and fate still drive me back;
Forced to dote on in thy own way,
I chide thee first, and then obey.
Wretched when from thee, vexed when nigh,
I with thee or without thee, die.
The GARLAND.
THE pride of every grove I chose,
The violet sweet, and lily fair,
The dappled pink, and blushing rose,
To deck my charming Chloe's hair.
At morn the nymph vouchsafed to place
Upon her brow the various wreath;
The flowers less blooming than her face,
The scent less fragrant than her breath.
The flowers she wore along the day;
And every nymph and shepherd said.
That in her hair they looked more gay
Than glowing in their native bed.
Undressed at evening, when she found
Their odours lost, their color past,
She changed her look; and on the ground
Her garland and her eyes she cast.
The eye dropped sense distinct and clear
As any muse's tongue could speak;
When from its lid a pearly tear
Ran trickling down her beauteous cheek.
Dissembling, what I knew too well --
My love, my life, said I, explain
This change of humor: pr'ythee tell,
The falling tear -- what does it mean?
She sighed, she smiled; and to the flowers
Pointing, the lovely moralist said,
See! friend, in some few fleeting hours,
See yonder, what a change is made.
Ah me! the blooming pride of May,
And that of Beauty are but one:
At morn both flourish bright and gay,
Both fade at evening, pale and gone.
At dawn poor Stella danced and sung,
The am'r us youth around her bowed!
At night her fatal knell was rung!
I saw, and kissed her in her shroud.
Such as she is, who died today,
Such, I, alas! may be tomorrow;
Go, Damon, bid thy muse display
The justice of thy Chloe's sorrow.
The MERRY ANDREW.
SLY Merry Andrew, the l^st Southwark fair,
(At Barthol'mew he did not much appear,
So peevish was the edict of the Mayor:)
At Southwark, therefore, as his tricks he showed,
To please our masters, and his friends the crowd,
A huge ne^'s tongue be^^ his right hand held,
His left was with a good Have pudding fill^d.
With a grave look, in the odd eq^^page,
The clownish mimic does traverse the stage:
Why how now, Andrew, cries his brother droll,
To day's conceit, methinks, is something dull:
Come on, Sir, to our worthy friends explain,
What does your emblematic worship mean?
Quoth Andrew, honest English let us speak,
Your emblem -- (what do you called) is heathen Greek,
To tongue or pudding thou haft no pretense,
Learning thy talent is; but mine is sense,
That busy fool I was which thou art now,
Desirous to correct, not knowing how;
With very good design, but little wit,
Blaming or praising things as I thought fit.
I for this conduct had what I deserved,
And, dealing honestly, was almost starved:
But, thanks to my indulgent stars, I eat,
Since I have found the secret to be great.
O dearest Andrew, says the humble droll,
Henceforth may I obey, and thou control,
Provided thou impart'st thy useful skill.
Bow then, says Andrew, and for once I will.
Be of your patron's mind, whatever he says;
Sleep very much, think little, and talk less:
Mind neither good nor bad, nor right nor wrong:
But cat your pudding, slave, and hold your tongue.
A reverend prelate stopped his coach and six,
To laugh a little at our Andrew's tricks;
But when he heard him give this golden rule,
Drive on, he cried, this fellow is no fool.
AMBITION and CONTENT. A FABLE.
WHILE yet the world was young, and men were few,
Nor lurking fraud, nor tyrant rapine knew;
In virtue rude, the gaudy arts they scorned,
Which, virtue lost, degenerate times adorned:
No sumptuous fabrics yet were seen to rise,
Nor gushing fountains taught to invade the skies;
With nature art had not begun the strife,
Nor swelling marble rose to mimic life:
No pencil yet had learned to express the fair:
The bounteous earth was all their homely care.
Then did Content exert her genial sway,
And taught the peaceful world her power to obey,
Content, a female of celestial race,
Bright and complete in each celestial grace:
Serenely fair she was, as rising day,
And brighter than the sun's meridian ray:
Joy of all hearts, delight of every eye,
Nor grief nor pain appeared when she was by;
Her presence from the wretched banished care,
Dispersed the swelling sigh, and stopped the falling tear.
Long did the nymph her regal state maintain,
As long mankind were blessed beneath her reign;
'Till dire Ambition, hellish fiend! arose
To plague the world, and banish man's repose:
A monster sprung from that rebellious crew,
Which mighty Jove's phlegraean thunder flew,
Resolved to dispossess the royal fair,
On all her friends he threatened open war.
Fond of the novelty, vain, fickle man,
In crowds to his infernal standard ran;
And the weak maid, defenseless left alone,
TO avoid his rage was forced to quit the throne.
It chanced as wandering through the fields she strayed,
Forsook of all, and destitute of aid,
Upon a rising mountain's flowery side,
A pleasant cottage roof'd with turf, she spied:
Fast by a gloomy venerable wood
Of shady plains, and ancient oaks it stood:
Around a various prospect charmed the sight:
Here waving harvests clad the fields with white:
Here a rough shaggy rock the clouds did pierce,
From which a torrent rushed with rapid force:
Here mountain-woods diffused a dusky shade,
Here flocks and herds in flowery valleys played,
While over the matted grass the liquid crystal strayed,
In this sweet place there dwelt a choerful pair,
Though bent beneath the weight of many a year;
Who wisely flying public noise and strife,
In this obscure retreat had passed their life;
The husband Industry was called, Frugality the wife,
With tenderest friendship mutually blessed,
No household jars had ere disturbed their rest.
A numerous offspring graced their homely board,
That still with nature's simple gifts was stored.
The father rural business only knew,
The sons the same delightful art pursue:
An only daughter, as a goddess fair,
Above the rest was the fond mother's care:
Plenty, the brightest nymph of all the plain,
Each heart's delight, adored by every swain.
Soon as Content this charming scene espied,
Joyful within herself the goddess cried:
This happy sight my drooping heart does raise,
The gods, I hope, will grant me better days:
When with prosperity my life was blessed,
In yonder house I Have been a welcome guest;
There now, perhaps, I may protection find,
For royalty is banished from my mind;
I Will thither haste: how happy should I be,
If such a refuge were reserved for me!
Thus spoke the fair, and straight she bent her way
To the tall mountain where the cottage lay:
Arrived, she makes her changed condition known;
Tells how the rebels drove her from the throne;
What painful dreary wilds she would wandered over,
And shelter from the tyrant does implore.
The faithful aged pair at once were seized
With joy and grief, at once were pained and pleased:
Grief for their banished Queen their hearts possessed,
And joy succeeded for their future guest:
And if you will deign, bright goddess, here to dwell,
And with your presence grace our humble cell,
Whatever the gods have given with bounteous hand,
Our harvests, fields, and flocks, our all command.
Meanwhile Ambition, on his rival's flight,
Sole lord of man, attained his wishes' height;
Of all dependence on his subjects ceased,
He ranged without a curb, and did whatever he pleased:
As some wild flame driven on by ^^rious winds
Wide spreads destruction, nor, ^^sistance finds;
So rushed the field, destructive over the plain,
D^^^c'd the labors of the industrious swain;
Polluted every st^^^ with human gore,
And scattered (...) and death from shore to shore,
G^e^t Jove (...) it from the Olympian ^ow'rs,
Where ^at (...) all the heavenly powers;
Then mith a nod that shook the Empyrean throne,
Thus the Saturnian thunderer begun:
You see, immortal inmates of the skies,
How this vile wretch almighty power defies:
His darling crimes, the blood which he has spilt,
Demand a torment equal to his guilt;
Then, Cyprian goddess, let thy mighty boy
Swift to the tyrant's guilty palace fly;
There let him choose his sharpest, hottest dart,
And with his former rival wound his heart.
And thou, my son, (the god to Hermes said)
Snatch up thy wand, and plume thy heals and head;
Dart through the yielding air with all thy force,
And down to Pluto's realms direct thy course;
There rouse Oblivion from her ^able cave,
Where dull she sits by L^the's sluggish wave;
Command her to secure the sacred bound,
Where lives Content retired, and all around
Diffuse the deepest gloom of Stygian night,
And screen the virgin from the tyrant's sight,
That the vain purpose of his life may try
Still to explore what still eludes his eye.
He spoke; loud praises shake the bright abode,
And all applaud the justice of the god.
A HYMN.
THESE, as they change, Almighty Father! these
Are but the varied GOD. The rolling year
Is full of thee. Forth in the pleasing Spring
Thy beauty walks, thy tenderness and love.
Wide flush the fields, the softening air is balm;
Echo the mountains round; the forest smiles;
And every sense, and every heart is joy.
Then comes thy glory in the Summer months,
With light and heat refulgent. Then thy sun
Shoots full perfection through the swelling year;
And often thy voice in dreadful thunder speaks;
And often at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
By brooks and groves in hollow-whispering gales
Thy bounty shines in autumn unconfined,
And spreads a common feast for all that live.
In Winter, awful Thou! with clouds and storms
Around Thee thrown, tempest over tempest rolled
Majestic darkness on the whirlwinds wings
Riding sublime, Thou bidst the world adore,
And humblest nature with thy northern blast.
Mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
Deep felt in these appear! a simple train,
Yet so delightful mixed, with such kind art,
Such beauty and beneficence combined,
Shade, unperceived, so softening into shade,
And all so forming an harmonious whole,
That, as they still succeed, they ravish still.
But wandering often, with brute unconscious gaze,
Man marks not Thee, marks not the mighty hand,
That, ever busy, wheels the silent spheres;
Works in the secret deep, shoots, streaming thence
The fair profusion that o'erspreads the Spring;
Flings from the sun direct the flaming day;
Feeds every creature, ^urls the tempest forth;
And, as on earth this grateful change revolves,
With transport touches all the springs of life.
Nature, attend! join, every living soul
Beneath the spacious temple of the sky:
In adoration join; and, ardent, raise
One general song! To him, ye vocal gales,
Breathe soft, whose spirit in your freshness breathes?
Oh talk of him in solitary glooms!
Where, over the rock, the scarcely waving pine
Fills the brown shade with a religious awe.
And ye, whose bolder note is heard afar,
Who shake the astonished world, lift high to heaven
The impetuous song, and say from whom ye rage.
His praise, ye brooks, attune; ye trembling rills:
And let me catch it as I muse along.
Ye headlong torrents, rapid and profound;
Ye softer floods, that lead the humid maze
Along the vale: and thou, majestic main,
A secret world of wonders in thyself,
Sound his stupendous praise; whose greater voice
Or bids you roar, or bids your roarings fall.
Soft roll your incense, herbs, and fruits and flowers,
In mingled clouds to him; whose sun exalts,
Whose breath perfumes you, and whose pencil paints;
Ye forests, bend: ye harvests, wave to him:
Breathe your still song into the reaper's heart,
As home he goes beneath the joyous moon.
Ye that keep watch in heaven, as earth asleep
Unconscious lies, effuse your mildest beams,
Ye constellations, while your angels strike,
Amid the spangled sky, the silver lyre:
Great source of day! best image here below
Of thy Creator, ever pouring wide,
From world to world, the vital ocean round,
On nature write with every beam his praise.
The thunder rolls: be hushed the prostrate world;
While cloud to cloud returns the solemn hymn.
Bleat out afresh, ye hills; ye massy rocks,
Retain the sound (...) the broad responsive low,
Ye valleys rise: for the Great Shepherd reigns;
And his unsuff'ring kingdom yet will come.
Ye woodlands all, awake: a boundless song
Burst from the groves; and when the restless day,
Expiring, lays the warbling world asleep,
Sweetest of birds! sweet Philomela, charm
The listening shades, and teach the night his praise.
Ye chief, for whom the whole creation smiles,
At once the head, the heart, and tongue of all,
Crown the great hymn! in swarming cities vast,
Assembled men to the deep organ join
The long-resounding voice, often breaking clear.
At solemn pauses, through the swelling base;
And, as each mingling flame increases each,
In one united ardour rise to heaven:
Or* if you rather choose the rural shade,
And find a fane in every sacred grove,
There let the shepherd's lute, the virgin's lay,
The (...), and the poet's lyre,
Still sing, the God of Seasons as they roll,
For me, (...) ^^he darling theme.
Whether the blossom (...), the Summer ray
Russ^ts the plain, inspiring (...) ^^^ams,
Or Winter (...) in the blackening (...)
Be my tongue mute, my fancy print no more,
And, dead to joy, forget my heart to beat.
Should f^^ command me to the ^^rthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant (...) climes,
Rivers unknown to long; where first the su^
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles; it is naught to me:
Since God is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste, as in the city full;
And where he vital breathes, there must be joy,
When even at last the solemn hours shall co^^^
And wing my mystic flight to future worlds,
I cheerful will they (...) There with new powers,
Will rising wonder (...): I cannot go
Where universal love not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs, and all their suns;
From seeming evil still educing good,
And better thence again, and be^^^ -- still,
In infinite progression -- but I lose
Myself in HIM, In LIGHT INEFABLE!
Come then, expressive Silence, muse his praise.
MIND superior to BODY.
WHAT is the blooming tincture of the skin,
To peace of mind, and harmony within?
What the bright sparkling of the finest eye,
To the soft soothing of a calm reply?
Can comeliness of form, or shape, or air,
With comeliness of words of deeds compare?
No -- those at first the unwary heart may gain;
But these, these only can the heart retain.
CONTENT. A PASTORAL.
OVER moorlands and mountains, rude, barren, and bare,
As 'wilder'd and wearied I room.
A gentle young shepherdess sees my despair,
And leads me -- over lawns to her home.
Yellow sheaves from rich Ceres her cottage had crowned,
Green rushes were strewn on her floor.
Her casement sweet woodbines crept wantonly round,
And decked the sod-seats at her door.
We sat ourselves down to a cooling repast;
Fresh fruits! and the culled me the best;
While thrown from my guard by same glances she cast,
Love slily stole into my breast.
I told my soft wishes; she sweetly replied,
Ye virgins, her voice was divine!)
(...) ones rejected, and great ones denied,
(...) take me, fond shepherd -- I Am ^hine.
Her (...) was so modest, her aspect so meek!
So (...), yet sweet were her charms;
I kissed (...) ripe roses that glowed on her cheek,
And (...) the loved maid in my arms.
Now jocund together we tend a few sheep,
And if, by you prattler, the stream,
Reclined on her bosom I sink into sheep,
Her image still softens my dream.
Together we range over the slow-rising hills,
Delighted with pastoral views,
Or rest on the rock whence the streamlet distills,
And point out new (...) for my muse,
To pomp or proud titles she never did aspire,
The damsel's of humble descent;
The cottager, Peace, is well known for her fire,
And shepherds have named ^er Content.
The FOX and the CAT. A FABLE.
THE FOX and the Cat, as they traveled one day,
With moral discourses cut shorter the way;
It Is great, says the Fox, to make justice our guide;
'How godlike is mercy!' Grimalkin replied.
While thus they proceeded, a wolf from the wood,
Impatient of hunger, and thirsting for blood.
Kushed forth -- is he few the dull shepherd asleep,
And seized for his supper an innocent sheep.
In vain, wretched victims, for mercy you bleat,
When mutton's at hand, says the wolf, I must eat.
Grimalkin's astonished -- The Fox stood aghast,
To see the fell beast at his bloody repast.
What a wretch, says the Cat -- it is the vilest of brutes;
Does he feed upon flesh, when there is herbage and roots
Cries the Fox -- ' While our oaks give us acorns so good,'
What a tyrant is this, to spill innocent blood;'
Well, onward they marched, and they moraliz'd still,
Till they came where some poultry picked chaff by a mill;
Sly Reynard surveyed them with gluttonous eyes,
And made (spite of morals) a pullet his prize.
A mouse too that chanced from her covert to stray,
The greedy Grimalkin secured as her prey.
A spider that sat in her web on the wall,
Perceived the poor victims, and pitied their fail:
She cried -- Of such murders how guiltless am I!
So ran to regale on a new-taken fly.
MORAL.
The faults of our neighbors with freedom we blame,
But tax not ourselves, though we practice the same.
On the taking of BIRD-NESTS.
I HAVE found out a gift for my fair,
I have found where the wood-pigeons breed:
But let me that plunder forbear!
She will say it is a barbarous deed.
He never can be true, she averred,
Who can rob a poor bird of its young;
And I loved her the more when I heard
Such tenderness drop from her tongue.
An ELEGY on a BLACK BIRD.
THE sun had chased the winter snow,
And kindly loosed the frost-bound soil;
The melting streams began to flow,
And ploughmen urged their annual toil.
'Twas then amidst the vernal throng,
Whom nature wakes to mirth and love,
A Blackbird raised his amorous song,
And thus it echoed through the grove.
O fairest of the feathered train,
For whom I sing, for whom I burn;
Attend with pity to my strain,
And grant my love a kind return.
See see the winter storms are flown,
And zephyrs gently fan the air!
Let us the genial influence own,
Let us the vernal pastime share.
The raven plumes his jetty wing,
To please his croaking paramour;
The larks responsive love-tales sing,
And tell their passion as they soar.
But trust me, love, the raven's wing
Is not to be compared with mine;
Nor can the lark so sweetly sing
As I, who strength with sweetness join.
With thee I Will prove the sweets of love,
With thee divide the cares of life;
No fonder husband in the grove,
Nor none than thee a happier wife.
I Will lead thee to the clearest rill,
Whose streams among the pebbles stray;
There will we sit and sip our fill,
Or on the flowery border play.
I Will guide thee to the thickest brake,
Impervious to the school-boy's eye:
For thee, the plaster'd nest I Will make,
And on thy downy pinions lie.
To get thee food I Will range the fields,
And cull the best of every kind;
Whatever nature's bounty yields,
Or love's assiduous care can find.
And when my lovely mate would stray,
To taste the summer sweets at large,
At home I Will wait the live long day,
And tend at home our infant charge.
When prompted by a mother's care,
Thy warmth shall form the imprisoned young;
With thee the task I Will fondly share,
Or cheer thy labors with my song.
He ceased his song. The melting dame
With tender pity heard his strain;
She owned, she felt a mutual flame,
And hastened to relieve his pain.
He led her to the nuptial bower
And nestled closely by her side,
The happiest bridegroom in that hour,
And She the most enamored bride.
Next morn he waked her with the song --
Arise! behold the newborn day!
The lark his matten peal has rung;
Arise, my love, and come away.
Together through the fields they strayed,
And to the verdant riv'let's side,
Renewed their vows and hopp'd and played,
With honest joy and decen^ pride.
But O! my muse with pain relates
The mournful sequel of my tale;
Sent by an order of the fates,
A gunner met them in the vale.
Alarmed, the lover cried, 'My dear,
Haste, haste away! from danger fly!
Here, gunner turn thy vengeance here!
O! spare my love, and let me die.'
At him the gunner took his aim;
The aim he took was much too true;
O! had he chose some other game,
Or shot as he has used to do! Never having killed any thing before nor since.

Divided pair: forgive the wrong,
While I with tears your fate rehearse:
I Will join the widow's plaintive song,
And save the lover in my verse.
The LADLE.
TWO gods long since came from above,
One Mercury, the other Jove;
The humor was, it seems, to know
If all the favors they bestow,
Could from our own perverseness ease us,
And, if our wish enjoyed, would please us.
Discoursing largely on this theme,
Over hills and dales their godships came;
'Till well nigh tired at almost night,
They thought it proper to alight.
Not here, and it is as true as odd is,
That in disguise a god or goddess
Exerts no supernatural powers;
But acts on maxims just like ours.
They spied at last a country farm,
Where all was snug and clean, and warm;
For woods before, and hills behind,
Secured it both from rain and wind:
Large oxen in the field were lowing:
Good grain was sown; good fruit was growing;
Of last year's corn in barns great store;
Fat turkies gobbling at the door:
And wealth, in short, with peace consented,
That people here should live contented:
But did they in effect do so?
Have patience, friend, and thou shall know.
The honest farmer and his wife,
To years declined from prime of life,
Had struggled with the marriage noose,
(As almost every couple does:)
Sometimes my plague, sometimes my darling!
Kissing today, tomorrow snarling;
Jointly submitting to endure
That evil which admits no cure.
Our gods the outward gate unbarr'd*
Our farmer met them in the yard:
Thought they were folks that lost their way,
And asked them civilly to stay;
Told them for supper or for bed,
They might go on, and be worse sped.
So said, so done; the gods consent,
All three into the parlour went:
They compliment, they sit, they chat;
Fight over the wars, reform the state;
A thousand knotty points they clear,
Till supper and my wife appear.
Well then. Things handsomely were served,
My mistress for the strangers carved:
How strong the beer, how good the meat,
How loud they laughed, how much they eat,
In epic sumptuous would appear,
Yet shall be passed in silence here:
For I would grieve to have it said,
That by a fine description led,
I made my episode too long;
Or tired my friends to grace my song.
The grace-cup served, the cloth away,
Jove thought it time to show his play;
Landlord and landlady, he cried
Folly and jesting lay aside,
That ye thus hospitably live,
And strangers with good cheer receive,
Is mighty grateful to your betters,
And makes even gods themselves your debtors,
To give this Thesis plainer proof,
You have tonight beneath your roof
A pair of gods; nay, never wonder,
This youth can fly, and I can thunder.
I Am Jupiter, and he Mercurius,
My page, my son indeed, but spurious.
Form then three wishes, you and madam,
And sure as you already had 'em,
The things desired in half an hour,
Shall all be here and in your power.
Thank ye great gods, the woman says;
O may your altars ever blaze;
A ladle for our silver dish
Is what I want -- is what I wish --
A ladle! cries the man -- a ladle!
Odzooks, Corisca, you have prayed ill;
What should be great you turn to farce,
I wish the ladle in your a -- e.
With ^qual g^^ef and shame my muse
The sequel of the tale pursues:
The ladle fell into the room,
And stuck in old Corisca's bum;
Our couple weep two wishes past,
And kindly join to form the last;
To ease the woman's awk ward pain,
And wish the ladle out again.
MORAL.
This commoner has worth and parts,
Is praised for arms, or loved for arts;
His (...) aches for a coronet;
And who is blessed that is not great?
Some sense, and more estate, kind heaven,
To this well lotted peer has given:
What then? He must have rule and sway;
And all is wrong, 'till he is in play.
The miser must take up his plumb;
And dares not touch the hoarded sum.
The sickly dotard wants a wife,
To draw off his last dregs of life.
Against our peace we arm our will,
Amidst our plenty Something still
For horses, houses, pictures, planting,
To thee, to me, to him is wanting.
The cruel Something unpossess'd,
Corrodes and leavens all the rest.
That Something if we could obtain,
Would soon create a future pain:
And to the coffin, from the cradle,
It Is all a Wish, and all a Ladle.
The EXPERIMENT. A TALE.
VIRTUE and Vice, two mighty powers,
Who rule this motley world of ours,
Disputed once which governed best,
And whose dependants most were blessed;
They reasoned, rallied, cracked their jokes,
Succeeding much like other folks;
Their logic wasted, and their wit,
Nor one nor the other would submit;
But both the doubtful point consent
To clear by fair experiment:
For this some mortal, they declare,
By turns shall both their bounties share:
And, either's power to bless him tried,
Shall then the long dispute decide.
On Hodge they fix, a country boor,
As yet rough, Ignorant, careless, poor:
Vice first exerts her power to bless,
And gives him Riches to excess:
With gold she taught him to supply
Each rising wish of luxury:
Hodge grew at length polite and great,
And lived like minister of state:
He swore with grace, got nobly drunk,
And kept in pomp his twentieth punk.
One morning, as in easy chair,
Hodge sat with ruminating air,
Vice, like a lady fair and gay,
Approached, and thus was heard to say,
(Behink her Virtue all the while
Stood slily listening with a smile)
"Know, favored mortal, know that I
The pleasures of thy life supply;
I raised thee from the clay-built cell,
Where Want, Contempt and Slavery dwell;
And (as each joy on earth is sold)
To purchase all, I gave thee gold;
This made the charms of beauty thine,
This blessed thee with the joys of wine;
This gave thee in the rich repast,
Whatever can please the tutored taste!
Confess the blessings I bestow,
And pay the grateful thanks you owe.
My name is Vice!" -- Cried Hodge, and leer'd,
"Long be your mighty name revered!
Forbid it, heaven! thus blessed by you,
That I should rob you of your due;
To Wealth, 'twas you that made me heir,
And gave, for which I thank you, Care;
Wealth brought me wine, it is past a doubt,
And wine -- see here is a leg! -- the gout:
To Wealth my French ragout I owe,
Whence scurvy, pains and asthmas flow;
And now to show how much I prize
The joys which from your bounties rise,
Each coupled with so dear a brother,
I Will give you one to take the other.
Avaunt, depart from whence you came,
And thank your stars that I am lame."
Enraged and grieved, away she slew,
And with her gifts from Hodge withdrew.
Now in this sad repe^^tant hour,
Celestial Virtue tried her power:
For Wealth CONTENT the goddess gave,
The unenvied treasure of the slave!
From wild desires she set him free,
And filled his breast with charity!
No more loud ^^mpers riot breeds,
And temperature gluttony succeeds.
Hodge, in his native cot at rest,
Now Virtue found, and thus addressed:
"Say, for it is yours by proof to know,
Can Virtue give the bliss below?
Content my gift, and Temperance mine,
And Charity, though meek, divine!"
With blushing cheeks, and kindling eyes,
The man transported thus replies:
"My goddess! on this favored head,
The life of life, thy blessings shed!
Many annual thousands when I told,
Insatiate still I sighed for gold;
You gave Content, a boundless store,
And rich indeed! I sighed no more.
With Temperance came delightful guest!
Health, tasteful food, and balmy rest;
With Charity's seraphic flame,
Each generous social pleasure came;
Pleasures which in possession rise,
And retrospective thought supplies!
Long to attest it may I live,
That, all Vice promises, you give."
Vice heard, and swore that Hodge for hire,
Had given his verdict like a lawyer;
And Virtue, turning with disdain,
Vowed never to speak to Vice again.
A CONTEMPLATION on NIGHT.
WHETHER amid the gloom of night I stray,
Or my glad eyes enjoy revolving day,
Still nature's various face involves my sense
Of an All-wise, all powerful Providence.
When the gay sun first breaks the shade of night,
And strikes the distant eastern hills with light,
Color returns, the plains their livery wear,
And a bright verdure clothes tho smiling year;
The blooming flowers with opening beauties glow,
And grazing flocks their milky fleeces show;
The barren cliffs with chalky fronts arise,
And a pure azure arches over the skies.
But when the gloomy reign of night returns,
Stripped of her fading pride all nature mourns
The trees no more their wonted verdure boast,
But weep in dewy tears their beauty lost;
No distant Landscapes draw our curious eyes
Wrapped in night's robe the whole creation lies.
Yet still, ^'en now, while darkness clothes the land,
We view the traces of the Almighty hand;
Millions of stars in heaven's wide vault appear,
And with new glories hang the boundless sphere:
The silver moon her eastern couch forsakes,
And over the skies her nightly circle (...),
Her solid globe beats back the sunny (...),
And to the world her borrowed light repays.
Whether these stars that twinkling (...) send,
Are (...) and rolling worlds those suns attend,
Man may to decture, and new schemes declare,
Yet all his systems but conjectures are;
But this we know that heaven's eternal King,
Who (...) this universe from nothing spring,
can at his word bid numerous worlds appear,
And rising worlds the all-pow'rful word shall hear.
When to the western main the sun descends,
To other lands a rising day he lends,
The spreading dawn another shepherd spies,
The wakeful flocks from their warm folds arise:
Refreshed the peasant seeks his early toil.
And bids the plough correct the fallow soil;
While we in sleep's embraces waste the night;
The climes opposed enjoy meridian light;
And when those lands the busy sun forsakes,
With us again the rosy morning wakes.
In lazy sleep the night rolls swift away,
And neither clime laments his absent ray.
When the pure soul is from the body flown,
No more shall night's alternate reign be known*
The sun no more shall rolling light bestow,
But from the almighty streams of glory flow.
O may some nobler thought my soul employ.
Than empty, transient, sublunary joy!
The stars shall drop, the sun shall lose his flame,
But thou, O God, for ever thin'st the ^^me,
The UNIVERSAL PRAYER.
FATHER of all! I in every age,
In every clime adored
by saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.
Thou Great First Cause, least understood,
Who all my sense confined,
To know but this, that thou art good,
And that myself am blind.
Yet gave me in this dark estate,
To see the good from ill;
And binding Nature fast in fate,
Left free the human will.
What conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not do.
This teach me more than hell to shun,
That more than heaven pursue.
What blessings thy free bounty gives,
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid when man receives,
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to earth's contracted span
Thy goodness let me bound,
Or think thee Lord alone of man,
When thousand worlds are round.
Let not this weak unknowing hand
Presume thy bolts to throw,
Or deal damnation round the land,
On each I judge thy foe.
If I am right, O teach my heart
Still in the right to stray:
If I am wrong, thy grace impart,
To find the better way.
Save me alike from foolish pride,
Or impious discontent,
At aught thy wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy goodness (...).
Teach me to feel another's (...),
To hide the fault I see:
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mean the I am, not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy breath:
O lead me wheresoe'er I go,
Through this day's life or death.
This day be bread and peace my lot;
All else beneath the sun
Thou kn^'st if best bestowed, or not,
And let thy will be done.
To thee, whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth, sea, skies;
One chorus let all beings raise!
All Nature's incense rise!
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE practice of virtue recommended Guardian 11 On idleness Spectator 14 On
spending time ibid 17 On the same subject Guardian 20 On pride ibid 24 The
basket-maker a Per^ian ^ale Gent. Mag. 26 On truth and sincerity Spectator 29
On defamation ibid 32 On calumny and reproach ibid 35 On cheerfulness ibid 37
The advantages of cheerfulness ibid 41 On happiness World 44 The art of
happiness ibid 48 On the influence of innocence and honor Guard. 51 Ingratitude
punished; an Eastern tale Gent. Mag. 53 The force of habit Spectator 59 The
absurdity of extremes World 63 On beauty and flattery Spectator 64 On
affectation ibid 68 On modesty ibid 71 Virtue under affliction, represented in
the story of Ama. ibid 73 On economy and frugality Pennsylvania Alm. 77 On
cleanliness Spectator 86 On choosing company Adventurer 88 On the justice of
providence in the distribution of riches Spectator 94 On the force of affection
Tatler 95 On cruelty to animals Guard. 99 The vision of justice Tatler 103 A
continuation of ditto ibid 108 No life pleasing to God that is not useful to
man Adv. 113 The judgment of common sense; a vision Anon. 118 The vision of
Carazan; an Eastern allegory Adv. 124 On creation and the animal world
Spectator 127 On the Deity, and the wonderful frame of human and animated
bodies ibid 131 On the attributes of God and the starry heavens ibid 135 On the
immortality of the soul ibid 139 On the vicissitude of material beings Watts
142 On the choice of present and future happiness Spect. 146 The mountain of
miseries; a vision ibid 149 The vision continued ibid 151 The vision of Almet;
an Eastern story Adventurer 154 On omens Spectator 159 On ghosts and
apparitions ibid 162 The importance of an early choice to a calling, and
perseverance in it Rambler 163 Story of the admirable Crichton, on incitement
to enterprise and emulation Adventurer 169 On labor and exercise Spectator 173
On temperance ibid 175 On ditto -- The infallible Elixir; an allegory Anon. 178
The vanity of some men's wishes and prayers Spect. 180 On aerial
castle-building Guard 183 On charity Anon. 184 Prosperity and adversity; an
allegory World 185 On conversation Spectator 189 The party-colored shield; a
fable Beaumou^ts Mor. 192 On gaming Anon. 194 On drunkenness ibid 198 History
of Santon Barsisa Guard. 203 Amurath: an Eastern story on the remonstrances of
conscience Advent. 206 Story of Amurath continued ibid 211 Ditto concluded ibid
216 The vanity of life, or the vision of Mirza Spect. 221 On sickness Guard.
226 Religion and superstition contrasted; a vision Ramb. 227 Begin nothing of
which you have not well considered the and Spect. 232 The folly of being
dissatisfied with one's present circumstances World 232 Generosity and
disinterested honesty Gent. Mag. 236 The story of Flavilla Adven. 237 The story
of Flavilla concluded ibid 245 Mirth and falsehood inconsistent* Gent. Mag. 252
On disingenuity Sentinel 252 On the justice of Providence Advent. 256 No
friendship among the wicked Gent. Mag. 260 Select thoughts 260
POETRY.
The Hermit Parnel 265 Truth and falsehood: a fable Duck 271 Luxury and want: a
vision Gent. Mag. 274 Husbandman's meditation in the field ibid 276 Ode to
spring Miss Carter 276 Elegy in a country Churchyard Gray 278 The Panther,
horse, and other beasts: a fable Moore 281 The spider and be ibid 284 Advice
to Belinda Lord Lyttleton 286 Story of Palemon and Lavinia Thomson 288 The
lady's looking-glass Prior 291 The garland ibid 292 The Merry Andrew ibid 293
Ambition and content: a fable Began. Mag. 294 A hymn to the Deity Thomson 297
Mind superior to body Gay 300 Content, a pastoral Cunningham 300 The fox and
cat: a fable ibid 301 On taking bird-nests 302 An elegy on a blackbird Jago 302
The ladle Prior 304 The experiment; a tale Grenville 307 Contemplation on the
night Gay 309 The universal prayer Pope 311

