A DISCOURSE Delivered before an Assembly OF FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS, Convened
for the purpose of Installing a LODGE in the City of NORWICH, in CONNECTICUT,
on the Festival of ST. JOHN the BAPTIST, 1795.

Prove all things; hold fast that which is good. 1. These. v. 21. By SAMUEL
SEABURY. D. D. Bishop of Connecticut and Rhode Island.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY BROTHER JOHN STERRY AND CO. M, DCC, XV.

FESTIVAL of St. John the Baptist, 24th of June, Anne Lucis, 5795.

At a special Grand Lodge of Free and accepted Masons, held at Norwich in the
State of Connecticut, present the Most Worshipful ELIPHALET BULKLEY Grand
Master pro. tem.

VOTED, that the thanks of this Lodge be given to Brother SAMUEL SEABURY, for
his discourse delivered at their request this day; and that Brothers JOSHUA
COIT, ASA SPALDING and EBENEZER HUNTINGTON, be a Committee to wait on him and
desire a copy for the press,

Extract from the minutes. Test SAM. HUNTINGTON 3rd, Sec.ry pro. tem.

To the Most Worshipful GEORGE WASHINGTON PRESIDENT OF The UNITED STATES of
AMERICA, The following DISCOURSE Is respectfully INSCRIBED, by his affectionate
Brother and most devoted Servant SAMUEL SEABURY.

New London, June 29th, 1795.
A DISCOURSE etc.
Heb. iii. 4. -- He that built all things is God.
THE Greek word (Kataskeuasas) translated built in our Bible, includes in its
meaning the notion of ordering and governing, and is here used by the apostle
to assert the divinity of Christ, the Son of God. For if he built all things,
and orders and governs them as the scriptures affirm, he must be our Creator --
God emphatically -- the object of our adoration and obedience.

IT is not however my design to consider the text precisely in this view, but
to draw your attention to the great Architect of universal nature, to the
order, and beauty, and blessings of creation, and from thence to the
obligations of adoration and obedience which we owe, and ought ever to pay to
our Creator, Governor, and preserver. For if we turn our mind to the
contemplation of the world which we inhabit, and consider it with due
attention, it is impossible not to suppose it to have been formed by some
infinitely great, and intelligent being. The nature of the structure shows his
power, the contrivance of its parts, his wisdom. The diversity that appears on
its surface, champaign country and hills, affords fields for tillage, gives
rise to rivers and brooks, and by promoting the circulation and free course of
the air, adds greatly to the salubrity of that grand supporter of animal life.
The vegetables with which its surface is covered give pleasure to the eye by
their pleasing variety, and by their artless, yet perfect disposition; and
relieve it from fatigue by their refreshing verdure. To the support too of life
they daily administer by the natural and healthful supply of food for man and
for beast which they afford. Materials for building, and for clothing, for
fuel we also derive from the vegetable world, by which the human body is
secured from storms, and heat, and cold -- from all the inclemencies of the
weather. -- All these things are for the use, and and convenience of man.

AND so are the innumerable animals supported on the earth, and in the sea.
They all conduce to his emolument or pleasure. They serve him for food, for
clothing for tillage, for bearing burdens, for transporting him from place to
place -- in a variety of ways making his life more easy and delightful to him.

BUT while we contemplate the earth, and find ourselves blessed in its rich
productions, can we avoid casting our eyes on the Sun, the great instrument of
light and heat, and of all their pleasing and happy effects, the causer of
night and day, the diversifier of climes and seasons, the measurer of time, the
grand operator in all the productions of nature? The nightly regent of the sky,
the splended moon, with the glittering stars, and rolling planets, add to the
grandeur of the celestial dome, and not only minister to the use and
convenience of man, but to the state and magnific^^ce of the great whole, and
render fully effectual the united influence of all its varied parts. -- These
are thy works, parent of good -- Almighty -- thine this universal frame.

BUT to inanimate matter, and to animals, the power and goodness of God was not
confined. To have built the world, and left it void of an intelligent being to
behold, contemplate; and admire its beauties, to enjoy its blessings, and to
adore its Almighty author, the source of being and of all good, would have
shown a deficiency of power or of wisdom. So did not the Supreme Architect. Man
created in his own image, he placed as the inhabitant and regent of his
material creation. He gave (...) faculties to enjoy its blessings; he endued
him with reason, to admire and contemplate its beauty, and order; and to lead
his mind and affections up to Him; that he might adore, and praise, and obey,
the Almighty author of ALL, the source of happiness to every being,

BUT not only in this world does the creative power of God show itself, nor is
man his only intelligent creature, Worlds on worlds appear to hang in the
immensity of space, and probably are inhabited by beings intelligent as well as
we, and possibly in a far greater degree: And angels we know are the creatures
of his hand, the ministering spirits that fulfill his will by executing his
commands. Their nature we know not; their office divine truth has revealed to
us.

LOOK now at the grandeur, order, use of the various parts of the creation,
especially of this world which is most open to our observation, and say, Could
it be the work of blind chance? Could it have been from eternity and
necessarily existed? Could it have made itself? Blind chance could never have
produced regularity, the effect of design. The constant mutability of the parts
and scenes of the world show that it could not have been from eternity, for
what is perpetually changing cannot be eternal. It could not have made itself,
for that supposes it to have acted before it had a being; its mutability also
confutes the notion of its being necessarily existent.

IT remains then that the world is the production of an infinite, Almighty
Being, intelligent, good, wise, and, in every point of view, amiable beyond
conception. He made all things that exist, whether animate or inanimate, brute
or rational, visible or invisible, material or spiritual. He built them all; be
they thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, men, angels; his hand formed
them; his will produced them; his word spoke them into being, He therefore who
built all things is God.

THIS God is a being infinite, eternal, unchangeable, without body, parts or
passions; the center and fountain of all perfections; the great Architect of
all nature, the Creator, the Builder, the Framer of every thing that exists;
whose word is power absolute; whose will is wisdom, and justice, and goodness,
and mercy, and truth infinite, and incomprehensible.

THAT God who built all things -- called every thing that exists from
nonentity into being -- should preserve and govern the creatures of his hand,
is the first dictate of nature. For what power less than that which created,
can preserve the Universe? What power less than that which built, can direct
the vast machine? Who preserves the sun, and moon, and stars steady and
unwearied in their course? Who commands the certain return of the various
seasons of the year, or the sweet vicissitudes of day and night? Who dispences
cold and heat, clouds and sunshine rain and dew as the various exigencies of
the world require, but that God who built all things, and every thing that is;
and who preserves and governs them all so as best to promote the benefit and
happiness of the whole.

WITH respect to man principally was the text written. We see what ample
provision the divine munificence has made for the support and pleasure of
man's body, and may we be ever thankful for it, ever praise the name of God
most high for his goodness, ever use with temperance the good things he has
provided for our subsistence, to his glory and our own benefit.

BUT remember, God who has done all this for you, has given you a rational,
an immortal part, a soul as well as a body. He breathed into the nostrils of
the first created man, the breath of life, and man became a living soul. By the
operation of this rational, intelligent soul, you can be made sensible of the
being of your Creator, of his wisdom, power, goodness, justice, truth, and of
all his infinite perfections; and though you cannot comprehend them, you know
that they must be in him -- that he cannot be without them.

THAT he loves you, appears from the bountiful provision he has made for the
happiness of your body. And can you immagine he would neglect your soul? that
immortal part which must live forever? Would he take more care of a perishing
body, that that might be delighted for a time, than of the immortal soul, that
that might be happy forever? That love which brought you into being, which
built the frame of your body, which covered your bones with flesh and skin,
which braced it with nerves and sinews, which made the blood to circulate through
the vessels provided for it -- that love framed also your soul according to the
model of his own image -- consequently for happiness divine with himself.

AND that the love which brought man into being still continues, appears from
God's giving his only begotten Son to be his Redeemer, when he had fallen into
a state of infirmity and death through sin; from the revelation of his will which
He made through his Son by his prophets, and by his Son himself; from the laws
and directions, and promises which that revelation contains, for the conduct of
the life of man, both what he ought to believe and do to obtain the full favor
of God; and from the blessed gift of his own most Holy Spirit, to do that in
and for man which man cannot do for himself -- to regenerate and renew his
nature, and build it up in faith and holiness, that he may become capable of
that happiness with his all gracious Creator for which he was originally
designed.

HE that has done so much will assuredly do all things for the salvation of
all men, that can comport with his own infinite justice and goodness.

BUT let it be remembered that man has a will of his own, and that every man is
what his will makes him to be. Since the departure of human nature from God in
the defection of Adam, this will has become perverse, obstinate, ungovernable,
impetuous, indisposed to submit to the will of God, in which every possible
happiness of a rational creature must forever consist. And how far the power
and justice of God can control this will, unless by influences, motives,
persuations consistently with its freedom, i. e. without destroying the nature
of man, and taking from him the freedom of choice, is hard to conceive. And if
the freedom of choice be taken from him, he ceases to be a man and becomes a
machine, and neither virtue nor vice, good nor evil can be attributed to him
more than to an irrational animal; nor can he be the object of reward or
punishment.

TO direct this will to its true end, submission to God and dependence on him,
is the design of all the laws and directions which God has given to man,
either by the light of reason, or the more explicit declarations of revelation;
of all the threats and promises which God has made to man; of all the
dispensations of his providence; of all the motions and inspirations of his
Spirit.

IN this sense also is God the builder of all things; not only of the material
world for the subsistence, comfort, and pleasure of man, but of that state of
righteousness, and peace, and holiness, in which man's happiness must consist;
on which only it can be built.

IT becomes therefore necessary that he submit to the will of God in all
things, that he obey every thing which God commands, and refrain from every
thing which God forbids. For God being the fountain of all goodness and
happiness, can command or forbid his creatures nothing but what is for their
advantage -- especially nothing that is unjust in itself, or unnecessary to the
good of the whole creation.

ON this ground the right of private judgment is left open and free to every
one; for every one must determine for himself what the will of God is -- what
he has commanded -- what he has forbidden. Only he must take care that he
judge right; for if he judge wrong, he does so at his own peril -- God expects
he will judge according to reason and truth; and has given him ability and
direction sufficient to form a true judgment.

HOW far ignorance, and weakness, and prejudice will operate in favor of a man
who errs in his judgment concerning the will of God, must be left to him who
knows the heart, and can discern the thoughts and intentions. He is merciful
and just, and will judge righteous judgment. On his goodness we depend, that he
will not impute the errors of the head, to the heart, nor condemn any one for
those mistakes into which he was unavoidably led, through ignorance, weakness, or
any other unsurmountable obstruction.

A SINCERE disposition however to obey the will of God, will make us very
careful, that we let no vicious affection of mind, no evil propensity of heart,
no undue attachment to party, no love of wealth or pleasure, no sinister
purpose or disposition of any kind, weaken, or blind, or pervert our judgment
where the will of God is concerned. For these things nothing can be said. He
who judges righteous judgment will condemn them; and we must endure the
penalty of our own perverseness.

SINCE then God, the builder of all things, built the world -- the universe --
things visible and invisible -- all orders and ranks of beings -- that his
glory might shine forth in the happiness of his creatures -- Since submission
to his will, the being entirely and absolutely what he wills us to be, is the
only sure foundation for perfect happiness, let us remember that God who built
all things has built them in perfect order and just proportion, and be induced
from that consideration ever to conduct ourselves according to the due order of
our own nature, and in just proportion to the state of our being.

BEHOLD the order of the material creation, and thence take a lesson of
instruction. He who built all things in just order and proportion, to preserve
that order which he had established, appointed the great law of gravitation,
and by his Almighty siat it effectually answers his purpose to this very day.
The word of the Supreme Architect, the grand master builder of the universe, is
the word of power. Various, and to the human eye contradictory are the motions
of the heavenly bodies, and of the different parts of this globe which we
inhabit. We see not how every thing amid such progressive and
retrograde-motions, preserves its order and place, nor where the the apparently
wild confusion ends. By the law of gravitation, every motion is performed,
every movement made without error, and without injury, from the revolutions of
the heavenly bodies of enormous size, down to the nourishment of the meanest
vegetable, and probably of the highest animal.

WHAT attraction or gravitation is in the natural, that love is in the moral
world. Both are appointed by the great author of nature; by him who built all
things, animate and inanimate; and both would surely answer the end for which
they were appointed, was it not for the perversity of the human will.

THE material creation has no will of its own, and therefore it obeys the will
of its great builder, and answers the purpose for which it was intended. But
God gave man an own will, and reason to direct it. He made him upright, but
they have sought out many inventions; and among their other experiments, the
effort to secure happiness to themselves, by pursuing the dictates of their own
will, independent on the will of their maker who built all things, has
assailed and beguiled them. Hence the same or similar disorders have arisen
among them, as would arise in the material world, should the whole creation
break the bounds and proportions set them by their creator, and run counter to
his design in their formation.

HAPPILY, he who built them superintends them, governs their motions, and gives
them ability to perform his will; and still they obediently fulfill his pleasure.

BUT man has forgotten the great law of his moral nature, the law of love; and
by departing from the will of his maker in persuit of his own inventions, has
filled the world with evils destructive of his happiness, and almost of his
present being -- with war; and bloodshed, and murder, and treachery, and
backbiting, and slander, and defamation, and every evil work.

TO be convinced that these things do destroy the peace and happiness of man in
the world, look at their effects -- behold the mischiefs they produce. Who can
be secure where the tongue or pen of the slanderer prevails? where the best
actions are converted into the foulest crimes, and ascribed to the vilest
motives? who can rest in peace where house breaking and robbery prevail? and
would you know the horrible effects of war and civil dissentions, look at the
present distracted condition of Europe -- look, and tremble at the horrible
view -- look, and rejoice, and bless God that your own country is at present
exempt from those direful calamities -- look, and pray earnestly to him that he
would graciously preserve you in security, and dispose the nations of the world
to be at peace with you -- look, and ask yourselves this one question, from
whence proceed the evils of ill neighborhood? the destructions wrought by
deceitful and villainous men? the devastations of tyranny and war? -- From the
want of that love which God has instituted to be the grand cement of the
brotherhood of men. -- the operating principle by which the whole human race
were to have been kept in unity and concord, even as the law of gravitation
pervades and keeps in order the whole material creation. And no other way can
infatuated man return to the enjoyment of happiness but by returning obediently
to submission to the will of the great Architect of all things, and living in
love with his brethren. Peace is the happy fruit of love, and quietness and
security of peace.

"FROM whence come wars and fightings"? asks St. James, Come they not hence,
even of your lusts that war in your members? Men lust after, and covet what
does not belong to them; what is the property of others; and others will not
quietly part with what is, or what they think is their own. War therefore is
generally, I wish I was warranted to say, not always founded in injustice.

AGAINST injustice of every kind, the utmost art of man can contrive no
security equal to that which our holy religion has instituted -- Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self.

LOVE being the grand principle ordained by the author of nature to preserve
peace and order among men; being too the principle which pervades Christ's
religion, and on which all its morality is founded, shows strongly that
Christ's religion came from the same source, from which sorung the nature of
man -- from him who built all things.

HUMAN laws reach only the outward actions of men. They can command only the
hands and the feet, and god make them obey. But they take no hold of the
conscience. The laws of God can alone reach that inward principle of right and
wrong; for as he only knows the thoughts and designs, he only can command them.
He gave to man the principle of benevolence and love, and that principle alone
can regulate the conduct of man so as to make him a mild and placid being.
Divest him of it, and he becomes ferocious in the extreme. Compared to him
wolves and tigers are harmeless animals. The reason which his maker endued him
to direct his conduct, and make his benevolent propensities of the highest use,
being perverted from its true object and pressed into the service of pride and
malice, enables him to pursue their dictates with the cruelty and ferocity of
demons -- with the destructive violence of accursed spirits. -- Nothing which
this world affords can illustrate its nature, or exemplify the horrid
operations of its maleyolence. Single victims of the human race are too small
to satiate its vengeance. It demands multitudes, whole nations to glut its
fury: and then laments the weakness of nature that could carry it no further in
the horrid road of destruction and revenge than to kill the body.

FROM this hateful object -- the human heart filled with pride, inflamed by
malice, and directed by reason and cunning -- turn your attention to the same
human heart blessed and softened by the divine spirit of love and good will;
directed by the same reason, only illuminated and refined by the gracious
inspirations of the Almighty, the blessed influence of the Holy Spirit who is
love -- infinite, unbounded love.

IN the same proportion as any man is actuated by love, he is rendered
incapable of injuring his neighbor: For whoever willingly injured those whom
he loved? If ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture, thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, said St. James ye do well. That law forbids
every thing by which our neighbor can be injured, and commands every thing by
which he can be benefited. It says, Do not commit adultry; It says also "Do not
kill." It says also, Do not steal, do not covet, do not bear false witness, do
not slander, do not injure thy neighbor in any matter.

IN similar terms St. Paul says, He that has loved another, has fulfilled
the law. For this law, Thou shall not commit adultry; and this law, Thou shall
not kill; and this law, "Thou shall not steal" and this law, "Thou shall not
bear false witness;" and this law, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any
other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to his neighbor; therefore love
is the fulfiling of the law.

LET men be actuated by this love, which is an emanation from the all-glorious
Architect of all nature -- from him that built all things, and tell me where
are wars, and tumults, and murder, and bloodshed, and rapine, and stealing, and
violence, and slander -- where is any evil work? They are fled; they are become
as smoke; like cloud after rain they are passed, and gone, and vanished away --
no more to curse the earth; no more to set neighbor against neighbor, nation
against nation, and people against people.

THIS happy state, my friends, God intended for man even in this world, and
therefore commanded every man to love his neighbor as himself.

YOUR professed design, Venerable brethren of the Masonic Fraternity, to whom I
have now the pleasure of addressing myself, is to cooperate with the Almighty
and infinitely gracious Architect of nature, according as your various stations
shall permit, to spread this divine principle of benevolence and love through the
world, and make it effectual to the grand purpose of human happiness.

THAT this principle proceeds from the author of nature, the author of order
and peace, appears from the nature of the world which he made in just order and
exact proportion; from the nature of man whom he formed to live in the world
when he had made it; from the nature of that holy religion by which man is
redeemed from death and made partaker of the hope of a blessed resurrection to
eternal life. This religion, I trust in God's goodness you all profess. By the
principles of your holy religion; by the priciples of the order of Masons, I
conjure you to keep ever in mind the grand object you ought ever to have in
view, the cultivation of love, and unity, and concord; and of course, of order
and peace and good will among men. Endeavor therefore to banish all strife,
and discord, and ill will from among men. Discountenance every temper, every
disposition which tends to disturb the peace and quiet of civil society, or to
make men less observant of the laws and regulations by which the peace and
happiness of our country is now secured, and remember, that by cultivating
order, and peace, and benevolent dispositions among men; by checking every
tendency to rapine, and war, and confusion among them, you cooperate with the
designs of the infinitely wise and good Creator who built all things; who made
man, not to worry but to be mutually beneficial to each other; and that then we
most resemble him, when we most cultivate those tempers and dispositions which
peculiarly flow from him, the author and fountain of all that is good -- To
whom be glory forever.

MATTERS which relate to war ought to be left to the Governors and rulers of
our country -- To them they perticularly belong, to them the constitution of
our Government has committed them: Their abilities are equal to the decision,
and we have no reason to doubt their integrity.

LET us then confine ourselves to our own proper duty every one in his station;
remembering that as God has built all things in due order, in just weight, and
exact proportion, our duty requires that we have a regard to order, to the
reason, nature, and proportions of things in all our conduct. -- That love and
good will is the only principle that can support this order, that comports with
this reason, that reaches the nature or proportion of things among which we
live: -- That love is in the moral, what gravitation is in the natural world,
the law of the creator and that it would as invariably produce its full effect
in the moral, as gravitation does in the natural world, was it not counteracted
by the corrupt and pervese wills of inconsiderate and obstinate men.

OUR duty requires that we counteract this perversity of the human will; and as
nothing can do this more effectually than the silent persuasion of a good
example, let it be the earnest care of every Mason, to set that good example to
others. "Let brotherly love continue", is the motto of their order, let it be
also the governing principle of their conduct. Let them do nothing through strife
or ill will, but every thing in love and affection. So shall the God of love
bless them. Peace and quietness will be the probable (...). At least amidst the
contentions and commotions of this vain world, they will have nothing of which
to accuse themselves. Conscious that they have done their duty, have, as far as
they were able, extended and supported order, peace, affection and love, they
will look to the Almighty builder and maker of all things, and notwith(...) the
various infirmities of their mortal nature, shall (...), receive his
approbation, and ready (...) eternal kingdom of peace and love.

(...), incomprehensible Jehovah, Father, (...), Three in One, One in Three,
the (...), the Creator, Governor, Preserver (...) Redeemer of men, be ascribed
by (...) every creature he has made, (...) and Dominion, now and forever.


