PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIAL OF THE SHIP TWO FRIENDS, IN THE Court of Vice
Admiralty IN BERMUDA.

COPY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ORMROD AND CONRAD AT FRANKLIN'S HEAD, No. 41,
CHESNUT-STREET. M.DCCXCV.

PREFACE.
THE intent of publishing this case in a pamphlet, was not merely to multiply
copies with facility, to lay before the underwriters, and to transmit to the
British court of appeals, and the agent of the United States in London -- but,
also to show to the public at large, as well as the members of our government,
in particular, an unequivocal instance, of the slight, and groundless
pretenses, on which American property has been seized and confiscated in
Bermuda -- Here is a case in which the averments, sta^ed against an American
ship and cargo in the libel, are these,

PROCEEDINGS, etc.
BERMUDA.
At his Majesty's Court of Vice-Admiralty, held on Monday the 17th day of
August, 1795, for trial of a certain Ship, called the Two Friends, whereof
Samuel Williams was master, captured by the private sloop of war the Favorite,
Josiah Basden, Commander --

Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
THE Court being opened by the usual Proclamations,

His Excellency the Governor's Order for holding a Court, was read, and is as
follows, viz.

BERMUDA.
BY his Excellency James Craufurd, Esquire, Governor, Commander in Chief, and
Vice Admiral of these Islands.

To the Hon. John Green, Esquire Judge of his Majesty's Court of Vice Admiralty in
these Islands. Ja. Craufurd.


BY virtue of the power and authority to me given, I do hereby order and
direct, that you, the judge aforesaid, call and hold a court of Vice-Admiralty,
at the sessions house, in the town of St. George, on Monday the 15th day of
Aug. inst. for trial of a certain ship called the Two Friends, whereof one
Samuel Williams was late master, captured on the high seas, by the privateer
sloop Favorite, Josiah Basden commander, then and there to do, execute and
perform, in and concerning the said ship Two Friends and her lading, etc. as
fully, amply and effectually as any judge or judges of said court, in any of
his majesty's American plantations can or may do, perform, or execute,
according to your oath and duty, and the tenor of the commission already
granted you, as judge of said court.

Given under my hand and the great seal of these islands, this 15th day of
August; Anno Domini 1795. By his excellency's command, HENRY TUCKER, Secretary.

Mr. advocate general then moved the court for leave to exhibit a libel in
behalf of Josiah Basden commander, and the owners, officers and crew of the
private sloop of war the Favorite, which was admitted and filed and is as
follows, to wit.

Bermuda Court Vice Admiralty. The honorable John Green Esquire, judge of the
court of vice admiralty, for said islands.
The libel of Josiah Basden commander of the private sloop of war called the
Favorite, on behalf of himself and all others interested, against a certain
ship called the Two Friends, her cargo and lading,

Humbly Shows,

THAT his most sacred majesty, George the Third, king of Great Britain, and so
forth, by his commission under the seal of this honorable court, bearing date
the twelfth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and ninety five, di^ grant, commission to, license and authorized the said
Josiah Basden to set forth, in a warlike manner, the said sloop under his own
command, and by force of arms to apprehend, seize and take by and with the said
sloop and the crew of the same, the men of war, ships, goods and effects
belonging to France or others inhabiting within their countries, territories or
dominions of France, and to bring the same into such port as shall be most
convenient, in order to have them legally adjudged in such Admiralty court as
should be lawfully authorized within the British dominions, and the same ships,
vessels and goods so finally adjudged and condemned in such sort and manner as
by the course of the admiralty has been accustomed, to sell and dispose of as
by the said commission may more fully appear. And the libellant shows, that
pursuant to his said commission, the said Josiah Basden in and with the said
sloop and the crew of the same, on the high seas and within the jurisdiction of
this honorable court, on or about the first day of August, in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety five, in the latitude of thirty
eight degrees north, and longitude of sixty three degrees west from the
meridian of London, did meet with, seize and take a certain ship, called the
Two Friends, of the burden of three hundred and seventy tons, commanded by one
Samuel Williams, and laden with wine, brandy, and sundry other articles of
merchandise, and has brought the same into this port for legal adjudication
and condemnation as prize; for that the said ship Two Friends, together with
the cargo and lading thereof at the time of capture, did wholly or in part
belong to subjects of France, or others inhabiting within their countries,
territories or dominions, and that the said ship was bound on a voyage from
Nantz, in France, a port in the possession of the French, enemies of our
sovereign lord the king, to some port on the continent of the United States of
America -- And the libellant shows, that the cargo of the said ship is of the
growth, produce and manufacture of France -- And also, that the said ship Two
Friends, at the time of her capture, was found without and actually had not all
such necessary true and genuine papers and documents as trading vessels are
required to be furnished with in time of war, for the more certain
substantiating the true and undoubted property of and in the said vessel and
cargo, but also, that the papers so found on board are false and colorable: --
Whereby and by reason of all and singular the said premises, and by virtue of
the said commission so granted as aforesaid to the said Josiah Basden, and of
his majesty's instructions accompanying the same, the said ship Two Friends,
together with her tackle, apparel, furniture, boats and lading and every thing
else on board are became forfeited, and being first adjudged and condemned as
lawful prize, are to be disposed of agreeable to the law and powers in the said
commission granted the same as if they were the vessel and effects of open
enemies. Wherefore the said libellant humbly prays, that by the sentence and
decree of this honorable court the said ship Two Friends, with her cargo and
lading and every thing else on board at the time of capture, may be adjudged
and condemned as lawful prize to the use of the said Josiah Basden and the
owners, officers and crew of the said private sloop of war, called the
Favorite, according to the laws of nations, the right of arms, and the said
commission.

I. G. PALMER, Proctor for Libels. Filed in the court of Vice Admiralty this
17th day of Aug. 1795.
JOHN LEWIS, Register.

Mr. Advocate General then moved the court, that proclamation may be made, That
if any one can ought say why the ship called Two Friends, her boat, tackle,
apparel, furniture and lading, etc. now libelled against should not be
forfeited according to the prayer of the libel filed in this court, that they
may now come forth and they shall be heard. Proclamation being accordingly made
three times, and no claimant appearing, Mr. Advocate General moved the court
that the first default may be entered. Ordered and entered accordingly.

Then appeared Thomas Smith, prize-master of the ship Two Friends, and
delivered in the court (on oath) the papers found on board of the said ship,
which are as follow, to wit:

Bermuda Court of Vice Admiralty
Thomas Smith, prize-master on board the ship Two Friends, being duly sworn,
deposes and says, that the papers by him now deposited in the Registry of
this honorable court were found on board the said ship Two Friends, taken on
the high seas by the private sloop of war called the Favorite, on or about the
first day of August instant, and now libelled against in this honorable court:
And this deponent says, that the said papers are deposited as he received
them, without any fraud, addition, subduction or embezzlement to his knowledge.

Sworn to this 17th day of August 1795, before me JOHN GREEN.
THOMAS SMITH.

PERMANENT. No. 273.
IN pursuance of an act of the Congress of the United States of America,
entitled, "An act concerning the registering and recording of ships or
vessels." John Swanwick of the city of Philadelphia, merchant, having taken or
subscribed the oath required by the said act, JOS. NOURSE, Register.
and having sworn that he, said John Swanwick, is the only owner of the ship or
vessel called the Two Friends, of Philadelphia, whereof Samuel Williams is at
present master, and is a citizen of the United States, as he has sworn, and
that the said ship or vessel was built at Philadelphia, in the State of
Pennsylvania, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety three. Per
former register, No. 7, issued at this office, 20th January last, now delivered
up to be cancelled; ARCH. ENGLE D. Coll.
And Walter Stewart, surveyor of his district, having certified that the said
ship or vessel has two decks and three masts, and that her length is one
hundred feet nine inches, her breadth twenty nine feet, her depth fourteen feet
six inches, and that she measures three hundred seventy and 66-95 tons; that
she is a square sterned ship, W. TILTON D. Off.
has -- and no head; and the said Samuel Williams having agreed to the
description and admeasurement above specified, and sufficient security bring
given according to the said act, the said ship has been duly registered at the
port of Philadelphia.

Given under my hand and seal, at the port of Philadelphia, this seventeenth
day of November, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety four.
GEORGE WASHINGTON, PRESIDENT of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA
To all who shall see these presents, greeting:
BE it known, that leave and permission are hereby given to Samuel Williams,
master or commander of the ship called the Two Friends, of the burden 370
66-95 tons or thereabouts, lying at present in the port of Philadelphia, bound
for Nantz, and laden with tobacco and rice, to depart and proceed with his said
ship on his said voyage, such ship having been visited and the said Samuel
Williams, having made oath before the proper officer, that the said ship
belongs to one or more of the citizens of the United States of America, and to
him or them only.

In witness whereof, I have subscribed my name to these presents, and affixed
the seal of the United States of America thereto, and caused the some to be
counter-signed by Archibald Engle, Deputy Collector at Philadelphia, the 22d
day of November, in the year of our Lord Christ, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety four. Go: WASHINGTON.
By the President. EDM. RANDOLPH.
Countersigned, ARCHD. ENGLE, D. Coll.

MOST serene, serene, most puissant, puissant, high, illustrious, noble,
honorable, venerable, wise and prudent, lords, emperors, kings, republics,
princes, dukes, earls, barons, lords, bargoma^, schepens, counselors, as also,
judges, officers, justiciaries and regents of all the good cities and places,
whether ecclesiastical or secular, who shall see these patents or hear them,
read -- We, Robert Henry Dunkin, Esquire notary, make known, that the master of the
ship Two Friends appearing before us, has declared upon oath, that the vessel,
called the Two Friends, of Philadelphia, of the burden of about 370 66-95
tons, which he at present navigates, is of the United States of America, and
that no subjects of the present belligerent powers have any part or portion
therein, directly nor indirectly, so may God Almighty help him -- And as we
wish to see the said master prosper in his lawful affairs, our prayer is to all
the before mentioned and to each of them separately where the said master shall
arrive, with his vessel and cargo, that they may please to receive the said
master with goodness, and to treat him in a becoming manner, permitting him
upon the usual tolls and expenses, in (...) and repassing, to pass, navigate,
and frequent the ports, passes and territories, to the end to transact his
business, where and in what manner he shall judge proper: Whereof we shall be
willingly indebted.

In witness and for cause whereof, we affix hereto the seal of me Notary at
Philadelphia, this 22d day of November, Anno Domini, 1794. Quod Attestor ROBERT
HENRY DUNKIN, Notary Public.

Shipped in good order and well-conditioned, in and upon the good ship called
the Two Friends, whereof is master for this present voyage Samuel Williams, and
now riding at anchor in the river Delaware, and bound for Nantz, to say, eight
hogsheads of tobacco, on account and risque of the shipper master of the
vessel, being marked and numbered as in the margin, and are to be delivered in
the like good order and well-conditioned, at the aforesaid port of Nantz, (the
danger of the seas only excepted) unto or his assigns, he or they paying
freight for the said goods.

In witness whereof the master or purser of the said ship has affirmed to two
bills of lading, all of this tenor and date; the one of which bills being
accomplished, the other to stand void.

Dated in Philadelphia 24th Nov. 1794. S B No. 242 a 249 Hhds.
SAMUEL WILLIAMS.

INVOICE of the following Merchandise, shipped by JOHN K. HELMUTH, on board of
the American ship TWO FRIENDS. Captain SAMUEL WILLIAMS, on account and risk of
JOHN SWANWICK Esquire a Citizen of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, and to him
Consigned.
No. 10 -- 5 Trunks, containing, viz. 56 pieces 60 else silk loops, of sundry
colors, a 15 840 168 ditto No. 60 12 2016 129 36 ditto 27 3483 55 ditto 15 8^5
61 doz. black silk ribbons 15 915 35 dozen thread and silk bat bands 18 643 10
249 sundry black nar. ribbons, plain and spotted 4 996 30 pieces of 24 else
silk ribbon, called pacloux 7 210 5lb. fine red Grenada sewing silk 200 1000
5lb. sudnry colors 150 750 3lb. red common Grenada 150 450 3 doz. silk velvet
black ribbons, No. 150, 70 210 7 dozen ditto 140, 65 487 10 3 120, 60 180 3
110, 55 165 5 90, 50 250 4 80, 45 180 10 70, 40 200 19 60 35 665 20lb. 6 oz,
strong hair ribbon 150 3056 5 90 doz. black ribbons for hats, containing 24
else, No. 11/2 8 720 102 ditto 1 10 1020 56 11 12 672 114 pieces of 30 else
silk trimming edgings 8.10 969 62lb. sorted twisted silk for sewing 120 7440
6lb. 40z. fine rose pink 140 875 49 else blue silk stuff called Prusienne 21
1031 12 6 16 69 5-8 silk and thread cloth, shaved 43 close, for widow's
mourning 18 1073 5 1 piece fine pink crape 150 150 57 5-8 black, pink and blue
gauze of Italy 9 518 12 6 ^ 22 dozen forced salined ribbons, No. 11s6 33 4026 9
ditto 9s6 30 270 1192 3 7 (...) Carried over. L41831 15 Brought Forward L44831
15 12 doz, assorted fat ribbons, No. 5 at 10. 120 24 fine pink, 11s6 36 864 10
ditto 38 8 832 234 pairs of sorted silk gloves for women 13 3042 276 stockings
for men 42 11592 133 for women 36 4068 1512 piec 60 else sorted silk trimming
lace 36 18432 16 rose pink 40 640 4 pieces hair ribb. conta. 5 doz. a piece 1
No, 3 at 65 260 8 4 70 560 2 5 5 75 275 Trunks and packing of the above 375 5

I. S. No, 6. One trunk containing as follows: 19 Umbrellas at 60 L 1140 20 90
1800 18 100 1800 18 70 1260 24 65 1560 36 80 2880 48 pieces black ribb. 15 720
No. 7. 5 12 60 11220 136 doz. 3-4 fans at 12/10 1709 7 ^

No. 8. One trunk containing viz: 12 dozen fans at 12/10 150 6 piec. 94 shawls
ea. 7-8 45 4230 13 208 3-4 26 5408 26 Baffeta chintz 260; el. 30 7815 2 pieces
321/2 30 975 9 printed musl. 1291/4 25 3231 5 3 cambrick 45 else 52 2340 17
white gauze 2247-8 10 ^2^8 15 121 lb. 3/4 silk for sewing 100 2175 28573

No. 9. One trunk containing viz: 1 black mode 1463 el. at 45 3791 5 2 ^ 40
2590 3 50 30 1500 4 3 doz. gloves 54 54 163 5 4 ditto 50 100 6 11/2 ditto 72
108 7 100 p, taste narrow rib. 60 cls. 3800 8 24 silk shawls 5-4 120 2880 3
doz. gloves 70 210 4 ditto 60 240 20 p. embroidered black gauze 394 else 10
3940 19421 5 Carried Forward L^47665 12 6

No. 9. One trunk containing as follows: 1 piece embroidered bl. satin 5-8 40
else at 33 1320 2 pieces black mode 1/2 51el24 1224 1 31 22 462 3 5-8 70 5-8 27
1006 17 6 1 30 2-^ 28 847 2 601/2 30 1995 7754 17 6

No. 9. One trunk containing as follows: 84 shawls silk 30 2520 3 embroi.
carakos etc. 450 1350 15 p. rib. 60 else No. 5 4 ^0 910 11 3 21/2 66 726 5506

No. 10. 1 trunk containing as follows: 6 umbrellas No. 2. 27 162 41 doz. snuff
boxes 36 1476 44 white gloves 30 1320 8 60 480 8 100 800 8 54 432 13 72 936 3
40 140 5746

No. 11. One trunk containing viz: 1 ps. dou. camb. 6 el. at 40 240 1 31/^ 50
275 1 53/^ 55 316 5 1 51/2 60 330 1 6 60 360 20 pieces linen 46 920 12 a pair
silk stockings 34 408 12 38 456 12 32 384 60 Silk handkerchiefs 38 2280 12 60
720 24 pair silk stockings 58 1392 5 silk shawls 5-4 90 450 4 else of black
mode 23 10 141 4 ditto 30 180 6 ditto 27 10 165 6 ditto 33 15 142 10 35 ditto
30 1057 10 57 ditto 20 1150 11367 Carried Forward L178039 14

Brought Forward L178039 14

No. 11. One trunk containing as follows: 48 else black mode at 18 879 25^ 26
656 10 50 21 1050 87 16 440 33 19 631 15 63 18 1138 10 48 24 1158 4 pieces
cont. 118el. s. m. silk 2 236 10 6190 5

No. 1. 12 else black laces at 39 L468 2. 12 3. 13 25 ditto 32 10 828 15 5. 14
ditto 26 12 379 1 6.14 7.13 27 ditto 26 702 9.11 ditto 23 8 274 19 12.14 10.12
14.13 15.12 11.12 17.13 63 ditto 22 1408 17 6 19.111/2 16.12 372/4 ditto 20 16
785 4 23.12 22.12 20.12 24.14 50 ditto 19 10 984 15 25.23 ditto 16 5 379 3 4
26.26 ^ 27.12 28.13 ^ 22 ditto 15 12 727 7 30.2^ 29.21 49 ditto 13 637 32.14
ditto 11 14 163 16 34.33^ ditto 11 1 372 18 9 36.10^ 35.12 46/8; 10 1 228 12 9
37.14 ditto 9 17 137 18 43.10 ditto 9 5 92 10 42.21^ ditto 9 2 197 3 4 42.11
ditto 8 9 92 19 40.13 45.^ 26 1-6 ditto 6 10 170 1 8 48.28 ^ditto 4 5 121 16 8
47.40 ditto 5 4 208 49.10 ^ditto 2 15 54 13 1 50.33 ditto 2 12 85 16 40.13
41.30 39.231/2 67 1-6 ditto 9 15 654 176 10150 4 7 Deduct 15 per cent 1523 8 7
8632 16 Carried Forward L192862 15

Brought forward, L192862 15

No. 8, 18 Else black lace, at 12 216 90 11 11 123 15 15, 20 14, 23/4 8, 12 52
10 527 10 5 13 9 10 121 10 70 22 9 202 10 12 37 7 10 277 10 33, 26 14, 20 8, 12
79 7 558 5 54 13 6 15 91 2 6 14 17 28 46 6 10 300 12 6 31, 29 11 11, 36 8, 20
7, 20 116 6 699 12 3, 26 2, 25 2, 12 75 5 10 415 5 15 45 5 227 10 12, 50 13, 52
102 4 10 459 16 9 4 10 42 15 12 11 4 5 48 17 6 19, 43 11, 50 20, 10 11, 25 129
1-6 4 516 13 4 19 28 3 15 106 17 6 45 10, 25 9,25 95 3 10 332 10 1355, 15 23, 3
22, 7 55 3 5 179 16 8 23, 28 4, 40 638, 25 15, 18 4, 50 50 212 3 636 637 18 2
15 50 17 6 24, 24 25, 10 34 2 10 85 26 14 2 5 31 10 1356, 22 1357, 22 29 12 56
2 113 10 6363 17 6 Deduct 5 per cent. 318 3 6 6045 Carried forward L198908 9 0

Brought Forward L198908 9

No. 261. 10 thread lace at 62 8 632 16 294 4 27 12 110 8 302 9 304 6 15 23 8
368 11 333 3 22 2 77 7 311 3 334 3 6 19 10 117 310 6 309 12 335 12 31.12 24 18
4 574 1 2 306 6 14 6 85 16 317 6 13 78 312 6 11 14 70 4 336 11 11 9 131 13 6
441 3 9 2 27 6 321 3 7 10 22 10 340 7 6 10 45 10 2340 2 8 Deduct 15 per cent
351 8 1989 2

181 9 else thread lace at 29 18 269 2 58 6 39 234 2305 10 38 8 384 171 111/4 39
7 18 33 16 616 17 1807 7 31 4 234 2107 6 39 234 1508 3 29 6 28 12 257 8 56 5
217 6 11 27 6 300 6 3 3 31 9 12 26 312 1310 6 1308 7 44 3 1610 6 45 6 228 7 37
24 14 913 18 1307 4 24 2 112 9 4 41 12 22 12 271 4 160 3 54 3 6 20 16 124 16
1110 55 6 18 17 109 19 2 33 10 18 4 182 1106 6 17 12 105 12 4^ 10 14 320 4 16
18 251 7 9 4959 15 3 Carried forward L200897 15

Brought Forward L200897 11

No. 180 7 else thread lace 14 9 4959 15 3 9108 5 13 13 68 5 1480 7 178 12 850
4 19 13 247 1607 3 7150 3 1400 6 10 12 7 129 13 6 179 13 1405 73/4 26 11 14 312
19 6 229 10 152 12 214 10 218 10 950 3 52 6 192 7 59 11-24 10 8 618 17 4 1108 3
10 15 41 13 1 120 4 1207 5 1302 7 16 10 2 166 13 127 3 138 8 210 3 140 12 1402
9 98 12 48 11 12 536 19 3 136 5 11 14 58 10 1109 5 212 12 1204 3 130 3 172 10
27 7 148 3 43 9 15 424 2 6 1005 4 11503 3 850 5 13 9 9 131 2 4 196 3 213 5/3^
219 12 145 7 1107 4 86 6 38 9 2 349 3 6 1036 5 8 15 50 6 3 207 71-6 80 6 15 6
201 8 119 81/4 118 6 108 6 13 13 209 6 102 12 99 5 83 8-12 8 9 704 17 5 Carried
forward 8904 10 11 Carried Forward L200897 11

Brought Forward L200897 11 8904 10 11

No. 32. 6 else thread lace at 7 16 46 16 126. 3 7 9 26 1 6 907. 9 7 3 64 7
820. 5 11. 10 15 5 17 87 15 139. 3 1-6 587. 8 11 1-6 5 4 58 1 4 9187 11 9
Deduct 5 per Cent 459 7 9 8728 4 1037. 5else 1007. 7 1057. 5 9O6. 10 27 laces 8
3 224 2 6 Deduct 5 per Cent 11 3 6 I. S. 212 19 212 19

No. 1. Hogshead containing 2809. 25else 2797. 24 2793. 22 2789. 24 2797. 24
2808. 24 2794. 22 2791. 23 190 Silesia cloth at 29 5510 2747. 23 2921. 263/4
2926. 26 2923. 26 102 26 2658 10

S. No. 1 30 maps West. Ocean at 3 10 105 30 gulf Gascogne 3 90 12 in 2 sheets
12 144 99 globes of the chan coast of Eng. 3 297 11 downs, etc. 30 16 10 60
coasts of Brittany, etc. 3 180 6 river Bourdeaux 10 60 118 straits Gib. etc. 3
354 5 inlet of Ferrol 5 30 12 the flags 6 72 Packing 18 1366 10 Carried Over
219373 14

Brought Forward 219373 14 No. 2. One Bale containing viz: 84 maps the azores,
the coast of Africa from Gib. to Cape G. Hope 3 252 36 the Canaries etc. 131
the gulf of Mexico. 4 10 162 St. Domingo, etc. 3 393 8 the French Guyane 1 10
12 6 gulf of Mexico ^ sheets 10 60 30 Newfoundland 3 90 72 New England 5 360
34 Directories of India 3 102 6 by Dapers 5 30 Packing 18 1479

No. 3. One Bale containing viz: 60 pieces rain green paper 50 3000 32 borders
35 1120 Packing 2O 4140

No. 4. One Bag containing as follows viz: 50 pieces plain yellow paper 50 3000
32 borders 35 1120 20 blue 50 1000 12 borders 35 420 Packing 20 5560

For the following goods bartered against 35 Tierces of Rice: 200 bbls. of
raisins at 250 50000 280 velts Malaga wine in 5 casks 80 22400 3 bbls. of
prunes as follows: 72400 No. 24 232lb. 22 tare 25 236 25 26 223 24 691 72 72
619 lbs. at 2 per lb. 1238

4 small boxes containing viz: 20 silver watches at 230 4600 19 gold ditto 650
12350 16950 Carried Forward 321140 14

I. S. Amount brought Forward 321140 14

No. 11. A trunk containing as follows: 6 pice. of Pekin mea. 61 (...) else a
85 4248 15 2 green satin 19 5-6 35 694 3 4 3 4 2 ditto 23 48 1128 1 silk guuze
21 60 1385 2 silk Gronde Tour 19 (...) 36 706 10 7 218 (...) 36 8273 1 call.
Eternal 21 38 778 2 striped 40^ 40 1630 1 for silk br^eehes 18 50 1600 2 silk
d^b. papeline 56 (...) 40 2265 1 silk for women shoes 51 (...) ^ ^45 1 silk
cloth 64 (...) (...) 10 4 satin 58 1-^ (...) ^68 15 8 I. S. 31838 14 98 a 137.
40 casks or to tons of Bordeaux red wine, at 2700 per ton 27000

CHARGES.
Duties paid formerly in Paimboenf for the wine shipped in the Iris L-46 17 6
Carriage of 5 chests from Tours 400 Six trunks 1400 Canvass oil cloth, ropes,
etc. 400 Cartage and drayage 200 Carriage of sundry goods, petty charges, and
postage of letters 200 Cooperage etc. on 200 kegs of raise. 600 Rolling 5 casks
Malaga wine 40 Paid the visitor of the Custom house 50 Cooperage of 10 tons
wine at 100 1000 Drayage 15 150 Laborers 15 150 Lighterage 15 150 My commis.
384115 8 at 5 p. c. 19240 24026 15 Assignats L404040 3

Errors Excepted

Nantz 14th June, 1795. JOHN K. HELMUTH.

INVOICE of the following Goods shipped by JOHN K. HELMUTH, on board of the
American ship TWO FRIENDS, Capt. Samuel Williams, bound to PHILADELPHIA, on
Account and Risk of the Underwriters of the Cargo of said vessel and Consigned
to JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire of PHILADELPHIA.
I. S. 276 Hogsheads or 69 Tons of red Bourdeaux wine, as follows: No. 1 to 35.
35hhds, at 2500 p. ton of 4 casks L21875 36 to 97. 62 ditto 2700 do. 41850 1
cask emptied and employed in filling up 700 138 a 217: 80 casks 2600 per ton
5200 218 a 316. 99 do. [others 1 employed in filling up at 2800 70000 276 casks
of wine 16 casks of currants weighing neat 197891b. at 2 per lb. 39578 L226003

CHARGES.
Cooperage on 69 tons wine at 100 6900 D^ayage 15 1030 Laborers 15 1035
Lighterage 15 1035 Paid Melerau lighterman 15 specie at 20 for one 300 Coiron
for storage of 18casks 13 10 Agaisie for do. 100 do. 25 Weighing of the
currants on receiv. 500 Paid for 3 empty hhds at 80 240 4 do. 75 300 9 do. 70
630 Cooperage of the hhds 12 192 Carriage of currants 420 For putting the
currants into hhds. 120 Storage during 2 mo. for the currants 200 12945 10
238948 10 Commission 5 per cent 11947 8 Errors Excepted. Nantz 16th June, 1795.
L250895 18

JOHN K. HELMUTH.

I, PETER FREDERICK DOBREE, Vice Consul of the United States of America at
Nantes, etc. certify that the vouchers of this account, amounting to two
hundred and fifty thousand eight hundred and ninety five livres, eighteen sols
assignals, have been left with me. In testimony of which I have delivered this
certificate to serve as it will be found meet.

Nantz, 16th June, 1795. P. F. DOBREE, (L. S.)

ACCOUNT, Sales and Neat Proceeds of the following damaged TOBACCO, from the
ship the Two Friends, Captain Williams, loaded at Philadelphia by JOHN SWANWICK
of said place, under the direction of Mr. Helmuth, and Sold in Nantz, for
account of the Underwriters.
DAMAGED TOBACCO SOLD by the TRIBUNAL of COMMERCE.
5 Hhds. to Le Fevre, containing 1332lb 1348 1422 1403 1243 6748 1012 tare 15
p. ct. Neat, 5736lb. at 106p. cwt. L^80 3 ^ 5 1095 1195 1309 1484 1359 6442 966
Tare 15 p. ct. 5476lb, at 92 p. cwt. 5037 18 4 10 1295 1105 1403 1328 1526 1400
1300 1272 1568 1301 13498 2025 tare 15 p. ct. 114731b. at 70 p. cwt. 803l 2 ^ 5
1384 1559 1323 1256 1500 7015 1052 tare 15 p. ct. 5963 at 75 p. cwt. 4472 5 5
1441 1584 1315 1347 1415 7102 1065 tare 15 p. ct. 6037 at 90 P. cwt. 5433 10 5
1415 1338 1397 1378 1384 6912 1037 tare 15 p. ct. 5875 at 120 p. cwt. 7050 20
do. to Lesevre 1359 1328 1234 1100 1478 1163 1322 1334 1522 1312 1125 1146 1217
1283 1218 1268 1184 1150 1203 983 12892 12067 12067 24959lb. 3744 tare 15 p.ct.
Neat 21215 at 110 p. cwt. 23336 10 10 1460 1300 1625 1250 1180 1125 1640 1395
1108 1246 13389 2008 tare 15 p. ct. 1138^lb. at 60 p. cwt. 6828 12 ^ 5 1346
1585 1373 1360 1290 6954 1043 tare 15 p. ct. 5911 at 95 p. cwt. 5615 9 5 1350
1440 1496 1390 1670 7346 1002 tare 15 p. ct. 6244 at 94 p. cwt. 5869 7 2 5 1240
1122 1347 1158 1084 5951 893 Tare 15 p. ct. 5058lb.at 121 p. cwt. 6120 3 7 5
1296 1384 1146 1333 1033 6192 929 tare 15 p. ct. 52631b. at 75 p. cwt. 3947 5 5
Hhdi. to Le Febvre 1553 1412 1456 1456 1584 7461 1119 tare 15 p. ct. 6342 at
126 p. cwt, 7990 18 4 to Jourdan 1323 1293 1304 1409 1534 6863 1029 tare 15 p.
ct. 5834 at 105 p. cwt. 6184 0 ^ 1244 1300 1396 1435 1620 6995 1049 tare 15 p.
ct. 5946 at 125 p. cwt. 7432 10 1260 1120 1332 1310 1416 6438 966 tare 15 p.
ct. 5472 at 103 p. cwt. 5636 3 2 -to Babret 1490 1196 1359 1332 1371 6747 1012
tare at 15 p. ct. 5736 at 105 p. cwt. 6021 15 6 -- to Galliot 1446 1400 1344
1415 1523 7128 1069 tare at 15 p. ct. 6059 at 125 p. cwt 7573 15 10 -- to
Ferret 1523 1360 1454 1432 1533 1383 1493 997 1333 1408 13916 2087 tare 15 p.
ct. 11829 at 100 p. cwt. 11829 5 -- to Saupin 1522 1315 1580 1243 1487 7147
1072 tare 15 p. ct. 6075 at 171 p. cwt. 10388 5 5 -- to Ferret 1370 1410 1340
1208 1516 6844 1027 tare 15 p. ct. 5817 at 106 p. cwt. 6166 5 -- 1506 1345 1500
1370 1525 7246 1087 tare 15 p. ct. 6159 at 80 p. cwt. 4927 4 5 1302 1528 1332
1197 1422 6781 2017 tare 15 p. ct. 5764 at 109 p. cwt. 6282 15 2 5 965 1320
1594 1503 1545 6867 1030 tare 15 p. ct. 5837 at 125 p. cwt. 7269 5 5 1146 2184
2132 ^237 1123 5822 873 tare 15 p. ct. 4949 at 129 p. cwt. 6384 4 2 5 1242 1204
1078 1454 1621 6599 990 tare 15 p. ct. 5609 at 119 p. cwt. 6674 14 2 5 -- to
Muller 1320 1437 1396 1246 1094 6493 974 tare 15 p. ct. 5519 at 100 p. cwt.
5519 5 1604 1288 946 1154 1238 6230 934 tare 15 p. ct. 5296 at 125 p. cwt. 6620
5 -- to Brulard 1536 1694 1580 1580 1395 7785 ^168 tare 15 p. ct. 6617at 110 p.
cwt. 7278 14

57 to Lefelvre

1173 1522 882 985 1015 1446 1182 1222 1391 1250 1218 1227 1603 1290 1414 907
1204 1264 1181 1300 1186 1410 1037 1200 1062 1404 1480 1150 1132 1174 1322 1274
1163 1360 1348 1544 1335 1235 1281 1673 1283 1169 1070 1243 1273 1242 1342 1246
1200 1185 1604 1142 1314 1169 1347 1162 1210 12588 12859 12602 12603 11932 9024
12588 12859 12602 12603 11932 9024 71608 10741 tare Df. 15 p. ct. 232 Hhds.
damaged tobacco 60867 at 150 p. cwt. 91300 10 A heap of damaged tobacco
proceeding from sundry Hhds. and weighing 1146 at 300 p. cwt. 3438 302765 19 3
Barrels of damaged Rice sold to Brulard for 300 L303065 19

N. B. Out of the 53 bbls. of Rice sold to the municipality of Nantz, 1546lb.
have been rejected and nothing could be obtained for, as being quite rotten.

Carried over.

Brought Forward, L303065 19

CHARGES.

Lighterage of 232 hhds. tobac. and 3 casks of rice equal to 2 hhds. 234 hhds.
at 15 L3510 Unloading ditto do. 3510 Examining the tobac. cutting the rotten
and putting the whole in good order 2640 Cooperage at 8 per hhd. 1872 Weighing
and delivery a 20 p. hhd. 4080 For Stowages 300 To the cr^er of the sale, and
for publishing 188 Drayage a 80 per hhd. 1872 Warehouse rent during two months
at 30 per month 702 Custom duties on said tobac. weighing as follows: 308524
gross weight Tare 12 per cent only is allowed at the custom house 37078 Neat at
12 per cent 271451 33931 7 Deduct the duties received from several buyers 15536
5 18395 2 37669 2 Commission 5 per cent 15153 6 52822 8 Neat Proceeds 250243 11

Errors Excepted, Nantz 16 June 1795.

N. B. It is supposed to me allowance will be made by the Custom house on the
duties of damaged Tobacco; but which cannot be ascertained before the sailing
of the ship Two Friends.

JOHN K. HELMUTH.
I certify the exactness of the present account of sales as having been present
at the sale made before the Judges of the Tribunal of Commerce of this city and
the vouchers exhibited to me.

IN witness whereof, I have signed the present and caused my seal of office to
be thereunto affixed. Nantz, 16th June, 1795.

P.S. DOBREE.



To CASH paid for Disbursements on the Ship TWO FRIENDS, while in distress and
repairing, by SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
Paimbeoeuf, 1795. Assig. Dols. Cts Jan. 30, To cash paid for 12 gall. brandy
when -- on shore at St. Nazarre for all hands 480 Joseph Watson 4 days work 80
Feb. 3, Jseph Bains 3 days do. 60 James Career 3 days do. 60 Arthur Dunker 5
days do. 100 17, Rheuben Knowles 4 da. do. 80 Joseph Barnes 4 days do. 80 James
Mead 5 days do. 100 Samuel Logan 5 da. do. 100 James Kerkey 5 da. do. 100 1240
Which at 25 per dollar is 49 40 March 20, Samuel Joaner 5 days work 100 3 men
90 livres -- names unknown 90 190 Which at 30 per dollar is 6 33 May 24, To
cash paid for pumping and heaving the ship down for 12 seamen 250 for 3 gallons
of brandy 280 for supper and wi. for the mas. carpen. 80 610 Which at 85 per
Dollar is 7 17 62 90

Errors Excepted

SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
Messrs. Schwaghausers and Dobree will please to pay the above account and
oblige their Most Humble Servant, JOHN K. HELMUTH.
Received the 3d June, 1795. SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
I certify the above account as just relating to the course of Exchange. --
Nantz, 16th June 1795 P.F. DOBREE, V. Consul U. S.

ACCOUNT of the disbursements made for the ship TWO FRIENDS, Capt. Samuel
Williams, when in distress and refit^ing; to the debt of JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire of
Philadelphia.
Third Year. To Cen. Agree of St. Brevin for his trouble Pluv. 18. in procuring
hands for the salvage of the ship 50 Gaulier for 10 men employed pumping 100
Paimboeuf. Seven large boats for relieving the vessel and carrying tobac. and
rice to Paimboe 885 Ventre 8. 15 sailors from the sloop Phoenix, for pumping 75
10. Salvage of an anchor and carriage thereof aboard 275 Gl. 30. The caulkers,
carpenters and ferry boatmen 260 Floreal 14. The caulkers and carpenters 867
21. do. do. 236 - 12 soldiers employed in helping the carpen. 100 28. Le Roux,
a sawyer 85 17 6 - The caulkers and carpentars 2010 30. Deny's ship builders,
67 days raft hire a 20 1340 Un. 3. Deny's (the eldest) furnisher 44 days of
Penton hire at 40 1760 Le Bache for nails 2424 4. Deny's (the eldest) for amt.
of bill for pitch brimstone, two planks, etc. 9229 The caulkers and carpenters
521 Cailleau, blockmaker 730 Ravache, blacksmith 5154 Le Roux sawyer 6 10 For a
boat and ^ men to weigh anchor, etc. 100 Launa^, riggerman for his work 23 da.
at 30 460 Bo^m^ for hire of a ferryboat to carry the caulkers and carpenters
aboard 380 8. Bourgeois, ship builders, per bill 583 15 6 Postage of letters
and messengers 85 Paid by J. K. Helmuth to the following sailors, Robert
Whelford 140 Viz: John Taner Daniel Largen 260 George Anderson 60 460 L33177 12
Commission 5 per Cent 1658 17 Errors Excepted -- the 16th June 1795. 34836 9

J. K. HELMUTH.

I Peter Frederick Dobree, vice consul of the United States of America at
Nantz, do certify, that the accounts mentioned on the other side amounting
together to thirty four thousand eight hundred and thirty six livres nine sols
assignats, have been deposited in my chancelery by said Mr. Helmuth. In
testimony of which I have delivered this certificate to serve as it will be
found meet.

P. F. DOBREE.
Nantz, the 16th June 1795.
At NANTZ this fourteenth day of June, in the year one thousand seven hundred
and ninety five, the 26th day of Praireal, the third year of the French
Republic.
I PETER FREDERICK DOBREE, vice consul of the United States of America, for the
port of Nantz, and for such parts of France as are nearer to the said port than
to the residence of any other consul or vice-consul of the United States,
within the s^id Republic, do certify, --

That personally came and appeared before me this day, John K. Helmuth, of
Philadelphia, who voluntarily made oath and affirmed that the goods and
merchandise he has shipped on board the Two Friends, Capt. Samuel Williams,
contained in the two bills of loading here annexed, are the property of
American citizens, and that no foreigners to the United States are directly or
indirectly concerned therein.

IN faith and testimony I have hereunto set my hand and caused my seal of
office to be affixed this day and year aforesaid.

P. F. DOBREE.

Shipped, by the grace of God, in good order and well-conditioned, by John K.
Helmuth, a citizen of the United States of America, in and upon the good ship
called the Two Friends, whereof is master under God, for this present voyage
Samuel Williams, and now riding at anchor in the river Loire, and by God's
grace, bound for Philadelphia, to say, two hundred and seventy six casks of
Bordeaux red wine, and sixteen I. S. No 1 a 97 1 38 a 316 276 casks. No. 1 a 16
hhds of currants.
hhds, of currants, on account and risque of the underwriters on the cargo of
the ship Two Friends, at Philadelphia, being marked and numbered as in the
margin, and are to be delivered in the like good order and well-conditioned, at
the aforesaid port of Philadelphia, (the danger of the seas only excepted) unto
John Swanwick, Esquire or to his assigns, he or they paying freight for the said
goods, four pounds ten shillings per ton, with primage and average accustomed.
--

In witness whereof the master or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four
bills of lading, all of this tenor and date; the one of which bills being
accomplished, the other three to stand void; and so God send the good ship to
her desired port in safety. Amen. --

Dated in Nantz, June 14th 1795. Contents unknown. SAMUEL WILLIAMS.

SHIPPED by the grace of God in good order and well-conditioned, by John K.
Helmuth, a citizen of the Unit. States of America, in and upon the good ship
called the Two Friends, whereof is master under God for this present voyage
Samuel Williams, and now riding at anchor in the river Loire, and by God's
grace bound for Philadelphia, to say, one small keg, ten trunks, containing
sundry merchandises, one cask of Silesia cloths, one bale of charts, three
bales of papering, two hundred One small keg I. S. No. 1 a 10 trunks. do. 1
cask do. 1 a 4 bales. do. 1 a 200 kegs of raisins. No. 1 a 5 casks Mala. wi.
No. 1 a 3 bbls. prunes. I. S. 98 a 137 40 casks wi.
kegs of raisins, four pipes one quarter cask Malaga wine, three barrels
prunes, one small box containing watches, and forty casks of Bordeaux red wine,
on account and risk of John Swanwick, Esquire of Philadelphia, a citizen of the
United States of America, being marked and numbered as in the margin, and are
to be delivered in the like good order and well-conditioned, at the aforesaid
port of Philadelphia, (the danger of the seas only excepted) unto John Swanwick
Esquire or to his assigns, he or they paying freight for the said goods, as owners
property, with primage and average accustomed. -- In witness whereof the master
or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of this
tenor and date, one of which bills being accomplished, the other three to stand
void; and so God send the good ship to her desired port in safety. Amen. Dated
in Nantz, June 14th 1795.

Contents Unknown. SAMUEL WILLIAMS.

NANTZ, June 12th 1795. Honored Sir,
THE ship Two Friends being at last repaired and ready for sea, I have now the
honor to enclose you herein invoice and bill of lading of sundry merchandises,
shipped on your account and risque, amounting to livres assignats 404056 3. As
also, invoice and bill of lading of sundry goods shipped on account of the
underwriters of the cargo of the Two Friends, amounting to livres, assigs.
250895 18 with account sales and necessary papers for your prompt recovery from
them.

I further enclose you a bill on my brother for 1000 dollars. -- As also a
receipt from Capt. Williams for 900 dollars, which he will deliver you
immediately after his arrival.

Your ships delay here has been unfortunately very long, but taking into
consideration the many difficulties under which the labored it is not too long
a time. Mr. S. cannot well form an idea to himself of the tedious manner of
doing business here, who is accustomed to so much activity. In order to get a
single permit for goods it requires two or three days at least, and the number
of holidays which at present are kept in France makes mercantile business very
difficult to be transacted. -- On Sunday the people do not any business and on
Decade-days all public offices are shut.

I am extremely sorry it is impossible for me to return in the ship Two
Friends, as there still remains about sixty hogsheads of tobacco unsold; and I
should not wish to leave France without having the accounts of the voyage
completed. From appearances tobacco will raise considerably in value and is in
demand.

I dare say should the Two Friends arrive safe in port, the merchandise which I
have shipped on your account will answer very well, as goods of the same kind
are seventy or eighty per cent dearer now than they were at the time of
purchase. I hope Capt. Mc. C^l, of the ship Iris, may have arrived safe at
New York with the goods shipped on your account.

My apprehensions respecting war with Great Britain are very considerable,
notwithstanding (as is reported here) a treaty has been ratified in England by
Mr. Jay. The British cruizers take all American vessels bound to France loaded
with provisions. A brig belonging to Mr. Meade of Philadelphia, and cleared out
for Nantz, was boarded by an English frigate in the bay; who put a prize-master
and several men on board to carry her into Portsmouth: But the captain and
American seamen who were left in the brig found means to make drunk the
prize-master and his men -- In which time they retook possession of the vessel
and brought her safe in here.

The late Dauphin of France is dead and Luxembourg is taken by the French: --
The death of the son of Capet will occasion some alteration with respect to
some of the powers at war with France. -- The Spanish government demanded as
one of their terms on which it would agree to a peace, the delivery of the
dauphin up to them -- some suspicions are at this time formed of his not dying
a natural death.

A serious fire took place a few days ago, at Paimboeuf, by which six fine
ships were burnt, as you will see by the account given in the Nantz papers. I
wished much for a few lines from you, but I suppose you expected my departure
from this before the arrival of the vessels which sailed not long since from
Philadelphia. Please accept the enclosed papers from

Honored Sir, Your grateful and Most obedient servant, JOHN K. HELMUTH.
FLOUR, 23 dollars per barrel. RICE, 11 dollars per cwt. Other articles do not
sell for specie.



Le vingt quatre Germinal, an 3me de la Republique Francoise une et
indivisible, neuf heures du matin.
[FOR TRANSLATION. SEE THE APPENDIX.]
24 Germinal, 2,15, 82 Floreal 1 4, 7, 8 Prairial an 3.
Devant nous Francois Rozier ju^e an tribunal de comerec de Nantes etant au
Greffe et ayant avec nons Jeau Morin commis gre^er juro ordinaire et I'huissier
de service.

Est comparu Andre Goyau procureur specicial des citoyens Veuve Sob weighausu
et Do^ree agissant pour J. K. Helmuth, de Philadelphie, supercargue du navire
les Deux Amiss, capt. Samuel Williams, lequel a requis notre transport rue de
Launexy dans un magazin du citoyen Vigier, Process verbal de vente at livraison
des tabac et riz, faisant party de la cargaison du navire American les deux
Amiss.
a l'effet de rapporter process verbal de la vente de trois cents quarante
houcauds de tabar et trois barrils de riz, provenant de la cagaison du navire
les Deux Amiss, aux fins d'ordonnance du tribunal du vingt un de ce mois, qui
fera enregistree avec le present, vu affiches et plaeard qui aunoucent la dite
veute, et den Barrier faittes par Valiet huissier entegistrees par Bertrand le
vingt deux; et a sign (...) la minute. -- Goyan.

De tout quoi nous avons decoine acts en consequence nous nous sommes
transportes de compagnie des sus nomes dans le magazin du G. Vigier, ou ^tant
nous y avpur trouve le Cen. Dobree, vice consul des Etats Unis de I'Amerique,
Septentrionale qui a dit vouloir assister a la vente don't est cas pour la
conservation des droits de qo^ it appartiendra et Michel Purnoy Breteur
ordinaire, qui a promis se comporter fidellenent au faits de sa commission. a
I'endroit le Cen. Goyeir a evoque aux fins de fon decernee d'hier, l'agent
maritime pour assister si bon lui semble au present, requerant que saute de
comparoitre. il soit concede de faut contre lui et pass outre a la vente a
sign avec le citoyen Dobree sign sur la minute, Goyau, et P. F. Dobree.

De tout quoi nous juge susdit avons decerne act et de ee qu'apres avoir
supercede plus d'une beure sans que I'agent maritinie ait comparu nous ayons
concede de faut contre lui, pour le profit ordonne qu'il sera de suite proceed
a sa vente don't est cas, a la quelle il a ete vacqn come suit a la condition de
prendre livraison a I'issue de la vente, de payer comptant sans escompte, et de
ne pouvoir exiger de reduction et de se contenter des quinze pour cent, pour
tare, suivant I'usage. J. S.

1er. Une lot de 5 boucauds de tabac, numero 161, marque B. 73 sans marque, 109
marque A, 172 marque B. 88 sans marque, le quel lot apres avoir ete oncaute
plusieurs fois a ete adjuge au Cen. le Fevre a cent dix livres le quintal, les
lettres J. S. signifient la marque generale, les autres ne font que des contre
marque, ainsi on ne repetera plus les lettres J. S.

2. Une autre lot de 5 boucauds uumero 135, marque B. 71 sans marque, 11 s;ans
marque, 100 marque A et 107 sans marque, adjuge au Cen, Jourdan a cent cinq
livres le quintal.

3. Un auttre lot de 5 boucauds, No, 108 marque A, 77 sas marque, 69 marque B,
18 sans marque, 111 sans marque, adjuge au Cen, Babret a cent cinq livres le
quintal.

4. Un lot de 5 boucauds numero 50, marque B, 18, 169, 59, 161 sans marque
adjuge au Cen. Galliot a cent vingt cinq livres le quintal.

5. Un lot de cinq boucauds No. 43, marque A. 2 sans marque, 115 sans marque,
151 marque B, et 109 sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Saupin a cent soix ante et
onze livres le quintal.

6. Un lot de cinq boucauds sans marque No. 32, 17, 72, 41, 20, adjuge au
citoyen Le Fevre a quartre vingt douze livres le quintal.

7. Un lot de 5 boucauds, No. 103 marque A, 26, 23, 59, 30 sans marque, adjuge
au Cen. Brulard a cent dix livres le quintal.

8. Un lot de 5 boucauds, No 74, marque B. 58, 51, 47, 60 sans marque, adjuge
au citoyen Le Fevre a soixante dix livres le quintal. La nuit survenue nous
nous sommes retire et avons remis la continuation du present au denx Floreal
sous les seings de tons les comparants de l'huissier du Greffin et le notre les
dits jour et an stgne sur la minute, P. S. Dobree, Goyan, Orieux; F. Rozier et
Morin.

Advenant ce jour deux Floreal an 3 de la Republique Francoise une et
indivisible, nous juges us dit avour proceed a la continuation du present --
come suit, huit heure du matin.

9. Un lot de 5 boucauds de tobac, No. 38 marque B, le 2d sans numero ni
marque, 70, 15, 8. sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a soixante quinze
livres du quintal.

10. Un lot de cinq boucauds de tabac No. 66, 78, 80, 63, 76 sansmarque, adjure
au Cen. Le Fevre a soixante dix livres le quintal.

11. Un lot de cinq boucauds No. 57 marque B, 14, 83, 4, 12, sans marque adjuge
au Cen. Le Fenre a quartre vingt dix livres le quintal.

12. Un lot de cinq boucauds No. 3. marque B. 10, 62, sans marque, et les 2
autres sans marque ni numero, adjuge au Cen. Le F^vre a cent vingt livres le
quintal.

13. Un lot de cinq boucauds No. 31, 82, 115, et les deux autres sans marque ni
numero, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a cent dix livres le quintal.

14. Tris futailles de riz avarie adjuge au citoyen Brulard apres plusieurs
encheres pour troic, cent livres.

15. Un lot de 5 boucauds de tabac No. 100, marque B. le second sans numero ni
marque et le cinquieme marque B, sans numero, le troisieme, sans No. marque S
A. Le quatrieme sans No, ni marque, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre, a soixante livres
le quintal.

16. Un lot de cinq boucands No 7, marque B, 113 marque A, 56 marque B, 54, 52
saus marque, adjuge au Cen. L'Fevre a quatre vingt quinze livres le quintal.

La nuit survenue nous nous sommes retire et avons remis la continuation du
present au quinze de ce mois, ce qui a ete a^nonce a tout le public sous les
sein^s come dessus les dits jours et an.

Sign sur la minute P. F. Dobree, Goyan, Orieux, F. Re^ier at Mori^.

Advenant le quinze du dit mois buit heure du matin, nous juge susdit avons
proceed a la continuation du present comme suit.

17. Un lot de 5 boucauds de ^abac, No 78, marque A. 67 marque B. 55, 14, 20
sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Ferrer a cent livres le quintal.

18. Un lot de 5 boucauds No, 85, marque B. 1 sans marque 104 marque A. 121
sans marque et le 5 sans marque ni No; adjuge au Cen. Jourdan a cent viagt cinq
livres le quintal.

19. Un lot de 5 boucauds No. 53, marque A. 91 marque B. (...) marque C. 33
marque B, et 3 sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre, a quartre vingt quartorze
livres le quintal.

20. Un lot de 5 boucauds No. 157, marque B. le 2d sans No. ni marque, le 3d
No. 30, marque A, le 4me numere 212, marque B, et le 5me No. 29, marque A,
adjuge au Cen Ferret a cent livres le quintal.

21. Un lot de 5 boucauds No. 87, marque B, 100, 39, 242, 81, sans marque
adjuge au Cen. Mulle. a cent livres le quintal.

22. Un lot de 5 boucands No 107, marque B. 52 marque A, 223 marque R. 49
marque A et 55 sans marque, adjuge au citoyen Jourdan, a cent trois livres le
quintal.

23. Uu lot de 5 boucauds No 44, marque B. 114, 168 sans marque 20 marque C. 26
marque B, adjuge au Cen. Lebiais a cent vingt livres le quintal.

24. Un lot de 5 boucauds No. 78, marque A. 53 marque S. 199 marque B. 14
marque C. 145 marque A, adjuge au citoyen Le Fevre a cent dix livres le quintal.

La nuit survenue nous nous sommes retire et avons remis la continuation du
presert au 2 du courrant, ce qui a ete annonce a tout le public sour les seings
come deffus les dits jour et an, sign prela minute, P. F. Dobre^, Goyan,
Orieux, F. Rozier et Morin.

Advenant le vingt deux du dit mois buit heure du matin nous juge enasdit avons
proceed a la continuation du preeent comme suit.

26. Un lot de 5 boucauds No. 93, marque B, 213 sans marque, 66 marque A, 101
sans marque, 15 marque C, adjuge ah Cen. Le Fevre a cent div livres le quintal.

25. Un lot de 5 boncauds No, 26, marque C, 169 marque A, 11, 170, sans marque,
127 marque B, adjudge au Cen. Le Fevre a cent (...) livres le quintal.

27. UN LOT de 5 boucauds No. 195, marque B. 75, 105, sans marque, 178 marque
A, 188 sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a ^wrd^ dix livres le quintal.

28. Un lot de 5 boucauds, No. 47, marque A. 114 sans marque, 208 marque B. 49
marque A, et le 5me sans marque ni No. adjuge au Cen. Ferret a cent livres le
quintal.

29. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 117 marque A, 60 marque B. 175 sans marque, 93 marque
A. 101 marque B. adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a soixante quinze le quintal.

30. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 179, marque B. 89, 226 sans marque le 4d sans marque
ni No. et le 5th. No. 13 sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Brauger a 119 le quintal.

31. Un lot de 5 bds. No, 49 marque B. 79 eans marque, 110 marque A, 84 marque
B. et 49 eans marque, adjuge au Cen. Ferret a quartre vingt livres le quintal.

32. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 48 sans marque, 46 marque A, 132 sans marque, 9
marque B, et 46 sans marque, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a eoixante livres le
quintal.

La nuit survenue nous nous somes retire et avons remis la continuation du
present au premier Praireal ce quoi a ete annonce a tout le public sour les
eeings come dessns les dits jour et au.

Advenant ce jour let Prairial an 3d de la Republique Fraucoise une et
indivisible, huit beure de matin, nous juge susdit avons proceed a la
continuation du preeent come euit.

33. Un lot de 5 bds. de tabac No. 123 marque A. le 2d. sans (...) ^que ni No.
le 3mc No. 22 marque 15. le 4mc No. 10. marque C. le 5mc No. 16 marque B,
adjuge au Cen. Ferret a 109 le quintal.

34. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 134, marque A. 152 marque B. 118 marque A. 64 marque
B. 28 marque A, adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a 126 le quintal.

35. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 1. marque A. 90 marque B. 63 sans marque, le 4me sans
marque ni No. et le 5me No. 61 sans marque adjuge au Cen. Ferret a cent vingt
cinq livres le quintal.

36. Un lot de 5 bds. No. 177 marque A. 161, 160, 174, 162 sans marque, adjuge
au Cen. Ferret a 129 le quintal.

1 er Lot. Un lot de ^o bds. de tabac, avarie sans contre marque ni No.
apparent intitule No. 1 adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a cent, cinquante livres le
quintal.

2d. Un autre lot de 5 bds. de tabac, egallement a vary intitule 2d lot,
adjuge au Cen. Delaville a cent cinquable livres le quintal, lesquels sont
egallement sans contre marque, ni No. apparents.

3me. Un autre lot de 20 bds. de tabac sans contre marque ni No. apparent,
intitule 3me lot adjuge au Cen. Le Fevre a 150 le quintal.

4me. Alendroit le Cen. Dobree nons a declare avoir fait beneficier une party
de tabac que a ete misi^en vente sous la denomination 4me lot et apres
plusieu^s encheres il a ete adjuge au Cen. Hutard a trois cents livres le
quintal. La nuit survenue nous nous sommes retire et avons remis au 4 de ce
mois la peze et livraison des dirs t^bac, sous le seings come deffus -- Sigue
pres la minute, P.F. Dobree, Goyan, O^ieux. F. Rozier et Morin.

Advenant ce dit jour 4 Prairial an 3me de la Republique Francoise une et
indivisible, huit hcure du matin, nous juge susdit avons precede au process
verbal de la livraison requis come suit.

S'est present le Cen. Le Fevre qui a requis la livraison du premier lot don't
il est adjudicataire la quelle a ete faite come euit.

E.S.P.F.

LOT 1er. Marquis. Nos. Poids. Le Fevre B. 161. 1338 73. 1348 A. 109. 1422 B.
172. 1403 83. 1243 6754 Tare 15 p. cent 1012 5699 net a 106 le 6080 3 2

Le Cen. Jourdan a requis livraison du 2d lot clle lui a ete faite come suit: 2
LOT. B. 155. 1332 Jourdan. 71. 1293 11. 1304 A. 106. 1509 107. 1534 6972 Tare
15 p. cent 1029 5948 a 105 ql. 6184

Le Cen. Babret a requis live raisoa du 3me lot elle lui a ete faite comme suit:
3 LOT. A. 108. 1490 B abrer. 77. 1195 B. 69. 1359 18. 1332 111 1371 6747 Txet
15 p. et. 1012 5735 a 105 le qtl. 6021 15

Le Cen. Galliot s'est present et a requis la livraison du 4 lot elle lui a
ete fait comme suit. 4 LOT. B. 50. 1446 18. 1400 169. 1344 59. 1415 151 1523
7128 Tare 15 p. ct. 1069 6059 3125 7573 15

Le Cen. Saupin a requis la livraison du 5 tot elle lui a ete faitte comme
suit. 5 LOT. A. 43. 1522 2. 1315 116. 1580 B. 151. 1243 109. 1487 7147 Tare 15
p. ct. 1072 6075 a 171 10381 5

Le Cen. Lesevre a requis live raison du 6 lot elle lui a ete faitte come suit.
6 32 1095 17 1195 72 1309 41 1494 20 1359 6452 Tare 15 p. c. 966 54961b. at 92
5037 18 4

Le Cen. Brulard a requis livraison du 7 lot elle lui a ete faitte come suit. 7
A 103 1536 26 1694 23 1580 29 1580 30 1395 77851b. Tare 15 p. c. 1168 6617 at
110 7278 4

Le. cen. Lefevre a requis livraison des 8 et 10 lot elle lui ont ete faitte
come suit. 8 B 74 1295 58 1105 51 403 47 1328 60 1526 10 66 1400 78 1300 80
1272 63 1568 76 1301 13498 Tare 15 p. ct. 2025 11473 70 ^031 8

La meme a la livraison du 9 lot come suit. 9 B 38 1384 1553 70 ^332 15 ^46 8
^0 70 Tare 15 p. ct. 1015 59631b. a 75 4472 3

La meme. a la livraison du 11 lot come suit. 11 B 57 1441 24 1584 83 1315 4
1347 12 1415 7102 Tare 15 p. ct. 1065 6037 a 90 5433 10

La meme a la livraison du 12 lot come suit. 42 B 3 1415 10 1333 62 1397 1378
1384 6912 Tare 15 p. ct. 1037 58751b. 2 120 le q. 7050

La meme a la livraison des 13, 24, 36 8^ 27 lot comme suit. 13 31 1359 82 1284
115 1478 1322 1522 A 78 1125 S 53 1247 24 B 119 1218 C 14 1184 A 145 1203 B 93
1528 26 113 1100 A 66 1163 101 1334 C 15 1312 ^ 191 1146 75 1248 105 1268 A 178
983 188 115 26959 Tare 15 p. et. 3744 21215 at 110 23336

La nuit survenue noua nous se^es retire et avons remis au 7 de ce ^is la
continuation, du present soux les seings comme deffus. Sique ^urlaminute P. S.
Dobree, Goyau, Orieux, Brnlard 14 F. Rozier et Morin.

Advenant au jour 7 Prairial nous juge susdit avons proceed a la continuation
des present comme suit.

Le even. Brulard a la live raison de 3 sutailles deriz don't l'adjudication lui a
ete faitte pour 300 cy. 800

Le cen. Lefevre a require live raison des lots No. 15 ct 32 faitte comme suit.
B 100 1460 15 SA 1300 1625 1250 B 1180 48 1125 32 A 45 1640 112 1395 B 9 1168
46 1246 13389 Tare 15 p. c. 2008 11381 a 60 4828 12

La mo^e a recue live raifon du 16 lot comme suit. 16 B 7 1346 A 113 1585 B 56
1373 54 1360 52 129c 6954 Tare 15 p. c. 1043 5911 at 95 5615 9

Le Cen Terret, a recue live raison des 17 et 28 lots comme suit. 17 A 78 1523 B
67 1360 55 1454 14 1432 20 1533 7302 A 47 1383 114 1392 38 B 201 997 A 45 1333
1408 139l6 Tare 15 p. ct. 2087 11829 a 100 11829

Le Cen Jourdan, a recue live raison du 18 lot comme suit. Jourdan B 85 1244 1
1300 A 104 1396 121 1435 1620 6295 Tare 15 p ct. 1049 5946 a 125 7432 10

Le Cen. Lefevre, a recue live raison du 19 lot comme suit. Lefevre A 53 1350 29
B 91 1460 C 1 1496 33 1390 3 1670 7366 Tare 15 p. ct. 1102 6264 94 5869 72

Le Cen. Ferret, a recue live raison du 20 lot comme suit. Ferret 20 L 157 1370
1410 A 39 1340 B 112 1108 A 29 1516 6744 Tare 15 p. ct. 1072 5672 a 105 6166

Le Cen. Muller a recue live raison du 21 let comme suit. Mulle^ ^ 87 1320 100
1437 39 1340 222 1256 81 1094 ^447 Tart 15. p. c. 974 5473 at 100 5119

Le Cen. Jourdan a recu live raison du 22 lot comme suit. Jourdan 22. B 107 1260
A 52 1120 B 223 1332 A 49 1310 55 1416 6438 Tare 15 p. c. 966 5472 at 103 5636

Le Cen. Labials a rccu live raison du 23me lot comme suit. Lebials 23 B 44 1604
114 1283 168 946 C 20 1150 B 86 1248 6232 Tare 15 p. c. 934 5297 at 125 6620

Le Cen. Lefevre a recu live raison du 25 lot comme suit. Lefevre 25. C 26 1240
A 169 1122 11 1347 170 2158 B 127 1084 5951 Tare 15 p. c. 893 5058 at 121 5120

Le Cen. Lefevre a recu live raisn du 29 lot comme suit. Lefevre 29. A 117 1296
B 60 1384 175 1146 A 93 1333 B 101 1033 6192 Tare 15 p. c. 929 5263 a 75 3947

Le Cen. Branger a rccu live raison da 30 lot comme suit. Branger 3c. B 179 124^
89 12^4 216 1078 1454 13 1621 6599 Tare 15 p. c. 990 5609 a 119 6674 14 2

Le Cen. F^ret a recu live raison du 31 lot comme suit. Ferret 31. B 49 1506 79
1345 A 110 1500 B 84 1370 42 1525 7246 Tare 15 p. c. 1087 6159 a 80 4927 4

Le Ccn. Lefevre a recu live raison du 34 lot comme suit. Lefevre 34. A 134 1553
B 152 1412 A 118 1456 B 64 1456 A 28 1584 7461 Tare 15 p. c. 1119 6342 a 116
7990 18 4

Le Cen. Ferret a recu live raison du 33me lot comme suit. A 123 1528 1302 B 22
1332 C 10 1197 B 16 1422 6781 Tare 15 p. c. 1017 5764 a 109 6282

La nuit survenue nous nous sommes retire et avons remisla continuation du
present sous les seings comme dessus les dits jour et an sign pres la minute,
P. F. Dobree. Goyau, Orieux, F. Rozier and Morin:

Advenant ce jour 8 Prairial an 3 de la Republique Francoise Une and
Indivisible, nous Juge susdit avons proceed a la continuation du present comme
suit. -- Le Cen. Ferret a recu live raison du 35 lot comme suit.

A 1 965 Ferret 35 B 90 1320 68 1534 1503 61 1545 6867 Tare 15 p. c. 1030 5887
a 125 7296 5

Le Cen. Ferret a recu live raison du 36me lot comme suit. A 117 1146 Ferret 36
161 1184 160 1132 175 1237 162 1123 5821 Tare 15 p. c. 873 4949 a 122 6384 4

Le Genesis Lefevre a recu live raison de 20 Bds. composant son adjudication sous
la denomination 1 lot comme suit. 1173 1182 1603 1181 1062 1332 1335 1070 1246
1314 1522 1222 1290 1300 1404 1274 1235 1243 1200 1169 25447 Tare 15 p. c. 3817
21830 a 150 32445

Le Cen. Delaville a recu live raison du 2 lot de la meme party comme suit. 882
985 13391 1210 1414 907 1136 410 1480 1150 1163 1360 1281 1673 1223 1242 1185
1185 1347 1347 12602 12603 12602 25205 Tare 15 p. c. 3781 21424 a 150 32136

Le Cen. Lefevre ^ recu live raison du 3me (...) compose de dix sept Beucauls
comme suit. 1016 1446 1218 1227 1204 1266 1037 1200 1132 1174 1348 1544 1283
1169 1342 - 1210 9024 - 11932 11932 - - 20956 Tare 15 p. c. 3143 17813 a 150
26719

Le Cen. Hautand a recu livraison du 4e lot, qui comprend la party de tabac
beneficie, le resulta^ des pezees a done net, onze cent quarante six livres a
trois cent livres le quintal, font ci. 3438 0 0 Ce sont toutes les merchandises
avarirees provenant de la cargaison du navire les Deux Amiss process verbal de
vente ci-devant, calcul fait des prix des livraisons, il se leve a la some des
trois cents trois mill soixante cinq livres dix neuf sols, 303065 19 0

A l'endroit le Cen. Dobree a dit qu'il existe encore quarante sept boucauds de
tabac de la meme cargaison, qu'il ma par me devoir classer dans la party
avariee parcequ'il croit qa'on tirant le pourri apparent et en faisant une
refraction, il peut les vendre come marchand, que cependant il ne veut rien
prendre sur son compte, a cet egard, qu'il croit qu'il est de l'interest des
proprietaires et des assures, de les fair visiter par experts pour avoir leur
Avis, pour quoi il requiert ainsi que le Cen. Goyau que nous nommions des
experts pour visiter les dits tabac et avoir deux les aparements resultant de
l'etat des dits tabac et a sign avec le dit. Goy^ Sign sur la minute, P. S.
Dobrep et Goyau.

Desquels dire et requisitions, nous juge susdit avons decerne act en
consequence avons nomme d'office pour experts, les Cen. Brulard et Sauerwald,
icux invites de se reudre au lieu de la commission, ont comparus et prete.
serment de se bien et fidellement comporter au fait de leur commission a
laquelle ils ont vacque de suite. D'apres leur examen ils nous ont fait voir et
avour vu 47 boueauds de tabac J S, examen nonveau par eux fait ils ont declare
etre d'avis de fair extraire le tabac pourri et qui est apparent. En
consequence avons ordonne des ouvriers et le tabac pourri pass a la balance
il sen est trouve 3123 lb. qui les experts estiment de nulle valeur.

Quant au surplus des boucauds ils ont declare qu'ils pouvoient etre vendus
pour marchand, moyenant une refraction de trente livres par boucaud a raison du
pourri qu'ils n'ont extrait ce qui fait pour la ditte refraction sur les
quarantes boucauds, 1410 lbs.

Tell est le raport des experts, qu'ils ont affirm sincere et veritable et
ont declare y persister, et ont signs. Sign sur la minute, Brulard fills et Y.
C, Saneerwald.

De tout quoi avons decerne act, ainsi qui de toutes les protestations du Cen.
Dobree verse et contre, qui il appartie. Nous declarons aussi que tous les
boucauds vendus sont marque des J S mais que p^^^eurs ne porten point de contre
marque ni de No soit qu'ils soient effaces ou qu'il n^en ait point ete mis
avaunt le chargement.

Arrete environ les huit heure du soir, nos seings ceux du Cen. Dobree, du Cen.
Goyau et du Greffier les dits jour et an que devant. Sign sur la minute P. F.
Dobree, Goyau, Orieux. F. Rozier et Morin.

C. MORIN.
Au Greffe expedition papier seyon assau recu quarante six livre dix sols.

La minute du present a et enregistree anandate ving^ sept Prairial au
treitrimioecle republique par Bertrand, (L. S.) qui a recu trois mill trente
deux livres.

C. MORIN.



I, Peter Frederic Dobree, Vice-Consul of the United States of America at
Nantes, etc. certify, that Citizen Morin, (L. S.)
who has signed the above, is Griffier or Recorder of the Tribunal of Commerce,
and to have myself been present at the sales of the tobacco referred to; in
faith of which I have signed the present certificate. Nantes, 7th June, 1795.

P. F. DOBREE.

Je sousigne Pierre Christophe Prale, President au Tribunal de Commerce de
Nantes, certify et atteste a qu'il appartien que la signature apposee de
l'autre partest est celle de Jean Morin, Commis Greffier jure ence tribunal a
la quelle foy doit etre, ajanuee tout on jugement que horse; en soy de quoi je
detivre le present et ai celui fait appose sceau du tribunal pour valoir selon
ce quelle rest.

Nantes le vingt neuf Prairial an troisieme de la Republique Francaise, une et
indivisible.

PRALE.

I, Peter Frederic Dobrec. Vice-Consul of the United States of America at
N^n^^, certify that the signature above is that of the Cit. Prale, President of
the Tribunal of Commerce, and to have been myself present at the sale and
inspection of the said tobacco. In faith and testimony of which I have signed
the present, and caused my seal of office to be thereunto affixed. Nantes, 17th
June, 1795.

P. F. DOBREE.

On motion of Mr. Advocate General for the usual monition to be issued --
Ordered accordingly -- returnable on Saturday, the 5th day of September next.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Friday the 21st day of August, 1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court,

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The Court being opened by the usual proclamations,

Mr. Advocate General then preferred the following petition in behalf of Capt.
Josiah Basden, which is as follows, to wit:

To the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of the Court of Vice-Admiralty, etc.
The humble petition of Josiah Basden, commander of the sloop favorite,

Humbly shows.

That your petitioner has lately captured a ship called the Two Friends, with
a valuable cargo, and a number of French passengers on board, which ship has
been since libelled against in this honorable court.

That there are some valuable articles of light carriage on board, as cash and
watches, which your petitioner conceives are improper to be left on board, from
the frequency of communication with the vessel by the Americans and others.

Your petitioner therefore humbly prays leave of your honor to permit him to
take the same articles from on board, to be placed in safe custody on shore,
and also for liberty to examine the Captain's trunks, and other pachages, for
papers. And your petitioner, as in duty bound, etc.

J. G. PALMER, Proc. for Pet.
August 21, 1795.
On the prayer of the above petition the Judge ordered a warrant to be issued,
to the Marshal of this court, for the purpose contained in the said petition.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Thursday, the 3d day of September
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The Court being opened by the usual proclamations,

There was returned into Court, by the Marshal, the warrant issued for unlading
certain articles from on board of the ship Two Friends, with the Marshal's
return endorsed thereon, to wit:

BERMUDA. By the Honorable John Green, Esquire Judge of his Majesty's Court of
Vice-Admiralty, in these Islands. (L. S.)
To John Fisher, Esquire Marshal of said Court.
JOHN GREEN. Whereas, John Grove Palmer, Esquire, Advocate General and Proctor
for Josiah Basden, Commander of the private sloop of war, the Favorite, has, by
petition, prayed the court for leave, that sundry articles of light carriage,
consisting of cash and watches, may be permitted to be landed from on board the
said ship Two Friends, for better security of the same, and has also prayed
leave, that the captain's trunks, and other packages, may be examined for the
discovery of papers.

These are, therefore, to authorize and empower you, the Marshal aforesaid, to
cause the money and watches to be landed, for the greater security of the same;
as also to cause the captain's trunks to be opened and examined, and to take a
particular account of sundry articles, as shall be landed, and a return thereof
to make to me as soon as may be, and for so doing, this shall be your warrant.

Given under my hand and seal, this 21st day of August, 1795.
Bermuda Court of Vice-Admiralty.
Pursuant to the within warrant to me directed, I have been on board the ship
Two Friends, and after having examined the trunks, etc. have landed the
following articles, viz.

1 bag containing 108 French crowns. 1 do. 192 dollars. 1 crown. 30 1-4
dollars. 1 1-16 do. 3 joes. I do 1 bag 199 d 7-8 crowns. I do. 282 crowns. 1
box with silver watches and 19 gold do.

Certified this 3d Sept. 1795. JOHN FISHER, Mar. C. V. A.

Mr. Harvey then offered to the court a letter of procuration from Capt. Samuel
Williams which was admitted and filed, and is as follows, (to wit:)

SAMUEL WILLIAMS, master of the ship, TWO FRIENDS, ads. JOSIAH BASDEN, of the
private armed sloop Favorite.
Bermuda court of Vice-Admiralty.
BE it known, to all persons whomsoever, that I, Samuel Williams master and
claimant of the ship Two Friends, do hereby nominate, constitute, and appoint
Benjamin Dickinson Harvey of the islands of Bermuda, my proctor in the above
suit. -- And I do hereby invest him, the said Benjamin Dickinson Harvey with
full power and authority to do and act all and singular the matters and things
in the said suit as fully and amply on my part as I myself might or could do in
any cause whatever agreeably to the style and practice of the court of
Vice-Admiralty -- Given under my hand and seal this third day of Sept. in the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety five.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS. (L. S.)
Sealed and delivered in the presence of us George Connell, Henry Bates.


Mr. Harvey then moved the court for leave to prefer a claim in behalf of
captain Samuel Williams and the owners, officers and crew of the ship Two
Friends and her lading, etc. and acquainted the court that captain Williams was
ready to enter into stipulation for that purpose.

Then appeared in court capt. Samuel Williams, with Benjamin Dickinson Harvey,
Esquire his surety, who submitting themselves to the jurisdiction of this court,
acknowledged themselves jointly and severally held and firmly bound to our
sovereign lord the king, his heirs and successors, that they will answer and
pay double costs as this court shall tax, and answer the prosecution of this
suit.

The claim was then admitted and sworn to, and is as follows, (to wit)

Bermuda Court of Vice-Admiralty.
In the matter of the ship Two Friends, Samuel Williams master, her boats,
tackle, apparel, furniture, and her cargo laden on board at the time of the
capture, by the private armed sloop of war, called the Favorite, Josiah Ba^den
commander, and now under prosecution in the said court -- Samuel Williams
master of the said ship Two Friends, by Benjamin Dickinson Harvey, his lawful
Proctor, comes here into this honorable court, and claims the said ship Two
Friends, her boats, tackle, apparel and furniture as (...) her cargo laden on
board at the time of the capture, for and in behalf of John Swanwick, merchant,
and certain persons who were underwriters on the said ship Two Friends, and he^
cargo and this claimant, all of Philadelphia and citizens of the United States
of America, and the owners, officers, and crew of the said ship the lawful and
true owners thereof, according to their respective rights, shares, interests,
and proportions therein; and prays that the same may be restored to him with
damages and costs for the wrongful capture, detention, and prosecution thereof.

BEN. DICKINSON HARVEY, Proctor for the Claimant.

Samuel Williams, the master and claimant abovenamed being duly sworn on the
Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, deposes and says, that the said ship Two
Friends, her boats, tackle, apparel, and furniture, as also her cargo
(exclusive of the passengers baggage, the private adventures of the claimant
and the rest of the officers and crew of the said ship, and a certain
proportion of the said cargo belonging to the said underwriters in
Philadelphia, arising from the sales of such part of the outward cargo of the
said ship ^s was damaged) were at the time of the capture and will be if
restored, the true and lawful property of the said John Swanwick, for whose
account and risque the said cargo was shipped by John K. Helmuth, an American
citizen, who went to France as supercargo of the said ship and there tarried;
and that the owners of the said ship and cargo are citizens of the United
States of America, in peace and amity with the king of Great Britain and his
allies: The said claimant further says, that upon his being captured he was
dispossessed of his papers (except those which he delivered up when he was
examined upon the usual interrogatories) since which neither he nor his proctor
or counsel have been able to procure copies, or to peruse them, it being a
privilege, as the claimant is informed, not allowed by this honorable court to
any master of a captured vessel or other claimant whatever, before a claim is
filed, unless the adverse party consents thereto.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
Sworn to this 3d day of Sept. 1795, before me JOHN GREEN.

At his Majesty's Court of Vice Admiralty aforesaid, held on Tuesday the 8th
day of Sept. 1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court,

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

On motion and consent of the parties in the case of the ship Two Friends, that
publication may pass in the said cause -- Ordered accordingly.

The answer of the master and others taken on the standing interrogatories, are
as follows, viz.

The answer of the master taken on the standing interrogotories who being duly
sworn, deposes and says --
To the first interrogatory, That he was born in Philadelphia, and has resided
there for the last seven years past; he is a citizen of the United States of
America, and is a freeman of the city of Philadelphia.

To 2d interrogatory, The respondant was present and on board of the vessel,
concerning which he is now examined, at the time she was seized and taken she
had not any commission.

To 3d interrogatory, The said vessel was taken in the latitudes of 38, 40,
north, and longitude 72, 30, west, on the second day of this instant August, he
knows not upon what pretense or for what reasons the said vessel was taken,
unless on a suspicion that the vessel had French property on board. The vessel
was brought to this port of Bermuda, she failed under American colors, no
other colors were on board, no resistance was made -- the vessel was taken by
the sloop Favorite, Josiah Basden, commander, she was an armed vessel but he
knows not whether she had any commission, no other vessel was in sight at the
time of the capture.

To 4th interrogatory, This respondant was the master of the said vessel taken,
he was appointed to the command of the said vessel, by John Swan wick, who
lives in Philadelphia; he took possession of the said ship at Philadelphia --
this respondant's place of abode is in Philadelphia, where his wife and family
reside.

To 5th interrogatory, The said ship is three hundred and seventy tons and an
half; there were seventeen mariners including the respondant belonging to the
said ship at the time she was taken, the greater part of them are Americans,
and the others are of different countries, but he knows not of what countries
in particular, some of them were shipped in America, and others were shipped
and came on board in France.

To 6th interrogatory, The respondant was not interested in the vessel nor any
of his officers, but he had on board as his private adventure, a piece of black
mode, twenty six pounds and an half (French weight) of sewing silk, twenty five
silk shawls, one dozen silk handkerchiefs, fourteen dozen and an half of men's
and women's kid skin gloves, between three and four hundred dollars in specie,
three silk umbrellas, one fowling piece, one hanger, and one new mahogany desk;
he knows not in particular what the mate has, an apprentice of this
respondant's has as his adventure two dozen of silk umbrellas; the respondant
was the master of the said ship taken, he first saw the said vessel at
P^iladelphia, where she was built in the month of May, one thousand seven
hundred and ninety four.

To 7th interrogatory, The name of the said ship taken is the Two Friends, and
has been called by that name ever since she was built -- the said ship had a
(sea brief) or sea letter on board which was obtained at Philadelphia. The
voyage the said vessel sailed before she was taken, was from Philadelphia to
Nantz in France, and carried from Philadelphia a cargo of tobacco, rice and
staves, the tobacco and rice were delivered at Nantz, the staves are now on
board the ship; the last clearing from which the said vessel sailed previous to
her capture, was Nantz, and sailed from thence on the 21st day of June last.

To 8th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel sailed from her last
clearing port as aforesaid, she had on board wine, dry goods, currants,
raisins, prunes, he cannot ascertain the particular quantity of either of the
said articles, as his books and bills of lading are all delivered out of his
possession; there was also on board nine hundred dollars in specie, nineteen
gold watches, and twenty silver ditto, which goods and articles were on board
at the time the vessel was taken, and were laden on board in the latter end of
May and beginning of June last.

To 9th interrogatory, At the time that the said ship was seized and taken, she
was owned by John Swanwick, and the respondant was shipped by him as being the
owner of her; he believes the said Mr. Swanwick was born in England, but
resides in Philadelphia, and is a citizen of the United States of America, and
is a member of the American Congress.

To 10th interrogatory, There was a bill of sale made from James Doughty, the
builder of the said ship, to the aforesaid Mr. Swanwick and Alexander Forster,
the said Mr. Forster afterward sold his part of the said ship to the said Mr.
Swanwick.

To 11th interrogatory, The cargo was all brought on board of the said ship, in
lighters from Nantz while lying in the river.

To 12th interrogatory, The lading on board of the said ship at the time she
was seized and taken, was shipped by John K. Helmuth, he is an American, but
was then at Nantz, and went out supercargo of the said ship from Philadelphia,
the lading was to have been delivered at Philadelphia, for and on the account,
risk, and benefit of the aforesaid Mr. John Swanwick, and the underwriters of
the ships outward cargo from America, some part of which being damaged in the
voyage to France was there sold for the account of the underwriters, and the
proceeds remitted on their account, the whole of which was consigned to the
said Mr. Swanwick. The respondant does take upon himself to swear that he
believes that at the time of the lading the cargo and at this present time,
and also if the said goods shall be restored and unladen at the destined port,
the goods, did, do and will belong to the persons now asserted to be the owners
and to none others.

To 13th interrogatory, The respondant signed three or four bills of lading, he
is not certain which, for the goods shipped on Mr. Swanwick's account, and
believes the same were signed for the goods on the account of the underwriters
of the outward cargo brought out in the said ship; neither of which were false
or colorable, nor were there any differing in any respect from, those found on
board at the time the vessel was taken, he does not recollect whether he signed
any bill of lading for the nine hundred dollars in specie on board, but they
were delivered to him by the aforesaid John K. Helmuth to be delivered to Mr.
Swanwick at Philadelphia, as his the said Mr. Swanwick's property.

To 14th interrogatory, There are not in Great Britain any bills of lading,
invoices or instruments, relating to the said ship or goods, to his knowledge.

To 15th interrogatory, There was not any charter party signed for the voyage.

To 16th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel sailed from her last
clearing port, she had on board a register and other usual ships papers, and
letters he supposes containing invoices of the cargo, and many other letters
and news papers, no papers were burnt, torn, thrown overboard, destroyed or
cancelled, concealed or attempted to be concealed.

To 17th interrogatory, The said ship has never been seized as prize before her
present capture.

To 18th interrogatory, The respondant has not as yet sustained any loss
himself, but the ship has sustained damage by the capture and detention, but he
cannot now ascertain what he has or may suffer by the capture and detention of
the said ship and her lading, he has not received or been promised any
indemnity or satisfaction for any damage he has or may sustain by the said
capture and detention.

To 19th interrogatory, He believes the vessel was insured out and home, and
further knows not.

To 20th interrogatory, In case the vessel had arrived at her destined port,
and the cargo there unladen, it would have become the property of the aforesaid
Mr. Swanwick, and the underwriters as beforementioned.

To 21st interrogatory, Some part of the wine on board of the said ship is of
the growth and produce of France, the other wine and the other goods he knows
not of what country they are the growth or produce of.

To 22d interrogatory, The lading was all brought on board of the vessel in
lighters from Nantz at different times.

To 23d interrogatory, Bills (...) ^ding for the goods shipped on board of the
said vessel were to have been forwarded from France to Philadelphia.

To 24th interrogatory, The respondant at the time the vessel was taken
delivered his vessels' register, and some other papers to captain Basden, by
whom he was taken, who delivered them to the prize master -- and this day the
respondant delivered into the registry of the court of vice-admiralty sundry
accounts and other papers; also a letter directed to Edmund Randolph, Esquire,
secretary of the United States of America.

To 25th interrogatory, Bulk was not broken during the voyage, before the
capture or since to his knowledge.

To 26th interrogatory, There were fourteen passengers on board of the said
ship, none of whom were secreted at the time of the capture, there were three
men, eight women and three children; they are French, but of what rank,
profession or occupation, he knows not -- he knows not whether either of
them had any commission, they came on board from Nantz whilst the ship lay in
the river there -- they were destined for Philadelphia he believes, to settle
in America, neither of the said passengers had any property on board, except
their apparel and baggage, nor any concern or authority, directly or
indirectly, in the ship or her cargo; there were not any officers, soldiers or
mariners on board, except the ships crew, nor any of his Britannic majesty's
subjects, to his knowledge.

To 27th interrogatory, The ships papers, bills of lading, and other papers,
were true and fair, to the best of his knowledge, as he knew of none being
false or colorable, or of any matter to affect their credit; -- the sea brief
(or sea letter) was obtained from the custom house at Philadelphia by this
respondant, and was obtained for this vessel only, and oath was made to the
same by this respondant, as is therein described, and was not delivered in fact
without his having made such oath, he does not recollect what see was paid for
the same.

To 28th interrogatory, Answered in the answers to the 14th and 23d
interrogatories.

To 29th interrogatory, At the time the said ship was pursued and taken, she
was steering a course for Philadelphia -- the course was not altered upon the
appearance of the vessel, by which they were taken; the course was at all times
as the wind and weather permitted, directed for Philadelphia, for which place
the vessel was destined.

To 30th interrogatory, There was a transfer made from Mr. Forster, who
formerly owned one half of the said ship to Mr. Swanwick, for his part of her,
but for what sum or consideration he knows not; which transfer was truly and
fairly made, and not for the purpose of covering or concealing the real
property, and that if the said ship shall he restored she will belong to the
said Mr. Swanwick, and to no other person.

To 31st interrogatory, No guns were mounted on board of the said vessel or any
arms or ammunition belonging to her, or any on board, except a fowling piece,
and an hanger, which belongs to this respondant, nor were there any military or
naval stores on board.

To 32d interrogatory, What this respondant has declared is all that he knows
or believes according to the best of his knowledge and belief, regarding the
real and true property and destination of the said vessel and cargo, concerning
which he has now been examined to the time of the capture.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
Taken and acknowledged this 21st day of August 1795. JOHN GREEN.

PORT of PHILADELPHIA. (L. S.)

These are to certify to all whom it does concern, that Samuel Williams, master
or commander of the ship called the Two Friends, burden 370 66-95 tons; A,
ENGLE, D. Collector,
mounted with guns, navigated with men, United States built, and bound for
Nantz, has here laden and taken on board a cargo, as per manifest annexed,
and has here entered and cleared his said vessel according to law; and these
are further to certify, that it appears by the original register now produced
to us, W. TILTON, D. Officer,
that the abovementioned ship was registered at Philadelphia, the seventeenth
day of November, 1794.

Given under our hands and seals of office, at the custom house, this twenty
second day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety four.
On this twenty second day of November in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and ninety four, before me Robert Henry Dunkin, Esquire notary
public, for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly commissioned and authorized
by law, to administer oaths and affirmations, dwelling in the city of
Philadelphia, personally came John Swanwick, of said merchant who being duly
sworn according to law, on his solemn oath, deposes and says, that the goods
mentioned in the annexed manifest here shipped in the ship Two Friends, whereof
Samuel Williams is master, now bound from this port to Philadelphia, for the
port of Nantz, are the sole property of this deponent, together with John K.
Helmuth, Samuel Williams and William Knight, all of whom are citizens of the
United States of America, and that the tobacco and rice are of the growth and
produce of the United States, and that no citizen or subject of the present
belligerent powers, or any of them, has any share, part, or interest therein,
directly nor indirectly, and that the said goods are bona fide bound directly
for the said port of Nantz.

J. SWANWICK. (L. S.) Sworn as above before me. Quod manu ac sagillo notariali
attestor.

Report and manifest of the cargo of the ship Two Friends, Samuel Williams,
master, bound for Nantz.
Marks No. Packages and contents by whom shipped on whose account S A 1 a 83
One hundred and eighty eight hogsheads Tobacco. John Swanwick a citizen of the
U. S. of America. John Swanwick a citizen of the U. S. of America. S B 1 a 232
Two hundred and thirty two hogsheads of ditto. S C 1 a 28 Twenty eight do. of
do. S 1 a 98 Ninety seven tierces and one half tierce of rice. S A 189a199
Eleven hhds. of tobacco. John K. Helmuth a citizen of the U. States of America.
John K. Helmuth a citizen of the U. States of America. S B 233a241 Nine do. of
do. John K. Helmuch a citizen of the U. States of America. John K. Helmuth a
citizen of the U. States of America. Do. 242a249 Eight do. of do. S. Williams.
S. Williams. S 99a 100 Two tierces of rice. Wm. Knight a citizen of the U.
States of America. Wm. Knight a citizen of the U. States of America.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS.
Philadelphia, 22d Nov. 1794. Sworn before me, ARCH. ENGLE, D. Collector.

S. 1 a 88 Hhds. S. B. 1 a 232 do. S. C. 1 a 28 do. Tobacco. S. 1 a 98 Rice.
SHIPPED in good order and well conditioned, by John Swanwick, in and upon the
good ship called the Two Friends, whereof is master for this present voyage
Samuel Williams, and now riding at anchor in the river Delaware, and bound for
Nantz, to say, four hundred and forty eight hogsheads of tobacco, and ninety
seven whole and one half tierce of rice, on account and risque of the shipper,
a citizen of the United States of America, being marked and numbered as in the
margin, and are to be delivered in the like good order, and well conditioned,
at the aforesaid port of Nantz, (the danger of the seas only excepted) unto
John K. Helmuth, or to his assigns, he or they paying freight for the said
goods, as owners property -- In witness whereof the master or purser of the
said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of this tenor and date;
the one of which bills being accomplished, the others to stand void -- Dated in
Philadelphia, 24th November, 1794.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS.

PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 24th, 1794. SIR,
THE ship Two Friends whereof you are master, being now laden and ready for
sea, you will proceed with her with all possible dispatch, for the port of
Nantz or Bourdeaux, in France, which ever you can most conveniently attain, and
on your arrival there deliver your cargo agreeably to bills of lading, to Mr.
J. K. Helmuth, supercargo on board, unless by any difficulty unforeseen at
present, it should be impossible to sell and take in a back cargo there, in
which case you must even go on to such other port as Mr. Helmuth may direct,
and as may be most for my interest; so soon as your outward cargo is unloaded
you will with all possible dispatch take on my account, a return cargo of salt,
brandy, wine, oil, soap, prunes, and any other articles Mr. Helmuth may
furnish, and proceed back here with such freight, goods or passengers as may
offer, and you can take without endangering my property on board -- in all
things write me constantly of your proceedings, take good care of your vessel
and stores, and make every dispatch in your power, the success of the voyage
depends greatly on this.

Should any accident happen to Mr. Helmuth you must open my letters for him,
and act as he would have done; but this I hope will not occur, and in that case
you must consult with him, and in all things act together for the best of my
interest, and in case of accident take care to leave your papers regularly made
out to recover from the underwriters.

I am truly your obedient servant, J. SWANWICK. Capt. Samuel Williams.

The answer of John Harper taken on the standing interrogatories, who being
duly sworn deposes and says --
To the 1st interrogatory, That he was born in Philadelphia, which is and has
been his place of abode for the last seven years past and upwards, he is a
subject or citizen of the United States of America, he is not a burgher or
freeman of any city or town.

To 2d interrogatory, The respondant was present and on board of the vessel,
concerning which he is now examined, at the time she was seized or taken, she
had not any commission.

To 3d interrogatory, The said vessel was taken in the latitude of 38, 00,
north, and longitude of 62, 30, west, the said vessel was taken to the best of
his recollection, on the first day of this instant August, he knows not upon
what pretense or for what reasons the said ship was seized and taken, the
vessel was brought to this port of Bermuda, she sailed under American colors,
no other colors were on board, no resistance was made, the said ship was taken
by the sloop Favorite, Josiah Basden, commander, she was an armed vessel, but
he knows not whether he had any commission, no other vessel was in sight at
the time of the capture.

To 4th interrogatory, The name of the master of the said ship is Samuel
Williams, the respondant has known the said master for ten or twelve years
past, and this respondant believes that he was appointed to the command of the
said ship by Mr. John Swanwick, who lives at Philadelphia, and he took
possession of her there, the master was born in Philadelphia, his place of
abode is there also, where his wife and family reside, and is a citizen of the
United States of America.

To 5th interrogatory, The said ship taken is three hundred and odd tons
burden, (he does not know exactly); there were seventeen mariners belonging to
the said ship at the time she was seized and taken, several of them were
Americans, and the others of different countries, but knows not of what
particular countries, three were shipped in France, the others were all shipped
and came on board in Philadelphia.

To 6th interrogatory, The respondant was not interested in the ship nor the
master, or any of the mariners; the master has a private adventure on board in
specie, and some goods, but knows not the particulars, or the particular
amount of either; the respondant has on board as his own property, a looking
glass, and a few articles in his chest for his family, such as a piece or two
of lace, and a few pair of silk stockings. This respondant did belong to the
said ship at the time she was taken, in the capacity of chief mate; he first
saw the said ship at Philadelphia, in the month of June or July, 1794; she was
built in Philadelphia.

To 7th interrogatory, The name of the said ship taken is the Two Friends, and
has been called by that name ever since she was built, he knows not whether
she had a sea brief (or sea letter) on board; the voyage the said vessel sailed
before she was taken was from Philadelphia to Nantz, and carried from
Philadelphia a cargo of tobacco and rice, which was delivered at Nantz -- the
last clearing the said ship sailed from, previous to her capture was Nantz, and
sailed from thence sometime in the month of June, he cannot recollect the
particular day of the month, as the log book was taken possession of by the
captors.

To 8th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel sailed from her last
clearing port as aforesaid, she had on board a cargo, consisting of wine,
raisins, currants, prunes, he cannot now ascertain the particular quantity of
either sort, and some trunks, the contents of which he knows not; which goods
were all on boa^ at the time the vessel was taken, and were laden on board in
the month of May and June last.

To 9th interrogatory, At the time the said ship was taken, she was owned by
John Swanwick, and was owner of her when he the respondant was shipped on board
by the master, he knows not of what country Mr. Swanwick is by birth, he
resides in Philadelphia, and is a citizen of the United States of America, and
was a member of the American Congress when this respondant sailed from
Philadelphia in the aforesaid ship.

To 10th Interrogatory, He knows not.

To 11th Interrogatory, The lading was all brought on board in Lighters from
Nantz at different times.

To 12th interrogatory, The lading on board of the said ship at the time she
was seized and taken, was shipped by Mr. John K. Helmuth as he informed this
respondant himself, (he came out from Philadelphia, in the said ship as
Supercargo) his place of residence is in Philadelphia, but he was then at Nantz
-- The lading was to have been delivered at Philadelphia, and he always
understood and was informed that the goods were for and on the account risk and
benefit of Mr. Swanwick, the owner of the ship and no other person to his
knowledge.

To 13th interrogatory, He knows not how many bills of lading were signed for
the goods seized on board of the said ship.

To 14th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 15th interrogatory, There was not any Charter party signed for the voyage
to his knowledge.

To 16th interrogatory, The respondant knows not what particular papers were
on board of the said ship at the time she took her departure from her last
clearing port before her being taken as prize as they were in the master's
possession -- No papers were burnt, torn, thrown overboard, destroyed or
cancelled, concealed or attempted to be concealed to his knowledge.

To 17th interrogatory, The said ship has never been seized as prize before her
present capture.

To 18th interrogatory, The respondant has not as yet sustained any loss by the
capture.

To 19th interrogatory, He has heard that the ship and the outward cargo from
America were insured, but further knows not.

To 20th interrogatory, In case the vessel had arrived at her destined port and
the cargo there unladen, he verily believes it would have become the property
of the aforesaid Mr. Swanwick the owner of the ship.

To 21st interrogatory, Some part of the cargo of wine, which the respondant
has seen, is French wine, the other he does not in particular know, the whole
of the goods were taken on board in France, he knows not of what country they
are the growth or produce of.

To 22d interrogatory, The lading was all brought on board in lighters, from
the shore at Nantz, at different times.

To 23d interrogatory, None to his knowledge.

To 24th interrogatory, He knows not what papers were delivered out of the
said ship at any time.

To 25th interrogatory, Bulk was not broken during the voyage before the
capture, or since to his knowledge.

To 26th interrogatory, There were fourteen passengers on board, men, women and
children, none of whom were secreted at the time of the capture -- They are all
French people, he does not in particular know their names, nor does he know
their rank, profession or occupation, they came on board at Paimboeuf, about
thirty miles distance from Nantz, they were going to Philadelphia, and were, he
believes, to settle in America -- They had not any property on board except
their baggage, nor any authority or concern directly nor indirectly in the ship
or her cargo -- There were not any officers, soldiers, or mariners, or any of
his Britannic majesty's subjects secreted on board at the time of the capture.

To 27th interrogatory, He knows nothing of the ships or other papers found
on board as they were in the possession of the master, but never heard or knew
of any false or colorable papers being on board, and further to this
interrogatory knows not.

To 28th interrogatory, Answered in the answers to the 14th and 23d
interrogatories.

To 29th interrogatory, At the time that the said ship was pursued and taken,
she was steering a course for Philadelphia -- The course was not altered upon
the appearance of the vessel by which she was taken, but the course was always
as the wind and weather permitted, directed for Philadelphia, for which place
the vessel was destined.

To 30th interrogatory, He knows of no sale or transfer of the said vessel
made at any time, and that if the said vessel shall be restored he verily
believes that she will belong to the aforesaid Mr. Swanwick, and to no other
person.

To 31st interrogatory, No guns were mounted on board of the said vessel, or
any arms or ammunition belonging to her or any on board, except two fowling
pieces, one of which belongs to the captain and the other to this respondant.

To 32nd interrogatory, What this respondant has declared is all that he
knows or believes, according to the best of his knowledge and belief
regarding the zeal and true property and destination of the said vessel and
cargo, concerning which he has now been examined to the time of the capture.

JOHN HARPER.
Taken and acknowledged this 22nd day of Aug. 1795. JOHN GREEN.

The answer of Andrew Fogelstrom, taken on the standing interrogatories, who
being duly sworn, deposes and says --
To the first interrogatory, That he was born at Stockholm, in Swedeland, he
has for the greater part of the last seven years past, sailed out of London,
the latter part he has sailed out of America, he follows the sea and has no
particular place of abode, he is a subject to the king of Sweden, he is not a
burgher or freeman, of any city or town.

To 2d interrogatory, This respondant was present and on board of the vessel,
concerning which he is now examined, at the time she was seized and taken, she
had not any commission.

To 3d interrogatory, The respondant kept no reckoning, he knows not what
latitude the said vessel was taken in, nor does he recollect on what day of the
month the said vessel was taken, nor on what pretense, she was brought to this
Port of Bermuda, she sailed under American colors, no other colors were on
board, no resistance was made; the said vessel was taken by the sloop called
the Favorite, Josiah Basden, Commander, she was an armed vessel, but he
knows not whether she had any commission, no other vessel was in sight at the
time of the capture.

To 4th interrogatory, The name of the Master of the said vessel taken, is
Samuel Williams, he has only known the said master from the month of December,
the master took possession of the said ship at Philadelphia, he believes that
the master was appointed to the command of the said vessel by Mr. Swanwick, who
he has heard is the owner of the said ship, the master is married and his wife
and family reside there, and he supposes that is his place of abode also, he
knows not to whom he is a subject.

To 5th interrogatory, He knows not of what tonnage or burden the said ship
is of, there were seventeen mariners on board of the said vessel, including the
master and mate, at the time she was taken, he knows not of what country they
are of, three of them were shipped in France, and the others were shipped in
America.

To 6th interrogatory, The respondant was not interested in the vessel or her
lading nor any of the officers or mariners to his knowledge; the respondant was
in the capacity of a seaman, on board of the said vessel, at the time she was
seized and taken, he has known the said vessel for about nine months and an
half, he first saw her in Philadelphia, where she was built.

To 7th interrogatory, The name of the said vessel taken is the Two Friends,
and has been called by that name ever since she was built; he knows not
whether she had any sea brief on board, the voyage the said vessel sailed
before she was taken was from Philadelphia to Nantz, the voyage began at
Philadelphia, and was to have ended there, she carried from Philadelphia to
Nantz a cargo consisting of tobacco and rice, which cargo was delivered at
Nantz; the last clearing the said vessel sailed from, previous to her capture,
was Nantz.

To 8th interrogatory, The lading on board of the said vessel at the time she
was seized and taken, consisted of wine, raisins and ballast, and was all laden
on board in the month of June last.

To 9th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel was seized and taken, she
was owned by John Swanwick, he has always heard that he was the owner of her,
he knows not of what nation or country he is by birth, he resides in
Philadelphia with his wife and family, he knows not to whom he is a subject.

To 10th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 11th interrogatory, The cargo was all taken on board at Paimboeuf in Nantz,
at different times.

To 12th interrogatory, He knows not who shipped the goods on board of the
said vessel; the goods were to have been delivered in Philadelphia, and he
supposes for and on the account, risk and benefit of John Swanwick; he can take
upon himself to swear, that he believes that at the time of the lading the
cargo, and at this present time, and also if the said goods shall be restored
and unladen at the destined port the goods did, do, and will belong to the same
person, and to none others.

To 13th, 14th and 15th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 16th interrogatory, He knows not what papers were on board the said
vessel, at the time she was seized and taken; there were no papers, burnt,
torn, thrown overboard, destroyed, cancelled, concealed or attempted to be
concealed.

To 17th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 18th interrogatory, He has not sustained any loss by the seizing and taking
the said vessel.

To 19th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 20th interrogatory, In case the vessel had arrived at her destined port,
and the cargo there unladen, it would have immediately become the property of
Mr. Swanwick, and further knows not.

To 21st interrogatory, The lading on board of the said vessel is of the
growth, produce and manufacture of France.

To 22d interrogatory, The cargo was all taken from the shore at Paimboeuf, at
different times.

To 23d interrogatory, He knows not.

To 24th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel was seized and taken, the
captain delivered his papers up to the captain of the privateer.

To 25th interrogatory, Bulk was not broken during the voyage, before the
capture, he knows not whether it has been broke since.

To 26th interrogatory, There were some passengers on board of the said vessel
at the time she was seized and taken, but he knows not how many; he knows
not of what rank or profession they are of, they all came on board at Paimboeuf
in Nantz, they were destined for Philadelphia, upon what business he knows
not; he knows not whether they had any interest, concern or authority,
directly or indirectly, in the said vessel or her cargo, there were no
officers, soldiers or mariners, or any of his Britannic majesty's subjects
secreted on board at the time of the capture.

To 27th and 28th interrogatories, He knows not.

To 29th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel was pursued and taken, she
was steering a course for Philadelphia; the course was not altered upon the
appearance of the vessel by which they were taken, but was at all times when
the wind and weather would permit, directed for Philadelphia, for which place
they were really destined.

To 30th interrogatory, He knows not of any sale or transfer being made of
the said vessel at any time, but does verily believe that if the said vessel
shall be restored, she will belong to the persons now asserted to be the
owners, and to no others.

To 31st interrogatory, There were no guns mounted on board of the said vessel,
or any arms or ammunition belonging to her, or any military or naval stores.

To 32d interrogatory, What this respondant has declared is all which he
knows or believes, according to the best of his knowledge and belief,
regarding the real and true property and destination of the said vessel and
cargo, concerning which he has now been examined, at the time of the capture.

ANDREW FOGELSTROM.
Taken and acknowledged this 7th Sept. 1795. JOHN GREEN.

The answer of Claude Thouin, taken on the standing interrogatories, who being
duly sworn, deposes and says --
To the first interrogatory, The respondant was born in St. Domingue, he has
lived for the last seven years past, sometime in Hispaniola, sometime in
France, and a short time in North America, he is a subject to the French
Republic, he is a freeman of the town of Saint Domingue.

To 2nd interrogatory, The respondant was present and on board of the vessel at
the time she was seized and taken, he knows not whether she had any
commission.

To 3d interrogatory, He knows not in what latitude the said vessel was
taken, but believes she was taken on the first day of August last, ke knows
not upon what pretense or for what reasons the said vessel was taken -- The
said vessel was brought to this Port of Bermuda, she sailed under American
colors, he knows not whether she had any others on board, no resistance was
made -- The said vessel was taken by the sloop Favorite, Josiah Basden,
commander, he knows not whether she had any commission, no other vessel was
in sight at the time of the capture.

To 4th interrogatory, The name of the Master of the said vessel taken, is
Samuel Williams, he has known the said master for about three months and
further knows not.

To 5th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 6th interrogatory, The respondant was not interested in the said vessel or
her lading, he knows not whether the master or mariners have any part, share
or interest therein -- The respondant was passenger on board of the said vessel
at the time she was taken, he has known her for about three months -- he first
saw the said vessel in Nantz, he knows not where she was built.

To 7th interrogatory, The name of the said vessel taken is the Two Friends, he
knows not how long she has been called by that name, or whether she has ever
been called by any other, he knows not whether she had any sea brief on board
-- The voyage the said vessel sailed before she was taken was, from
Philadelphia, to Nantz, but what cargo she carried there he knows not.

To 8th Interrogatory, He knows not.

To 9th interrogatory, He believes that at the time the said vessel was seized
and taken she was owned by Mr. John Swanwick, he knows not where he was born,
he resides in Philadelphia, and he supposes he is a subject to the United
States of America.

To 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15th interrogatories, He knows not.

To 16th Interrogatory, He knows not what papers were on board of the said
vessel they being in the Master's possession -- no papers were burnt, torn,
thrown overboard, destroyed or cancelled, concealed or attempted to be
concealed, to his knowledge.

To 17th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 18th interrogatory, He has not sustained any loss by the seizing and taking
the vessel concerning which he is now examined to the time of the capture.

To 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24th interrogatories, He knows not.

To 25th interrogatory, Bulk was not broken during the voyage either before or
since the capture.

To 26th interrogatory, There were fourteen passengers on board of the said
vessel at the time she was seized and taken, twelve of whom were formerly
planters, the other two are women, he knows not in particular of what
profession they are of -- They all came on board at Nantz, and were destined
for Philadelphia, they were going to reside there, neither of whom had any
interest, concern or authority, directly or indirectly in the said vessel and
cargo. There were no officers, soldiers or mariners, or any of His Britannic
Majesty's subjects secreted on board at the time of the capture.

To 27th and 28th interrogatories, He knows not.

To 29th interrogatory, At the time the said vessel was seized and taken she
was steering a course for Philadelphia, he knows not whether the course was
altered upon the appearance of the vessel by which they were taken, but was at
all times when the wind and weather would permit, directed for Philadelphia,
for which place the vessel was really destined.

To 30th interrogatory, He knows not.

To 3lst interrogatory, There were no guns mounted on board of the said vessel,
or any arms or ammunition belonging to her, nor any military or naval stores or
board.

To 32nd interrogatory, What this respondant has declared, is all which he
knows or believes, according to the best of his knowledge and belief,
regarding the zeal and true property and destination of the said vessel and
cargo, concerning which he has now been examined to the time of the capture.

CLAUDE THOUIN.
Taken and acknowledged, this 4th, Sept. 1795. JOHN GREEN.

The said cause, by consent of the parties, was then set down for hearing on
Friday the 11th instant.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Friday, the 11th day of September
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

In the case of the ship Two Friends --

Mr. Advoccate General opened the nature of the libel and proceeded in his
arguments -- Mr. Harvey, proctor for the claimant, then spoke in support of the
claim, and having gone through his arguments, Mr. Advocate General having
replied, the proctor then submitted to the court.

At his Majesty's court aforesaid, held on Wednesday the 16th day of November,
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register, JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

In the case of the ship Two Friends --

The following decree was then promulged, (to wit.)

Court of vice-admiralty, Bermuda.
Having perused and duly considered the libel of Josiah Basden, commander of
the private sloop of war called the Favorite, as well in name of himself as on
the part of the owners, officers and crew of, and belonging to the said sloop,
against a certain ship or vessel called the Two Friends, and her cargo, whereof
one Samuel Williams, was late master, and the claim of the said Samuel
Williams, for the same; and having attentively examined the answers of the said
Samuel Williams, and others, taken on the standing interrogatories, together
with the several papers and documents captured with and on board the said ship
Two Friends, and exhibited in this cause. And having observed all and singular
the matters and things that by law in this behalf ought to be observed,
according to the style, manner and practice of this court, it appears to me
that the cargo aforesaid is liable to forfeiture, although I am not so fully
satisfied respecting the arguments urged against the ship -- I do therefore
acquit the said ship, with her boats, tackle, apparel and furniture, together
with the private adventure and money of the said master, also the private
adventures of the mariners belonging to the said ship; and I do hereby sentence
and decree that the said ship so called the Two Friends, with her boats,
tackle, apparel and furniture, and the adventures and money aforesaid, be
restored to the said claimant, to and for the use and behoof of himself and all
others therein severally interested -- and, I do further sentence and decree,
that all the cargo and lading of the said ship Two Friends, (except as before
excepted) be, and the same are hereby adjudged and condemned as lawful prize to
and for the use of the said libellant, the owners, officers and crew of the
said sloop Favorite; and that the said cargo and lading be delivered to the
said captors, or to their agent or agents, he or they paying to the said
claimant from the whole of the said condemned cargo, a reasonable freight for
the same, on account of the owners of the said ship Two Friends -- and I do
order that the costs of suit be paid by the claimant.

JOHN GREEN, Judge.
Promulged in the court of vice admiralty, this 16th day of September, 1795.
JNO. LEWIS, Register.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on the day of 1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

Mr. Harvey, proctor for the claimant, moved the court for leave to appeal from
the sentence and decree of this court, made and given the 16th instant, in case
of the cargo and lading of the ship Two Friends, granted accordingly, provided
security be given within the time prescribed by law.

The court then ordered a warrant to be issued to the Honorable Samuel Trott,
Esquire Wm. Foot, Esquire and Mr. Richard Prudden, to appraise the cargo and lading of
the said ship Two Friends.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Thursday the 24th day of September,
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

Mr. Harvey moved the court for leave to perfect the appeal in the case of the
ship Two Friends, and acquainted the court that captain Williams was ready to
enter into stipulation for that purpose.

Then appeared in court captain Samuel Williams, with Mr. James Perot, one of
the house of James and William Perot, and for the said house, his surety, who
submitting themselves to the jurisdiction of this court, acknowledged
themselves jointly and severally held, and firmly bound to our sovereign Lord
the King, his heirs and successors, in the sum of five hundred pounds, lawful
money of Great Britain, to this effect, that the appellant will effectually
prosecute his said appeal, and also pay treble costs asshall be awarded, in
case the sentence of this court shall be affirmed.

The appeal was then admitted and filed, and is as follows, (to wit:)

Bermuda, court of Vice-admiralty.
In the matter of the ship Two Friends, Samuel Williams, master, her boats,
tackle, apparel and furniture, and her cargo, laden on board at the time of the
capture by the private armed sloop of war called the Favorite, Josiah Basden,
commander.

The said Samuel Williams, the respondant or claimant in this cause, conceiving
himself and the owners of the said ship Two Friends, and her cargo, also the
officers and crew of the said vessel, greatly aggrieved by that part of the
sentence or decree, made and given in this cause, by the Honorable John Green,
Esquire judge of the court of vice-admiralty, for the islands of Bermuda, on the
sixteenth day of September instant, which condemns all or any part of the cargo
and lading of the said ship Two Friends, and orders the claimant to pay costs,
prays leave to appeal therefrom; and he does hereby appeal from the said part
of the sentence or decree aforesaid to the commissioners appointed, or to be
appointed, under the great seal of Great Britain, for receiving, hearing and
determining appeals in prize causes, or in cases similar to the present, or to
any other court that is or may be, authorized to take cognizance of the same,
for a reversal of the aforesaid part of the said decree, and for complete
redress of all losses, injuries, damages, costs and other grievances, already
sustained, or which may hereafter be sustained thereby, and in conseqence of
the capture, detention and prosecution of the said ship Two Friends, and her
cargo, by the said Josiah Basden; and the respondant also prays that the
apostels may be delivered to him in due time, and he does hereby offer to give
all such security upon this his appeal, as is by law required to be given --
Dated the twenty fourth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and ninety five.

BENJ. DICK. HARVEY, Proctor, and of counsel for the respondant.
Filed in the court of vice-admiralty, this 24th day of September, 1795. JNO.
LEWIS, Register.

Mr. Advocate General then moved the court for leave to prefer an appeal in
behalf of the libellant, in the case of the ship Two Friends, from the sentence
and decree of this court, made and given on the 16th instant, which acquits the
said ship Two Friends, and allows a freight, and acquainted the court that Mr.
William Lightbourne, the agent for the private sloop of war the Favorite, was
ready to enter into stipulation for that purpose.

Then appeared in court Mr. William Lightbourne, agent for the private sloop of
war the Favorite, with Forster Bascome, Esquire, his surety, who submitting
themselves to the jurisdiction of the court, acknowledged themselves jointly
and severally held, and firmly bound, to our sovereign Lord the king, his heirs
and successors, in the sum of five hundred pounds lawful money of Great
Britain, to this effect, that the appellant will effectually prosecute his said
appeal, and also pay treble costs, as shall be awarded in case the sentence of
this court shall be affirmed.

The appeal was then admitted and filed, and is as follows, (to wit.)

Josiah Basden, commander of the sloop Favorite, Appellant. Against Ship Two
Friends, Samuel Williams, claimant. Respondant.
The appellant Josiah Basden, conceiving himself aggrieved by the sentence and
decree made in this cause, on the sixteenth day of September, in the year of
our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety five, which acquits the said
ship Two Friends, allowing a freight, prays leave to appeal, and he hereby does
appeal from the same sentence, as fully and amply as by law he may or can do,
to the high court of admiralty of England, or to commissioners appointed, or to
be appointed, under the great seal of Great Britain, for receiving, hearing and
determining appeals in causes of prizes, or to such other court of judicature
as may have power to take cognizance of the same; and he hereby offers to give
all such security as by law he is required, praying that the apostels may be
delivered him in time -- Dated this 24th day of September, in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety five.

J. G. PALMER, Proctor for appellant.
Filed in the court of vice-admiralty, this 24th day of September, 1795. JNO.
LEWIS, Register.

The court then ordered a warrant to be issued to the Honorable Samuel Trott,
Esquire, William Foot, Esquire, and Mr. Richard Prudden, to appraise the said
ship Two Friends, her boats, tackle, apparel and furniture, etc.

At his Majesty's court aforesaid, held on Tuesday the 29th day of September,
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire judge of said court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

Then was returned into court by the apprisers, the warrant issued for
appraising the ship Two Friends, her tackle, apparel and furniture, etc. with
their return endorsed thereon, to which they were sworn, and is as follows, (to
wit.)

BERMUDA, BY the honorable John Green, Esquire judge of his majesty's court of
vice-admiralty in these islands.
To the hon. Samuel Trott, Esquire William Foot, Esquire and Mr. Richard Prudden,
merchants.
L.S. JOHN GREEN.

These are to authorize and empower you to repair on board the ship Two
Friends, whereof Samuel Williams was master, now lying in the harbor of Saint
George, and to view and inspect the said ship, with all her masts, yards,
sails, boats, tackle, apparel and furniture, and truly to value and appraise
the same according to the best of your skills and knowledge, and a return
thereof to make to me under your hands and seals (on oath) as soon as may be --
And for so doing this shall be your warrant.

Given under my hand and seal of the court of vice-admiralty of these islands,
this 26th day of September, 1795.
Pursuant to the within warrant to us directed, We the subscribers, repaired on
board the ship Two Friends, whereof Samuel Williams was master, and having
inspected and viewed the said ship, with all her masts, yards, sails, boats,
tackle, apparel and furniture, we do according to the best of our skills and
knowledge, value and appraise the same, at the sum of twenty two hundred pounds
current money of Bermuda.

Given under our hands and seals at St. George's, the twenty ninth day of Sept.
1795. SAMUEL TROTT, (L. S.) WILLIAM FOOT, (L. S.) RICHARD PRUDDEN, (L. S.)

Sworn to this 29th day of September, 1795,

before me, JOHN GREEN.



Captain Williams, then attended with a Mr. James Perot, one of the house of
James and William Perot, as his surety, to enter into the usual stipulation for
the appraised value of the ship Two Friends, her tackle, apparel and furniture;
the libellants agent being present, objected to Messrs. Perot's, as
insufficient securities, and offered to give better and more sufficient
security at some early day.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Tuesday the 29th day of September,
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

Then was returned into court the warrant issued for appraising the cargo and
lading of the ship Two Friends, with their return endorsed thereon, to which
they were sworn, and is as follows, (to wit.)

BERMUDA. BY the honorable John Green, Esquire, Judge of his Majesty's court
of Vice Admiralty, in these Islands.
To the honorable Samuel Trott, Esquire, Mr. William Foot, and Mr. Richard
Prudden, Merchants.
John Green. L.S.

These are to authorize and empower you to repair on board of the ship called
the Two Friends, whereof Samuel Williams was master, and now lying in the
harbor of Saint George, and to view and inspect the cargo, and lading on board
of the said ship, and the same to value and appraise, according to the best of
your skills and judgment, and a return thereof to make to me, under your hands
and seals, (on oath) as soon as may be. And for so doing this shall be your
warrant.

Given under my hand, and seal of the court of Vice Admiralty of these Islands,
this 22nd day of Sept. 1795.
PURSUANT to the within warrant, to us directed, we the subscribers, repaired
on board the ship Two Friends, whereof Samuel Williams was master, and having
inspected and viewed the cargo and lading on board the said ship, do according
to the best of our skill and knowledge, value and appraise the same, agreeably
to the schedule hereunto annexed, at the sum of four thousand one hundred and
forty two pounds one shilling and ten pence, current money of Bermuda.

Given under our hands and seals, at Saint George's, the 7th October 1795.
WILLIAM FOOT, (L. S.) SAMUEL TROTT, (L. S.) RICHARD PRUDDEN, (L. S.)

WE further certify that in the above sum, we omitted a quantity of staves, as
appears by the annexed schedule, and which we appraise at the sum of thirty
pounds, twelve shillings, current money.

WILLIAM FOOT, SAMUEL TROTT, RICHARD PRUDDEN.




Schedule of the appraisment of the cargo and lading of the ship Two Friends,
whereof Samuel Williams was master, referred to in the annexed return, viz:
10 Trunks Dry Goods, amounting to L2369 1 4 1 Hogshead Woolen cloths 67 18 2
Bales of maps or charts 45 19 2 Bales paper hangings and borders 54 1 Box cont.
20 silver watches, a 45s 45 19 gold do. a 7l. 10s. 142 10 5 Casks Malaga Wine
125 3 Barrels Prunes 5 187 Barrels Raisins, a 30s. 280 10 16 Hogsheads
Currants, 10l. 160 278 Hogsheads Red Wine, called Bourdeaux, very bad, a 40s.
556

Cash, viz. -- 590 and 7-8 Fr. Crowns a 7 s4 L 216 13 1 192 Dollars 6 s8 64 30
1-4 Dollars 2 10 1 1 -- 16th do. 5 3 Joes, a 53 s4 8 291 3 6 4142 1 10

WILLIAM FOOT, SAMUEL TROTT, RICHARD PRUDDEN.
10,200 Pipe, Hogshead, and Barrel staves omitted in the above schedule. 30 12

Total, 4172 13 10

WILLIAM FOOT, SAMUEL TROTT, RICHARD PRUDDEN.

Sworn to this 7th day of October 1795,

before me JOHN GREEN.



At his Majesty's court aforesaid, held on Thursday the 8th day of 0ctober,
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

In case of the ship Two Friends.

Then appeared in court Mr. William Lightbourn, agent for the private sloop of
war the Favorite, and of the house of Joseph and William Lightbourn, and for
the said house, with Robert Basset, Esquire, his surety, who submitting
themselves to the jurisdiction of this court, acknowledged themselves jointly
and severally held and firmly bound to Samuel Williams, the appellant, and his
parties, in the sum of four thousand one hundred and seventy two pounds,
thirteen shillings and ten pence, current money of Bermuda, upon condition to
restore to the said appellant and his parties, their heirs and assigns, the
cargo and lading of the said ship Two Friends, according to an appraisement
made and returned into this court, in case the sentence and decree of this
court, shall be reversed.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Thursday the 15th day of October
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The Court being opened by the usual proclamations, in the case of the ship Two
Friends, Mr. Advocate General acquainted the court, the libellant could not
procure the security they had expected, and therefore requested that the ship
may be sold by the court -- Whereupon the court ordered that the Messrs.
Perot's, originally offered, should be admitted on the part of the claimant, to
prevent the ship's being sold for much less than her real value, which as
appeared, might be the case in the present instance, if the court should issue
an order for the sale of said ship.

At his Majesty's Court aforesaid, held on Wednesday, the 21st day of October
1795.
Before the Hon. JOHN GREEN, Esquire Judge of said Court.

Officers attending --
JOHN FISHER, Esquire Marshal. JOHN LEWIS, Register. JOHN ROBERTS, Crier.
The court being opened by the usual proclamations,

In the case of the ship Two Friends --

Then appeared Capt, Samuel Williams, with Mr. James Perot, one of the house of
James and William Perot, his surety, who submitting themselves to the
jurisdiction of this court, acknowledged themselves jointly and severally held
and firmly bound to Mr. William Lightbourn, agent for the private sloop of war
the Favorite and his parties, their heirs and assigns, in the sum of two
thousand two hundred pounds current money of Bermuda -- Upon condition to
restore to the appellant the ship Two Friends, her tackle, apparel and
appurtenances, or the full value thereof, according to an appraisement made and
returned into this court, in case the sentence and decree of this court shall
be reversed.

BERMUDA, alias SOMERS' ISLAND.
I JOHN LEWIS registrar of the court of vice-admiralty in these islands, do
hereby certify to all whom it shall or may concern, that the aforewritten copy
of the proceedings of the trial of the ship Two Friends whereof Samuel Williams
was master, consisting of eighty pages, contains a just and true copy from the
original acts and proceedings in the said cause, now remaining in the registry
of the said court. Certified this fourth day of November, in the year one
thousand seven hundred and ninety four.

J. LEWIS, Registrar.

BERMUDA, alias SOMERS' ISLAND.
By the honorable John Green, Esquire, judge of his majesty's court of
vice-admiralty in the said island.

John Green. L.S.

BE IT hereby made known, to all whom these presents shall or may concern, that
John Lewis, Esquire, whose name is subscribed to the foregoing attestation is
registrar to the above court of vice-admiralty for the said island, and that
due faith is, and ought to be given, to whatever is done by him in his
aforesaid capacity, both within court and without.

In testimony whereof I, the said judge, have hereunto set my hand and affixed
the seal of the said court, this fourth day of November, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand seven hundred and ninety five.

BERMUDA, alias SOMERS' ISLAND.
By his excellency James Craufurd, Esquire Captain General, Governor, Commander in
Chief, and Vice Admiral of these islands.

To all to whom this present writing or instrument of protest shall come,
greeting:

James Craufurd. L.S.

KNOW YE, that this third day of November, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety five, before me the governor, personally appeared Capt. Samuel Williams,
master of the ship Two Friends, who being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of
Almighty God, deposes and says, that he sailed from Nantz, in France, on the
twenty first day of June last past, (as master of the said ship) bound for
Philadelphia, in the United States of America, with a cargo consisting of wine,
fruit, dry goods, some gold and silver watches, nine hundred dollars in specie,
and sundry other articles of merchandise, (all belonging to citizens of the
said United States) and having also on board fourteen passengers. That after
such his departure, nothing of moment occurred till the second day of August,
when in latitude 38, 40, and in longitude 72,0, West from London, he was
boarded by a Bermudian privateer sloop, called the Favorite, and commanded by
Capt. Josiah Basden, who demanded the appearer's papers and afterward took out
the greatest part of the appearer's crew, putting on board a prizemaster and
crew of his own, and ordering them to proceed with the ship Two Friends for
Bermuda, where she arrived on the 15th of the same month. -- And the appearer
says that the captors proceeded the next day to search the trunks and baggage
of the passengers, but found nothing except their apparel and bedding -- That
on the seventeenth the Two Friends was libelled in the court of vice admiralty
for these islands, with her cargo, as French property, and her hatches sealed
up -- That on the twenty first, the marshal of the said court, with the captain
and agent of the said privateer, visited the said ship and carried ashore the
watches and money before mentioned, and also examined the appearer's trunks,
but took nothing out of them -- And the appearer further says, that on the
seventh and eighth of September the before named persons, with several others,
came on board the Two Friends and overhauled the trunks and casks of dry goods
and hoisted up some of the casks of wine, after which they stowed away the wine
and dry goods, and sealed up the hatches again -- And the appearer further
deposes and says, that having thought it necessary to employ a proctor, the
said proctor did on the third of September (at the request and in behalf of the
appearer) interpose a claim for the said ship and cargo, as neutral property,
belonging to certain citizens of the United States of America, as aforesaid --
That on the eleventh of the said month the cause was argued before the
honorable John Green Esquire, judge of the said court, who on the sixteenth
promulged his decree, thereby ordering restoration of the said ship Two Friends
to the claimant, together with the private adventures belonging to the appearer
and his crew, but condemning the cargo of the said ship, as lawful prize to the
captors, subject to the payment of freight, and burthening the claimant with
costs of suit -- That the appearer conceiving the said decree to be highly
oppressive and unjust (inasmuch as the whole of the property ought, in his
opinion, to have been acquitted and the captors condemned in costs and damages
for the illegal capture thereof,) thought fit to appeal therefrom to the high
court of appeals in Great Britain, whereupon the captors, with a professed
design of harrassing and embarrassing the appearer, and of deterring him, if
possible, from perfecting such appeal, entered a cross-appeal for the said ship
and freight, in consequence of which a warrant was issued, authorizing certain
persons to appraise the said ship and cargo -- That the said appraisers having
made their return to the court of their valuation of the said ship (but not of
the cargo) the appearer attended the said judge Green on the twenty ninth of
September (when Samuel Ewing was also present) for the purpose of stipulating
for the said ship at her appraised value, and offered Messrs. James and William
Perot, one of the most respectable houses in these islands, as the appearer has
been informed, for his securities; the said James Perot attending at the same
time with the ^pea^r; but the appearer says, that the competency of the said
James and William Perot, was nevertheless objected to, on the part of the
captors, and their security rejected by the court -- That the said captors, at
the same time, offered to take the said ship at her valuation, and to give good
and sufficient security for the same, and actually named the persons they
should produce as their security, whom the court agreed to accept, but that
after a delay of several days on the part of the captors, the appearer's
proctor pressed the court, either to oblige the said captors to stipulate with
security, for the value of the said ship, as they had undertaken to do, or to
dismiss their appeal, they having neglected to comply with their engagement and
insisting to have the vessel sold under the direction of the court, for the
most she would yield, but that the judge of the said court refused to grant
such motion, declaring however, that he would accept the appearer's security --
That the appearer accordingly again produced his security on the twentieth of
October, by which means he got possession of his ship, which the captors, as
the appearer charge, strove all in their power to prevent. -- And the
appearer complains and says, that when he, the appearer, attended the said
judge of the court of vice-admiralty the first time, with his security, for the
value of the said ship, his proctor and counsel, Benjamin Dickinson Harvey, Esquire
in order to keep the court within the strict rules of fair practice, and that
no undue advantage may be taken by the captors, particularly cautioned the
court, by no means to suffer any proceeding to be had relative to the cargo of
the said ship, (the appraisement of which was not finished at that time, or
returned) without his being duly notified thereof, to the end that he may have
an opportunity of making all just exceptions either as to the insufficiency of
the security, which might be proffered therefore by the captors, or otherwise,
which the said judge promised should be done, but that the said judge
nevertheless admitted the security for the said cargo (which the appearer avers
was valued very much below its real value) without the consent or privity of
the appearer or his said proctor, who would certainly have objected to such
security upon the ground of its insufficiency, as the persons of whom it
consisted, were, as the appearer has been informed, and verily believes to be
true, interested in the said privateer, and of course, not such security as the
law requires. -- That when the appearer's said proctor, heard of this
transaction, which was not till several days after it had taken place, he
remonstrated with great warmth to the said judge against the impropriety and
injustice of the measure, which the said judge never once attempted to justify
or defend, but declared that he would act differently in future -- And the
appearer further says, that when his said proctor obtained a sight of the
appraisement of the said cargo, he insisted that more particularity ought to
have been observed with respect to the dry goods, and also pointed out the
great deficiency in the cargo, and in an especial manner, that a certain
quantity of staves (part of the outward cargo) which the agent of the privateer
had actually taken out of the Two Friends, and converted to his own use, were
in no wise accounted for, whereupon the said judge promised to attend to these
several exceptions, but has failed so to do, save only that he has caused some
of the said staves to be since added to the appraisement of the said cargo --
And the appearer moreover says, that according to the best of his belief, he
can, and does aver, that at the time of the capture of the said ship Two
Friends, by the said sloop Favorite, her cargo, and particularly her wine and
fruit were in prime order, the appearer having taken care to afford all the air
in the hold that he possibly could, and that such was also the case, when the
said ship arrived in these islands, but that from the length of time the said
ship has lain in port in this warm climate, with her hatches sealed up, the
said wine and fruit have received very material injury, which has greatly
reduced the value of each. And in like manner also appeared John Harper, mate,
and William Knight, a mariner of, and belonging to the said ship Two Friends,
who solemnly made oath, that what the before named Samuel Williams has herein
before declared, is strictly true. -- Wherefore the said Samuel Williams,
complaining of the several matters and things herein set forth, protests
against the same, and more especially he protests formally, publicly and
solemnly, against the captain, officers, owners, agents and crew of the said
privateer, and also against the judge of the said court of vice-admiralty, for
all costs, delays, detentions, detriments, damages, demurrages, losses,
charges, expenses, vexations, spoliations, wastes and injuries, of what nature
or kind soever, which have already been occasioned, or shall, or may hereafter
be occasioned, or sustained by reason of the premises, the appearer hereby
expressly reserving to himself the privilige of amplifying his present protest,
or of making any other protest or protests, which he may be advised to make, or
which the nature of his case may require -- And persevering in the said
protest, the appearers aforesaid, have hereunto set their hands.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS. JOHN HARPER. WILLIAM KNIGHT.

Thus done and protested before me the governor.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the great seal of
these islands to be hereto affixed the day and year first within written.

By his excellency's command, HENRY TUCKER, Secretary.



APPENDIX.
TRANSLATION of SALE of SHIP TWO FRIENDS' CARGO AT NANTZ, READ IN THE TRIAL.
Extract from the minutes of the office of the tribunal of commerce of Nantes,
the twenty fourth of Germinal, third year of the Republic of France, one and
indivisible, at nine in the morning.
BEFORE us Francois Rozier, judge of the tribunal of commerce at Nantes, being
in the office, and having with us Jean Morin, clerk to the office, sworn
accordingly, altogether with the usher of service --

Appeared, Andre Goyau, special attorney of the citizens Widow Sheweighauser
and Dobree, in behalf of John K. Helmuth, of Philadelphia, supercargo of the
ship the Two Friends, Samuel Williams, master; who required of us that we would
go to the street Delaunay, into the store of the citizen Viguier, in order to
draw a process verbal of the vendue of three hundred and forty hogsheads of
tobacco, and three barrels of rice, proceeding from the cargo of the ship the
Two Friends, according to the ordinance of the tribunal of the twenty first
instant, which shall be recorded with the present posted up bills, which
announced the said vendue, and the publications made by Vallet, usher, recorded
by Bertrand, the twenty second, and signed. Signed in the minute, GOYAU.

Of all that we have given act, and accordingly we went in company with the
above mentioned, into the store of the citizen Viguier where being, we found
there the citizen Dobree, vice consul of the United States of America, who said
that he was desirous to be present at this said vendue, in order to preserve
the fights of whom it may concern; and Michel ordinary breteur, who promised to
discharge faithfully the duty of his commission. In this place the citizen
Goyau asked, according to his declaration of yesterday, the maritime agent to
assist, if he think proper, the present, requesting that in case of
nonappearance, it should be granted default against him, and proceeded to the
vendue, and has signed, with the Citizen Dobree, signed in the minute, GOYAU,
and P. F. DOBREE.

Of all this, we said judge have delivered act of our having waited more than
one hour for the maritime agent, who having not appeared, we have pronounced
default against him, for the benefit ordained, that it should be immediately
proceeded to the said vendue, to which it has been attended as it follows;
under the condition of taking away the merchandise at the close of the vendue,
and to pay ready money without discount, to ask any diminution and to be
contented with fifteen per cent. for the tare and trett, according to custom.

1. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, numbers 161, marked J. B. S. seventy
three without marks; hundred and nine marked A. hundred and twelve marked B.
and eighty eight without marks; which lot after having been put up several
times, was awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at one hundred and six livres a
quintal. The letters J. S. are the general mark, and the other but the
counter-marks only; thus the J. S. shall be repeated.

2. One other lot of five hogsheads, numbers 155, marked B. seventy one without
marks, eleven without marks, hundred and six marked A. and hundred and seven
without marks, awarded, to the Citizen Jourdan, at one hundred and five livres
a quintal.

3. One other lot of five hogsheads, numbers hundred and eight, marked A.
seventy seven without marks; sixty nine marked B. eighteen without marks, one
hundred and eleven without marks, awarded to the Citizen Babret, at one hundred
and five livres a quintal.

4. One other lot of five hogsheads, numbers 50 marked B. 18, 169, 50, 151,
without marks, awarded to the Citizen Galliot, at one hundred and five livres a
quintal.

5. One other lot of five hogsheads, numbers 43 marked A. 2 without marks; 116
without marks; 151 marked B. and 109 without marks, awarded to the Citizen
Saupine, at one hundred and seventy one livres a quintal.

6. One lot of five hogsheads without marks, numbers 32, 17, 72, 41, 20,
awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at ninety two livres a quintal.

7. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 103 marked A. 26, 23, 29, 30, without
marks, awarded to the Citizen Butard, at one hundred and ten livres a quintal.

8. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 74 marked B. 58, 51, 47, 60, without
marks, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at seventy livres a quintal.

Being night, we retired, and have put off the continuation of the present to
the second of Floreal, under the signatures of all who appeared, of the usher,
of the keeper of record, and of ours. The said day and year. Signed in the
minute. P. F. Dobree, Goyau, Orieux, Rozier, and Morin.

Being the day of the second Floreal, the third year of the republic of France,
one and indivisible, we said judge, have proceeded to the continuation of the
present as follows -- eight o'clock in the forenoon.

9. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, numbers 38 marked B. the second
without number nor marks, 70, 15, 8, without marks, awarded to the Citizen Le
Fevre, at seventy five livres a quintal.

10. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, numbers 66, 78, 80, 63, 76, without
marks, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at seventy livres a quintal.

11. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 57 marked B. 24, 83, 4, 12, without
marks, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at ninety livres a quintal.

12. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 3 marked B. 10, 62, without marks, and
the two remnant without neither marks nor numbers, awarded to the Citizen Le
Fevre, at one hundred and twenty livres a quintal.

13. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 31, 82, 115, and the two other without
neither marks nor numbers, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at one hundred and
ten livres a quintal.

14. Three barrels of damaged rice, awarded to the Citizen Brulard, after
several putting up, for three hundred livres.

15. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, number 100 marked B. the second
without neither marks nor numbers, the third without number, but marked S. A.
the fourth without number nor marks, and the fifth marked B. without number,
awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at sixty livres a quintal.

16. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 7 marked B. 113, marked A. 56 marked B.
54, 52 without marks -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre at ninety-five livres a
quintal.

Being night we retired, and put off the continuation of the present till the
15th instant -- what was published, under the signatures as above, the said day
and year, signed in the minute. P. F. Dobree, Orieux, Goyau, Rozier and Morin.

Being the 15th of the said month, 8 o'clock, in the forenoon, we above said
Judge, have proceeded to the continuation of the present as follows:

17. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, numbers 78, marked A. 67 marked B.
55, 14, 20, without marks -- awarded to the citizen Ferret, at one hundred
livres a quintal.

18. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 85 marked B. 1 without marks, 104
marked A. 121 without marks, and the fifth, without marks nor numbers --
awarded to the citizen Jourdeau, at one hundred and twenty-five livres a
quintal.

19. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 53, marked A. 91 marked B. 1 marked C.
33 marked B. and 3 without marks -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at
ninety-four livres a quintal.

20. One lot of five hogsheads, the first number 157 marked B. the second
without number nor marks, the third numbered 30, marked A. the fourth number
212 marked B. and the fifth numbered 29 marked A -- awarded to the citizen
Ferret, at one hundred livres a quintal.

21. One lot of five hogsheads, number 87, marked B. 100, 39, 222, 81, without
marks -- awarded to the citizen Muller, at one hundred livres a quintal.

22. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 107 marked B. 52 marked A. 223, marked
B. 49, marked A. and 55 without mark -- awarded to the citizen Jourdan, at one
hundred livres a quintal.

23. One lot of five hogsheads, number 44, marked B. 114, 168, without marks,
20 marked C. 86 marked B -- awarded to the citizen Lebrais, at one hundred
twenty-five livres a quintal.

24. One lot of five hogsheads, numbers 78, marked A. 53 marked S. 199 marked
B. 14 marked S. 145 marked A -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at one hundred
and ten livres a quintal.

Being night we retired and put off the continuation of the present, till the
twenty-second instant, what was made public, under the signatures as above, the
said day and year, signed in the minute, Goyau, P. F. Dobree, Orieux, Rozier
and Morin.

Being the twenty-second day of the said month, eight o'clock in the forenoon,
we the abovesaid Judge, have proceeded to the continuation (...) the present as
follows:

25. (...) tobacco No. (...) 170, without marks 127 (...) (...) a (...)

26. (...) ed B. 213 without marks, 66, 101, without marks, 15 marked C. --
awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at one hundred and ten livres a quintal.

27. One lot of five hogsheads No. 191 marked B. 75, 105, without marks, 178
marked A. 188 without marks -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at one hundred
and ten livres a quintal.

28. One lot of five hogsheads, No. 47, marked A. 114 without mark, 208 marked
B. 45 marked A. and the fifth without mark nor numher -- awarded to the citizen
Ferret, at one hundred and ten livres a quintal.

29. One lot of five hogsheads, No. 117 marked A. 60 marked B. 175 without
mark, 93 mark A. 101 marked B -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at
seventy-five livres a quintal.

30. One lot of five hogsheads, No. 179, marked B. 89, 226 without marks, the
fourth without mark nor number, and the fifth No. 13 without marks -- awarded
to the citizen Branger, at one hundred and nineteen livres.

31. One lot of five hogseads, No. 49, marked B. 79 without mark, 110 marked A.
84 marked B. and 42 without marks -- awarded to the citizen Ferret, at eighty
livres a quintal.

32. One lot of five hogsheads, No. 48, without mark, 46 marked A. 112 without
mark, 9 marked B. and 46 without mark -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at
sixty livres a quintal.

Being night we retired and put off the continuation of the present till the
first Prairial, what was made public, and under the abovesaid sig^^^es, (...)
said day and year, signed in the minute, Goyau, P. F. Dobree, Orieux, Rozier
and Morin.

Being the day of the first Prairial, the third year of the Republic of France,
one and indivisible, eight o'clock in the forenoon. We the abovesaid Judge,
have proceeded to the continuation of the present as follows:

33. One lot of five hogsheads of tobacco, No. 10 marked A. the second without
mark nor number, the third No. 22 marked B. the fourth No. 10 marked C, the
fifth No. 15 marked B -- awarded to the citizen Ferret, at one hundred and nine
livres a quintal.

34. One lot of live hogsheads, No. 134 marked A. 152 marked B. 118 marked A.
64 marked B. 28 marked A -- awarded to the citizen Lefevre, at one hundred and
twenty-six livres a quintal.

35. One lot of five hogsheads, Nos. 1 marked A. 90 marked B. 68 without mark,
the fourth without mark nor number, and the fifth number 61, without marks,
awarded to the Citizen Ferret, at one hundred and twenty five livres a quintal.

36. One lot of five hogsheads, Nos. 1, marked A. 161, 160, 175, 162, without
marks, awarded to the Citizen Ferret, at one hundred and twenty nine livres a
quintal.

1st lot. One lot of twenty hogsheads of damaged tobacco, without counter-marks
nor numbers, appearing entitled No. 1st, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at
one hundred and fifty livres a quintal.

2d lot. One other lot of twenty hogsheads of equally damaged tobacco, which
are equally without numbers nor marks appearing.

3d lot. One other lot of seventeen hogsheads of tobacco, without counter-marks
nor appearing numbers, entitled third lot, awarded to the Citizen Le Fevre, at
one hundred and fifty livres a quintal.

4th lot. In this place the Citizen Dobree, declared to us, that he caused a
part of this tobacco to benefit, which had been put for sale under the
denomination, fourth lot, and after several enhancing was awarded to the
Citizen Hutand, at three hundred livres a quintal.

Being night we retired, and have put off till the fourth of this month the
weighing and the delivery of the said tobacco, under the signatures as above.
Signed in the minute. Goyau, P. F. Dobree, Orieux, Rozier, and Morin.

Being the said day of the fourth of Prairial, the third year of the republic
of France, one and indivisible, eight o'clock in the forenoon, We the above
said judge have proceeded to the process verbal of delivery, requested as
follows:

Appeared the Citizen Le Fevre, who requested the delivery of the first lot, of
which he was the highest bidder, and which was made as follows:

LOT 1st. Marks. Nos. weights. Le Fevre B. 161. 1334 73. 1348 A. 109. 1422 B.
172. 1403 88. 1243 6748 Tare 15 p. cent 1012 neat 5736, at 106 p.q. 6030 3 2

The Citizen Jourdan requested the delivery of the Second Lot, which, was made
as follows: 2 LOT. B. 155. 1323 Jourdan. 71. 1293 11. 1304 A. 106. 1409 107.
1534 6803 Tare 15 p. cent 1029 5834 at 105 p. ql. 6184 11 9

The Citizen Babret requested the delivery of the Third, which was made to him
as follows: 3 LOT. A. 108. 1490 Babret. 77. 1195 B. 69. 1359 18. 1332 111. 1371
6747 Tare 15 p. ct. 1012 5735 at 105 p.qtl. 6021 1^

The Citizen Galliot appeared, and requested the delivery of the fourth Lot,
which was made as follows: 4 LOT. B. 50. 1446 Galliot, 18. 1400 109. 1344 59.
1415 151. 1523 7128 Tare 15 p. ct. 1069 6059 at 125 7573 15

The Citizen Saupin requested the 5th Lot, which was made as follows: 5 LOT. A.
43. 1522 Saupin, 2. 1315 116. 1580 B. 151. 1243 109. 1487 7147 Tare 15 p. ct.
1072 6075 a 171 10388 5

The Citizen Lefevre requested the delivery of the 6th Lot, which was made as
follows: 6 31 1095 Lefevre 17 1195 72 1309 41 1494 20 1359 6442 Tare 15 p. c.
966 5476lb. at 92 5037 18 4

The Citizen Brulard requested the delivery of the 7th Lot, which was made as
follows: 7 A 103 1536 Brulard 26 1694 23 1580 29 1580 30 1395 77851b. Tare 15
p. c. 1168 6610 at no 7278 14

The Citizen Lefevre requested the delivery of the 8th and Tenth Lots, which
was proceeded to as follows, 8 B 74 1295 Lefevre 58 1105 47 1328 60 1526 10 66
1400 78 1300 80 1272 63 1560 76 1^01 13498 Tare 15 p. ct. 2025 11473 at 70 8031
2

The same has had the 9th as follows: 9 B 38 1384 Lefevre 1553 70 1332 15 1246
8 1500 7015 Tare 15 p. ct. 1052 59631b. a 75 4472 5

The same has had the delivery of the 11th lot, as follows: 11 B 57 1441
Lefevre 24 1584 83 1315 4 1347 12 1415 7102 Tare 15 p, ct. 1065 6037 a 90 5433
10

The Twelfth has been delivered to the same as follows, 12 B 3 1415 10 1338 62
1397 1378 1384 6912 Tare 15 p. ct. 1037 58751b. a 120 p. q. 7050

The 13, 24, 26 and 27th lots have been delivered to the same, as follows, 13
31 1359 82 1234 115 1478 A 78 1125 S 53 1247 24 B 119 1218 C 14 1184 A 145 1203
B 93 1328 26 213 1100 A 66 1163 101 1334 C 15 1312 27 B 191 1146 75 1233 A 178
983 188 1150 24959 Tare 15 p. ct. 3744 21215 at (...) 23336 10

Being night, we retired, and have put off, till the 7th of this month, the
continuation of the present, under the signatures, as above. Signed to the
minute, Goyau, P. F. Dobree, Orieux, F. Rozier, and Morin.

Being the said day of the 7th Praireal, we above said judge, have proceeded to
the continuation of the present, as follows:

Brulard, 14th. The Citizen Brulard received the 3 barrels of damaged rice,
according to the awarding made him for three hundred livres, viz. 300

The Citizen Lefevre requested the delivery of the lots Nos. 15 and 32, made as
follows: 15 B 100 1460 S A 1300 1625 1250 B 1180 48 1125 32 A 45 1640 112 1395
B 9 1168 48 1246 13389 Tare 15 p. c. 2008 11381 a 60 6828 12

The same received the delivery of the 16th lot, as follows: 16 B 7 1346 A 113
1585 B 56 1373 54 1360 52 1290 6954 Tare 15 p. c. 1043 5911 at 95 5615 9

The Citizen Ferret, received the delivery of the 17th and 28th lots, as
follows. Fenet 17 A 78 1523 B 67 1360 55 1454 14 1432 20 1533 A 47 1383 114
1493 28 B 208 997 A 45 1333 1408 13916 Tare 15 p. c. 2087 11829 at 100 11829

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of he 19th lot as follows. Lefevre A
53 1350 19 B 91 1440 C 1 1496 B 33 1390 3 1670 7346 Tare 15 p. ct. 1102 6244 at
94 6869 7 2

The citizen Ferret received the delivery of the 20th lot as follows. Ferret 20
B 157 1370 1410 A 30 1340 B 212 1208 A 29 1516 6844 Tare 15 p. ct. 1027 5817 a
106 6166

The citizen Muller received the delivery of the 21st lot as follows, Muller 21
B 87 1320 100 1437 39 1396 222 1246 81 1094 6493 Tare 15 p. c. 974 5119 at 100
5119

The citizen Jourdan received the delivery of the 22d lot as follows, Jourdan
22. B 107 1260 A 52 1120 B 223 1332 A 49 1310 55 1416 6438 Tare 15 p. c. 966
5472 at 103 5636 3 2

The citizen Lebiais received the delivery of the 23d lot as follows, Lebiais
23 B 44 1604 114 1288 168 946 C 20 1150 B 86 1248 6236 Tare 15 p. c. 933 5296
at 125 6620

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of the 25th lot as follows, Lefevre
25. C 26 1240 A 169 1122 11 1347 170 1158 B 127 1084 5951 Tare 15 p. c. 893
5058 at 121 6120 3 7

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of the 29th lot as follows, Lefevre
29. A 117 1296 B 60 1384 175 1146 A 93 1333 B 101 1033 6192 Tare 15 p. c. 929
5263 at 75 3947 5

The citizen Branger received the delivery of the 30th let as follows, Branger
30. B 179 1242 89 1204 216 1078 1454 13 1621 6599 Tare 15 p. c. 990 5609 at 119
6674 14 2

The citizen Ferret received the delivery of the 31st lot as follows, Ferret
31. B 49 1506 79 1345 A 110 1500 B 84 1370 42 1525 7^16 Tare 15 p. c. 108^ 6159
at 80 4927 4

The citizen Ferret received the delivery of the 33d lot as follows, Ferret 33
A 123 1528 1302 B 22 1332 C 10 1197 B 16 1422 6781 Tare 15 p ct. 1017 5764 at
109 6282 15 2

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of the 34th lot as follows, Lefevre
34. A 134 1553 B 152 1412 A 118 1456 B 64 1456 A 28 1584 7461 Tare 15 p. c.
1119 6342 at 126 7990 18 4

Being night we retired, and have put off till tomorrow, the continuation of
the present, under the signatures as above, said day and ye^, signed to the
minute, Goyau, P. F. Dobree, Orieux, Rozier and Morin.

Being the day of the eighth Prairial, the third year of the Republic of
France, one and indivisible, we judge abovesaid, have proceeded to the
continuation of the present as follows,

The citizen Ferret received the delivery of the 35th lot as follows. A 1 965
Ferret 35 B 90 1320 68 1534 1503 1545 6867 Tare 15 p. c. 1030 5837 a 125 7296 5

The citizen Ferret received the delivery of the 36th lot as follows, A 177
1146 Ferret 36 161 1184 160 1132 175 1237 162 1123 5822 Tare ^5 p. c. 873 4949
at 129 6384 4

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of twenty hogsheads, composing his
awarding, under the denomination, first lot. as follows, Lefevre 1 1173 1282
1603 1184 1062 1322 1336 1070 1246 1314 1522 1222 1290 1300 1404 1274 1235 1243
1200 1169 35447 Tare 15 p. c. 3817 21830 at 150 3^445

The citizen De la Ville received the delivery of the 2d lot as follows, 882
985 1391 1210 1414 907 1136 1410 1480 1150 1163 1360 1281 1673 1273 1242 1185
1185 1347 1347 12602 12603 12602 25205 Tare 15 p.c. 3781 214241b at 150 32136

The citizen Lefevre received the delivery of the 3d lot composed of seventeen
hogsheads, as follows, Lefevre 3. 1016 1446 1218 1217 1204 1264 1037 1200 1132
1174 1348 1544 1283 1169 1342 - 1210 9084 - 11932 11932 - - 20956 Tare 15 p. c.
3143 17815 at 150 26719 10

The Citizen Hutaud, received the delivery of the 4th lot, formed of the
benefitted tobacco, the result of its weighing is net of ele-hundred and forty
six pounds weight, at three hundred lives a quintal, give 3438 These are all
the damaged merchandises proceeding from the cargo of the ship the Two Friends,
carried to the process verbal of the above vendue. The account made up of the
prices of the deliveries, rises to the amount of three hundred and three
thousand and sixty five livres, nineteen pence. 303,065 19

In this place the Citizen Dobree, said that there was yet forty seven
hogsheads of tobacco belonging to the same cargo, which he thought ought not to
be put together with the damaged ones, because he was of opinion, that by
picking up the rotten part out of the good, and defalcating accordingly, he can
sell them as merchant and good; but however, he would take nothing on his own
account, that he thinks that it is the interest of the owners and insurers to
have them visited by juries, in order to have their advices, and which he
requested, as well as the Citizen Goyau, that we would appoint immediately
juries, to visit the said tobacco, and to have from them their proceeding,
stating the quality of the said tobacco, and has signed with us the said Goyau.
Signed to the minute. P. F. Dobree, and Goyau.

Of which said requisitions and declarations we above said judge have given
act, accordingly we have appointed and impanelled the Citizens Brulard and
Sauwervald, juries, and invited them to repair to the place assigned them by
their commission, have appeared and sworn to discharge with faithfulness, the
duty imposed on them by their said commission, and proceeded to it immediately.

From their examination, they caused us to see, and we have seen, forty seven
hogsheads of tobacco, marked J. S. after a new disquisition they declared to us
that they were of opinion that the rotten tobacco should be separated;
accordingly we have ordained the said separation should be made by workmen; and
the rotten tobacco being weighed produces three thousand one hundred and twenty
three pounds, which was estimated by the juries of being of no value.

As for the remnant of the hogsheads, they declared that they could be sold as
merchant and good, provided thirty pounds should be deducted out of every
hogshead, on account of the rotten tobacco, which they could not entirely take
out; which amounted for the forty seven hogsheads, to fourteen hundred and ten
pounds weight.

Such is the report of the juries, which they have affirmed, sincere and true,
and have declared to insist in it, and have signed. Signed to the minute. I. C.
Sauwervald, and Brulard, Sen.

Of all that we have given act, as well as of all protestations and reserves of
the Citizen Dobree, in behalf and against all whom it may concern, We declare
also, that all the hogsheads sold, are marked with the letters J. S. but that
several had no counter-marks nor numbers, whether they were rubbed away, or
that they had not been marked before their shipping.

Stated at about eight o'clock at night, under our signs, and those of the
Citizen Dobree, of the Citizen Goyau, and of the Register, the said day and
year as above. Signed to the minute. P. F. Dobree, Goyau, Orieux, Rozier, and
Morin.

Recorded at Nantes, the twenty seventh of Prairial, the third year of the
republic, by Bertrand, who received three thousand thirty two livres.

Signed, MORIN.

I the under written, Jean Lormier, judge of the tribunal of the commerce of
Nantes, do certify and declare to all whom it may concern, that the signature
put above, is that of Jean Morin, sworn register of this tribunal, to which
full faith is and shall be given -- in testimony of which I have delivered the
present, and caused the seal of the tribunal to be set thereunto, to serve to
all whom it may concern.

Nantes, the 23d of Fructidor, the third year of the republic. Signed, LORMIER.

DOCUMENTS RESPECTING SHIP TWO FRIENDS AND CARGO.
To all to whom these Presents shall come --
I PHINEAS BOND, L. S.
Esquire, his Britannic Majesty's Consul-General for the Middle and Southern
States of AMERICA, DO HEREBY CERTIFY, That Mr. Clement Biddle, before whom the
annexed affidavit was sworn, and who has attested the same under his hand and
notarial seal, is a Notary Public for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly
commissioned and appointed, residing in the city of Philadelphia.

IN FAITH AND TESTIMONY whereof, I the said Consul-General have hereunto set my
Hand, and affixed my Seal of Office, at the City of Philadelphia, this Eleventh
day of September, in the year of our LORD one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five.

P. BOND, Consul-General

ON this eleventh day of September, in the year of our Lord One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Ninety Five, L. S.
before me, CLEMENT BIDDLE, Esquire, Notary Public, for the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, duly commissioned and authorized by law, to administer oaths and
affirmations, dwelling in the city of Philadelphia, PERSONALLY came John
Swanwick, of the said city, Esquire, and a representative for the said city, in
the Congress of the United States, who being duly sworn according to law, on
his solemn oath deposes and says, that the annexed writing marked A. is a just
and true invoice, and the annexed paper marked B. is one of the original bills
of loading of the cargo here shipped by him in the month of November last, in
the ship Two Friends, whereof Samuel Williams, is master, bound for Nantz, in
France, and that the said ship and the whole of the said cargo, at the time of
the shipment, was the sole property of him the deponent, and that on or about
the fourteenth day of March last, he sold one half of the said ship Two
Friends, and one third part of the said cargo so shipped as aforesaid, to
Alexander Foster, of the said city, merchant, who as well as the deponant, is a
citizen of the United States of America, and that no citizen or subject of the
present belligerent powers, or any of them, had any share, interest or part in
the said ship or cargo, directly, or indirectly, by way of covert, trust or
otherwise, and that the writing annexed marked C. is a just and true copy of
the original instructions given by this deponant, to John K. Helmuth, (who had
lived as an apprentice with the deponent, and is a citizen of the said United
States, and to whom he had consigned the cargo of the ship Two Friends, here
shipped as aforesaid), respecting the sale of the said cargo, and of the
disposition of the proceeds thereof; that there was insured on the said ship
and cargo as follows, to wit: in the public offices in this city -- Fifteen
Thousand Dollars on vessel -- Twenty Four Thousand Dollars on cargo -- For
account of the said John Swanwick, and the said Alexander Foster, warranting
the property of the said vessel and cargo to be the property of citizens of the
United States of America, and that part of the said cargo of tobacco here
shipped being damaged in entering the river Loire, was sold for account of the
underwriters of the said cargo; that the annexed writing marked D. is an
original letter received from the said John K. Helmuth, dated Nantz, June 12,
1795, and the papers annexed marked E. 1, and E. 2, are original duplicate
bills of loading of the cargo shipped on board the said ship Two Friends, at
Nantz, and which arose from the proceeds of the cargo here shipped in the said
ship Two Friends, as aforesaid, and is the sole property of him the said John
Swanwick, and the said Alexander Foster, or of the underwriters, for their
account, on the cargo of the said ship, on the said tobacco, from the proceeds
of which the goods mentioned in the bill of loading marked E. 2, arose; and
that no citizen or subject of the present belligerant powers, their governments
or agents, or any of them, had, have or has any share, interest or property,
in the said goods mentioned in the said two bills of loading annexed, marked E.
1, and E. 2, by way of covert, trust or otherwise, directly, or indirectly,

J. SWANWICK.
And that nine hundred dollars in money on board said ship, are also the
property of this deponent.

J. SWANWICK.
Sworn as above before me, Quod attestor. CLEMENT BIDDLE, Notary Public.



(A.) INVOICE Of 448 Hogsheads of Tobacco and 97 whole and half Tierce of Rice,
shipped by JOHN SWANWICK, on board the American ship Two Friends, SAMUEL
WILLIAMS, master, bound for NANTZ, on account and risque of the shipper, a
citizen of the United States, and consigned to JOHN K. HELMUTH, super cargo on
board.
S. A. No. c. q lb Tare. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 9 10 10 9 9 9 12 10 11 10 10
113 1 1 3 0 0 3 0 1 3 1 1 1 0 14 7 l8 4 14 0 24 0 7 21 25 115 100 140 112 100
128 152 151 150 178 150 1476

No. c q lb Tare. 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 10 10 11 10 10 13 12 10 12
11 9 122 1 3 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 2 3 3 21 10 7 7 24 0 14 12 0 18 7 8 146 104 140 125
160 168 142 136 171 127 111 1500

No. c q lb Tare. 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 10 10 10 11 11 11 11 9 9 11
11 119 0 3 2 1 0 3 1 2 2 3 0 2 14 14 10 21 14 10 14 20 10 7 24 18 129 150 164
133 145 132 142 110 145 119 140 1509

35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 10 12 12 11 10 12 11 10 10 12 12 11 137 0
1 1 0 1 1 2 3 2 0 0 1 1 4 5 25 18 14 14 20 21 0 0 0 7 0 153 161 130 175 176 167
82 156 136 130 200 145 1811

49 50 51 53 54 55 56 60 62 63 64 65 66 10 10 11 10 10 12 10 12 11 10 100 12 11
144 0 3 2 3 1 0 2 2 1 0 0 1 1 0 18 24 10 0 24 14 0 14 0 7 4 7 4 14 125 176 110
168 168 214 148 136 158 140 137 147 136 1963

Totals.
113 122 119 137 141 637 74 562 1 3 2 1 0 1 2 2 25 8 18 0 14 9 15 tare 22 neat,
or 1476 1500 1509 18^ 1963 8359 603022 lb. L1102 17 8

34 47 48 52 57 58 59 61 67 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 8 9 10
10 11 11 10 10 12 12 183 2 3 3 1 3 2 3 2 0 1 1 1 3 2 0 0 0 3 1 4 21 7 10 21 24
7 7 24 7 21 7 7 21 15 18 14 0 11 118 135 126 135 154 159 140 150 150 114 115
118 2413

86 87 88 89 90 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 100 101 102 103 104 105 9 11 9 10 12 9 10
10 11 10 11 9 10 10 10 10 10 11 186 194 183 504 60 2 2 0 2 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 1
0 2 0 0 3 0 1 1 4 5 21 0 11 21 6 11 13 9 7 7 14 0 14 14 21 0 13 17 11 13 4 110
116 102 114 145 116 118 106 139 103 108 110 125 183 125 122 114 118 2174 2165
2413 6752 tare

106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 10 11
10 10 11 10 10 11 10 11 11 10 11 10 10 10 11 11 194 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 2 2 0 3 2
3 1 0 0 0 14 14 0 7 0 7 7 0 0 24 21 0 0 21 0 0 14 0 17 112 114 142 118 1l0 150
128 124 114 114 119 140 110 115 108 103 126 118 2165

504 09 neat, or 56457 a 32/6 917 8 6

69 70 71 72 75 75 13 11 11 12 11 13 73 6 67 1 0 3 2 1 2 3 3 18 0 18 4 0 24 8 5
0 159 103 130 105 114 150 761 tare neat or 7507 a 33/9 126 13 6

68 73 76 91 99 tare neat 11 19 12 9 46 4 41 8 1 7 2 2 2 3 1 2 3 3 0 2 14 0 0
11 25 8 17 13 22 19 134 143 135 100 512 tare neat or 4693 27/ 63 72 or 859 30/
12 17 8

124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 11 9 8 9 10 9 10 10 8 10 100 3 3 2 2 3
1 0 2 2 1 18 14 25 7 0 14 2 14 14 12 8 136 112 105 113 106 108 130 110 130 114
1135

134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 8 9 10 9 9 9 9 9 11 9 96 3 0 1 0 2 2 3
0 2 2 3 4 6 23 4 21 14 2 16 18 4 0 114 111 114 118 120 108 102 108 114 113 1122

144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 9 9 11 9 9 8 9 9 9 9 95 3 1 0 2 0 2 3
0 2 2 3 4 4 20 9 14 14 18 7 14 14 6 100 116 107 109 198 115 126 109 198 130
1108

154 155 150 157 138 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 9 11 9 9 7 10 8 8 9 6 10 8 ^12
1 0 0 3 1 1 0 2 2 3 3 3 1 10 5 20 17 12 25 25 16 14 6 5 18 5 109 107 102 114
196 198 104 102 103 102 136 107 1280

166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 10 7 10 7 8 9 9 9 9 10 9 9 111
112 103 327 100 96 95 0 2 0 3 3 1 3 0 3 1 2 0 3 1 1 2 1 3 3 2 3 14 23 14 7 15
14 19 12 7 14 27 0 19 5 26 22 8 0 6 8 4 118 108 120 112 101 102 103 114 98 123
102 100 1300 1280 1209 3789 1135 1122 1108

178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 7 9 8 10 9 10 10 9 9 8 9 103 3 3 3
0 1 0 2 2 2 2 0 1 4 9 2 4 13 24 3 26 14 7 4 26 95 103 99 99 99 136 132 122 115
103 106 1209

near 556 2 22 or 62350 a 34/ per C. 1059 19 0

S.B. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3 9 10 9 9 ^ 9 10 9 10 8 8 9 96 2 1 1 3 1 3 3 2 1 2 3 14 18
5 14 7 14 13 7 14 11 5 117 126 194 115 111 100 128 125 9^ 94 1093

11 12 13 14 15 16 18 18 19 20 10 10 11 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 97 1 2 1 2 0 2 1 0 0 0 3
14 9 25 16 9 14 23 23 9 27 1 98 114 114 106 105 116 95 115 115 86 1064

21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 9 9 11 11 11 11 11 10 11 9 107 2 2 2 0 2 1 0 1 3
2 2 0 9 0 20 14 23 24 14 4 0 24 116 115 128 127 121 113 104 102 150 100 1178

31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 9 10 10 12 11 10 9 9 9 11 103 1 1 1 3 1 0 0 3 0
0 3 11 11 91 27 0 21 26 2 11 14 22 90 96 106 123 119 100 107 106 109 150 1106

41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 60 10 11 9 10 9 9 10 9 11 9 101 0 1 3 3 2 1 0 2 0 3
3 12 21 9 24 6 4 2 18 16 24 24 112 120 103 98 108 129 156 142 168 119 1253

51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 9 9 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 10 98 1 3 1 0 3 2 0 1 0 2 1
18 7 24 0 7 7 7 27 21 20 26 115 100 112 105 112 119 131 135 96 164 1189

61 62 63 64 65 66 7 68 69 70 9 9 11 10 9 10 9 10 9 9 100 2 2 0 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 4
11 7 21 6 25 23 4 14 11 4 124 100 100 107 95 91 10 107 120 100 1062

71 72 73 74 75 76 77 7^ 79 80 10 9 9 9 9 9 8 8 10 9 95 0 2 0 2 2 3 3 2 1 2 18
9 2 12 21 0 11 20 13 0 9 11 109 110 107 100 116 102 106 115 120 120 1l

81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 8 9 0 10 9 10 0 8 9 9 95 3 3 2 1 0 0 2 2 3 2 3
16 21 7 4 23 25 4 21 7 25 13 104 118 100 124 114 112 106 102 112 138 1130

91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 9 10 9 9 10 9 8 8 9 9 95 2 1 2 2 2 0 3 3 2 2 2
7 12 0 7 18 14 16 7 4 0 1 200 113 108 118 107 112 106 1I7 118 103 1101

101 102 103 104 105 106 107 103 109 110 9 9 10 8 9 9 9 9 10 9 96 2 1 1 2 1 0 2
I 3 2 0 11 11 7 25 4 25 20 25 21 7 16 112 124 115 114 130 132 82 114 115 107
145

111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 8 8 11 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 99 3 3 3 2 3 3
1 3 0 2 2 7 8 21 3 0 14 22 12 25 11 21 100 108 132 124 110 104 110 l00 115 108
1111

121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 9 9 10 9 9 9 9 8 9 10 3 1 3 0 1 3 1 3
2 1 26 17 14 18 2 12 2 11 7 14 98 97 132 115 109 111 100 113 100 131

131 133 132 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 10 8 9 9 8 8 9 10 9 11 97 2 3 3 2 3 3
2 2 3 0 3 18 7 21 13 11 7 6 16 16 14 17 126 116 133 120 106 105 102 337 119 112
1175

141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 8 7 9 7 9 10 9 10 10 11 93 2 1 0 3 0 0
3 0 0 1 1 0 16 4 13 5 7 8 11 0 22 2 155 114 109 83 112 101 96 117 102 138 1120

151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 9 2O 9 9 10 9 9 9 9 9 96 0 0 3 3 1 3 0
2 1 3 2 3 4 2 4 14 7 21 6 7 13 25 99 107 111 102 103 107 110 101 110 122 1082

161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 9 8 9 8 10 9 9 9 9 8 93 0 3 3 3 1 1 2
0 3 1 1 13 25 0 21 21 7 23 21 0 4 23 101 99 97 95 109 123 109 1^7 108 106 1074

171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 9 9 9 8 9 9 9 9 8 9 94 2 2 1 1 3 3 2 1
2 3 0 9 13 14 21 21 20 0 10 0 11 7 115 96 111 97 107 123 91 118 117 103 1078

18l 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 10 9 9 9 7 9 10 8 9 9 93 0 1 1 3 3 1 2
0 1 0 1 11 21 20 9 7 10 23 17 7 20 5 154 117 113 125 90 98 127 115 108 94 1141

191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 109 200 9 9 9 9 8 10 9 8 11 9 96 0 3 1 0 3 3 2
2 2 3 3 18 7 4 14 21 4 16 7 16 7 2 107 111 105 107 94 101 102 104 128 120 1079

201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 11 8 8 10 10 8 9 10 9 9 9^ 0 3 0 2 0 2
1 0 0 2 1 14 7 0 11 0 14 4 0 7 25 1 120 100 109 121 120 100 132 128 102 118 110

211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 10 9 9 9 9 9 9 8 10 8 94 0 2 2 2 0 2 2
0 0 2 0 2 15 14 18 11 0 20 14 14 6 2 140 150 133 111 100 100 128 114 135 110
1221

221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 7 9 9 9 10 8 9 9 8 10 93 2 2 3 2 0 2 2
1 2 0 0 14 11 7 21 0 7 19 26 26 7 11 115 134 115 105 132 109 115 95 129 196
1161

231 232 10 8 19 3 3 2 22 4 26 189 121 312

TOTALS.
96 97 107 103 101 98 100 95 95 95 96 99 1189 1064 2254 tare234 3 3 2 3 3 1 3 0
3 2 0 0 3 0 0 1 5 1 24 22 24 26 4 18 18 1 16 21 7 23 2 4 1003 1064 1178 1106
1253 1042 1042 1111 1130 1101 1145 1111 13543 12607 26240

2019 2 26 is 226210 neat a 34 sp. C. 3845 11 4

96 97 98 96 93 94 93 96 95 94 93 19 1064 2 3 1 2 1 0 1 3 1 0 0 2 0 11 17 2 25
23 7 5 2 1 2 14 26 23 1106 1175 1120 1082 1074 1078 1141 1079 1150 1221 1161
310 10697

S.C. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 11 9 9 10 10 8 11 9 9 9 9 10 8 8 136 123
259 tare 26 0 0 0 2 0 1 2 2 2 1 3 1 3 3 0 1 1 1 0 4 6 0 4 4 12 25 14 22 2 13 9
16 19 7 26 22 110 107 128 116 90 114 111 116 109 115 120 145 100 99 1580 1382
2962

neat 253 0 4 is 26100 a 34 sp. C.443 14

15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 1 10 9 8 8 8 7 8 8 9 7 7 9 8 11 23 2
0 1 1 2 3 0 2 1 2 2 1 3 0 1 0 18 20 0 27 2 14 11 0 0 21 25 2 7 7 92 95 103 93
96 92 91 115 111 98 95 116 89 96 1382

97 Whole, and one half Tierce of RICE, as follow:
S.No.1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 6 6 5 6 6 5 5 5 5 4 57 0 1 3 0 1 3 1 0 0 3 0 23 1O
16 9 2 16 14 14 14 18 13

11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 5 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 51 0 3 1 0 O O 1 0 I 0 1 11
14 11 21 10 14 14 11 7 16 27

21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 55 1 1 3 0 1 1 2 0 0 1 1 12
10 27 7 0 18 10 0 18 0 18

31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 6 6 5 6 6 6 5 5 5 6 59 0 1 3 0 0 0 3 0 2 0 7 14
21 7 21 18 21 16 20 18 23

41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 T.49 50 6 6 5 6 5 6 40 6 2 6 45 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 3 0 0
15 20 21 23 9 11 23 3 14 7 5

51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 6 6 5 6 6 5 5 6 6 6 60 1 0 3 0 1 3 2 0 0 0 3 16
4 18 14 4 23 20 25 13 16 3

61 62 63 44 65 66 67 68 69 70 5 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 6 5 59 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 9 0 3 3 16
26 7 18 0 21 16 9 20 11 4

71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 5 6 5 6 6 6 6 6 5 6 59 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 3 111
0 13 4 6 0 18 0 9 19 24

81 82 83 84 85 86 87 83 89 90 6 5 5 6 5 5 6 5 5 6 60 0 3 3 0 3 3 1 3 3 0 0 21
17 23 14 13 23 3 27 11 7 19

91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 5 5 6 6 5 6 6 5 47 0 3 0 0 3 0 0 3 0 21 4 20 23 11 11
7 13 26

TOTALS.
57 51 55 59 45 60 59 60 47 59 556 Tare, a 7olbp.Hhd.and 351/2 p. 60 0 2 1 2 0
3 3 0 0 3 3 3 13 27 18 23 5 3 4 19 26 24 20 21

Neat, 496 0 1 at 28s p. C. 694 8 3

Total 8266 17 1

CHARGES.
Cooperage of Tobacco and Rice, L3 0 0 Porterage, 81 7 6 Commissions, 49 14 6
My commission on L8400 19 1 a 5 p.c. 42^ 0 11 Insurance on L8827 61 a 10 p.c.
882 14 0 1436 16 11 Errors execpted. Lc. 9 ^ 14 0

Philadelphia, Nov. 24, 1794. J. SWANLICK,

SHIPPED in good order, and well conditioned, S.A. 1 a 188hhds., S.B. 1 a 232
hhds. S.C. 1 a 28 hhds. Tobacco. S. i a 98 Rice.
by John Swanwick, in and upon the good ship called the Two Friends, whereof is
master for this present voyage Samuel Williams, and now riding at anchor in the
river Delaware, and bound for Nantz -- To say, Four hundred and forty eight
hogsheads of Tobacco, and ninety seven whole and one half tierce of Rice, on
account and risk of the shipper, a citizen of the United States of America.
Being marked and numbered as in the margin, and are to be delivered in the like
good order and well conditioned, at the aforesaid port of Nantz, (the danger of
the seas only excepted) unto John K. Helmuth, or to his assigns, he or they
paying freight for the said Goods, as owners property. In witness whereof the
master or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of
this tenor and date; the one of which bills being accomplished, the others to
stand void.

Dated in Philadelphia, Nov. 24, 1794. SAML. WILLIAMS.

Philadelphia, November 24, 1794. JOHN K. HELMUTH. DEAR SIR,
THE diligent attention and care, in what concerns me, which you have uniformly
displayed during your residence with me, and the recent instances which I have
observed, of an attachment in your family, which will always endear them to me,
have determined me to confide to your care, during the present voyage, my ship
Two Friends, and her cargo of Rice and Tobacco, agreeably to invoice and bills
of loading enclosed herein -- with which you will please to proceed to the port
of Nantz or Bourdeaux in France, and on your arrival there, make the best
possible sale of the whole, for my interest -- Investing the proceeds in a
cargo of Salt, Brandy, Claret, Oil, Soap, Dry Goods, Prunes, etc, as you shall
find best for my advantage, taking care to assort it, as nearly as possible, on
the footing of the note at the bottom of this letter, and to have the one cargo
put on board, immediately on discharging the other, making the conditions of
the sales accordingly -- The moment the property is on board your vessel, it is
under the in^rance I have here made; whereas, when once on shore, it is out of
all security as for me -- I have given you many letters of introduction, to
serve you among my friends in France: You must; select such assistance as you
in prudence shall find most advisable, and I shall allow you five per cent on
sales, and five per cent on the returns, out of which, you must pay all charges
to those who assist you, and conduct the whole business in your own name only,
as a citizen of the United States, no foreigner whatever having any concerns in
this ship or cargo, as you will see by my qualifications annexed to the ship's
clearance.

In making your sales and delivery, attend yourself to the weights, and see
that you are not imposed on in that matter; examine also the qualities of
Tobacco most suitable for the market you go to, to govern ourselves by in
future -- see also the quality of the goods in return, that they be the best of
their kind -- If after taking in my goods, you have any room left for
passengers or freight, you must do the best possible, for my interest in taking
them in -- and observe to do it, so as not to commit my property, with respect
to any of the belligerent powers; as it would be better for me to forego any
advantage of this kind, than to have my property endangered by that means -- If
on your arrival at Nantz or Bourdeaux, you find any other market in Europe
better, you may proceed to it under the insurance I have made, paying 1 per
cent additional premium, and in case of accident or damage, take great care to
have your papers of surveys, protests, etc. put in proper order, to secure my
prompt recovery of the underwriters.

You have taken the names of my different correspondents, so as to know who to
value on in case of any unforeseen interruption of your voyage, which I mention
by way of precaution, not expecting any thing of this kind will happen -- You
know my ship Active is gone to Hamburgh -- write by post direct on your
arrival, to Captn. Blair, to the care of Messrs. Parish and Co. advise him of
your proceedings, and tell him what freights or advantage may offer at the port
you are at, for his government, should he see fit to go that way; and in case
he stands in need of your assistance give him it, wherever he may claim it --
If on your arrival in France, from any troubles there may be, or any impediment
in getting returns, you cannot sell your cargo, so as to bring me back the
certain proceeds -- You must only leave that port, and proceed to Hamburgh, or
such other market as you may see best for my interest -- acting as you would
for yourself in such a case -- You have a power of Attorney, to act for me in
France, and I give you herewith an account of my claims, as to the sale of ship
Baring, on Fenwick, Mason and Co. pray attend to it -- as also to get my
account closed by Gasper Meyer of Bourdeaux, and King, Watson and Co. of
Dunkirk, by corresponding accordingly on your arrival, as I shall be glad in
that way to get these matters settled -- Write me by all conveyances, and
observe, that Brandy cannot be shipped but in large casks here, I shall add in
another letter what may occur further, and am mean while truly,

Your obedient servant, J. SWANWICK.

CARGO BACK AS FOLLOWS.
Salt enough to ballast in proportion to what may be necessary -- attention
paid to the whole of the ship's cargo -- Brandy the chief article, of good
taste and proof, in large casks -- Wines, the best you can get -- Claret, as
you know I buy them here -- not so sure however to sell always as Brandy,
therefore but few of these in proportion.

Clarets in bottles and cases, a few prime quality -- 4 or 500 boxes good fresh
Prunes, if you can get them good -- An assortment of best fine sallad Oil, in
cases.

Of Castile Soap and any other articles of this kind, you may think saleable
here.

Some boxes human Hair and perfumer's articles, hair-powder and pomatum, would
probably answer well -- Furniture, such as tables, glasses, chairs, desks, etc.
if cheap and fashionable, such as you have seen sell well at Odier's.

Any of the articles in the list herein, that may answer, such as millenery,
fans, silks, silk hose, gloves, umbrellas, etc.

Nantz, June 12th, 1795. HONORED SIR,
THE ship Two Friends, being at last repaired and ready for sea, I have now the
honor to enclose you herein, invoice and bill of loading, of sundry
merchandises, shipped on your account and risque, amounting to livres,
assignats, 404056 3 -- As also invoice and bill of loading of sundry goods
shipped on account of the underwriters, of the cargo of the ship Two Friends,
amounting to L250895 18 assignats, with account, sales, and necessary papers
for your prompt recovery from them -- I further enclose you a bill on my
brother for 1000 dollars, as also a receipt from Capt. Williams, for 900
dollars, which he will deliver you immediately after his arrival.

Your ship's delay here, has been unfortunately very long, but taking into
consideration the many difficulties under which she labored, it is not too
long a time -- Mr. S. cannot well form an idea to himself of the way of doing
business here, who is so much accustomed to activity. In order to get a single
permit for goods it requires 2 or 3 days at least, and the number of holidays
which at present are kept in France make mercantile business very difficult to
be transacted. On Sundays the people do not any business, and on decade days
all public offices are shut.

I am extremely sorry it is impossible for me to return in the ship Two
Friends, as there still remains about 60 hogsheads of tobacco unsold, and I
should not wish to leave France without having the accounts of the voyage
completed: From present appearances tobacco will raise considerably in value,
and is in demand here -- I dare say should the Two Friends arrive safe in port,
the merchandises which I have shipped will answer very well, as goods of the
same kind are 70 or 80 per cent dearer now than they were at the time of the
purchase. I hope captain M Call, may have arrived safe at New York, with the
goods snipped on your account. My apprehensions respecting a war with G.
Britain are very considerable, notwithstanding (as is reported here) a treaty
has been ratified in England, by Mr. Jay -- The British cruizers take all
American vessels bound to France, loaded with provision?. A brig belonging to
Mr. Meade, of Philadelphia, and cleared out for Nantz, was boarded by an
English frigate in the bay, who put a prize master and several men on board, to
carry her into Portsmouth; but the master and American seamen who were left on
board of the brig, found means to make drunk the prize master, and his men; in
which time they retook possession of the vessel and brought her safe in here.

The late dauphin of France is dead, and Luxembourg is taken by the French. The
death of the son of Capet, will occasion some alteration with respect to some
of the powers at war with France. The Spanish government demanded as one of
their terms on which it would agree to a peace, the delivery of the dauphin up
to them, some suspicions at this time are formed of his not dying a natural
death.

A serious fire took place a few days past at Paimboeuf, by which 6 fine ships
were consumed, as you will see by the account given in the Nantz paper.

I wished much for a few lines from you, but I suppose you expected my
departure from this before the arrival of the vessels which sailed not long
since from Philadelphia. Please accept the enclosed news papers, from

Honored Sir, Your grateful and true servant, JOHN K. HELMUTH.
June 18th, 1795. I shall send copies of the invoices and papers to recover
insurance, by the next conveyance, J. K. H.



SHIPPED by the Grace of God in good order and, well conditioned, 1 Small keg
I.S. No. 1, a 10 trunks Do. No. 1, cask Do. No. 1, a 4 bales 1 a 200 kegs of
raisins No. 1, a 5 casks Malaga wine No. 1, a 3 bbls. prunes A small box I.S.
No. 98, a 137, 40, casks of wine by J. K. Helmuth, a citizen of the United
States of America, in and upon the good ship called the Two Friends, whereof is
master under God for this present voyage Samuel Williams, and now riding at
anchor in the river Loire, and by God's grace bound for Philadelphia -- To say,
One small keg, ten trunks, containing sundry merchandises, one cask of Silesia
cloths, one bale of charts, three bales of papering, two hundred kegs of
raisins, four pipes and one quarter cask of Malaga wine, three barrels of
prunes, one small box containing watches, and forty casks of Bourdeaux red
wine, on account and risque of John Swanwick, Esquire of Philadelphia, a citizen of
the United States of America, being marked and numbered as in the margin, and
are to be delivered in the like good order and well conditioned, at the
aforesaid port of Philadelphia, (the danger of the seas only excepted,) unto
John Swanwick, Esquire or to his assigns, he or they paying for the said goods as
owners property, with primage and average accustomed. In witness whereof the
master or purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of
this tenor and date, one of which bills being accomplished, the other three to
stand void; and so God send the good ship to her desired port in safety. Amen.

Dated in Nantz, June 14th, 1795. Contents unknown. SAMUEL WILLIAMS.

SHIPPED by the grace of God in good order and well conditioned, I.S. No. 1, a
97 138 a 316 276 Casks I.S, 1, a 16 hhds. of currants by John K. Helmuth, a
citizen of the United States of America, in and upon the good ship called to
Two Friends, whereof is master under God for this present voyage Samuel
Williams, and now riding at anchor in the river Loire, and by God's grace bound
for Philadelphia -- To say, Two hundred and seventy six casks of Bourdeaux sed
wine, and sixteen hogsheads of currants, on account and risque of the
underwriters, on the cargo of the ship Two Friends, at Philadelphia, being
marked and numbered as in the margin, and are to be delivered in the like good
order and well conditioned, at the aforesaid port of Philadelphia, (the danger
of the seas only excepted,) unto John Swanwick, Esquire or to his assigns, he or
they paying freight for the said goods, four pounds ten sterling shillings per
ton, with primage and average accustomed: In witness whereof the master or
purser of the said ship has affirmed to four bills of lading, all of this tenor
and date, one of which bills being accomplished, the other three to stand void;
and so God send the good ship to her desired port in safety. Amen.

Dated in Nantz, June 14th, 1795. Contents unknown, SAMUEL WILLIAMS:

BY this public instrument of protest, be it known and made manifest unto all
whom these presents shall come, or may in any ways concern, That, on this
eighth day of February, in the year one thousand seven hundred ninety five;
before me Peter Frederick Dobree, vice consul of the United States, for the
port of Nantz, etc. personnally came and appeared, Samuel Williams, master of
the ship Two Friends, of Philadelphia, of about three hundred and fifty tons
burden, who being duly sworn, did solemnly declare in manner and form
following; that he left Philadelphia the fourth of December, bound to Nantz in
France, with a cargo of four hundred and seventy six hogsheads of tobacco, one
hundred tierces of rice, and twelve thousand staves, on freight, the wind at
north, with a fine fresh breeze -- that the eighth of the said month, his
vessel begun to leak, which obliged him to pump ship every two hours -- that
the twenty first the wind shifted to south east, and blew very strong, the sea
extremely heavy, and the leak increasing, they were forced to pump every half
hour -- that this bad weather had lasted during fifteen days; that the twenty
eighth of January, five o'clock A. M the wind being west north west, and very
thick weather, he has seen the land and hoisted his jack, to call a pilot: that
none coming, at five o'clock P. M. his vessel struck the rocks, called Les
Charpentiers, and leaked two feet of water an hour; that he steered at once to
get in the river, and got an anchor under sort Maindin, and hoisted lights for
assistance; but perceiving that his crew could no longer suffice to pump, and
having seven to eight feet of water in the hold, he her seen himself sacred (to
save the cargo) to cut his cable and run ashore on the coast of Brevin -- that
the next day at seven o'clock in the morning, he has sent his boat with Mr.
John K. Helmuth, supercargo, to seek succors on shore. That an inhabitant of
said Brevin got him eight men, who came on board; that the said day, said Mr.
Helmuth, went to Paimboeuf, and waited on Mr. Boudet, sworn interpreter and
broker, with whom he made his declaration at the custom house, to Mr. Louvet,
maritime agent, and to Mr. Lucas, officer of the port, who immediately gave him
every assistance in their power, in getting boats and men; that the thirty
first of the same month, at about one o'clock in the morning, he succeeded to
get his ship afloat, having still seven to eight feet of water in the hold,
although he had constantly kept men at the pump, and that about one in the
afternoon he got on the mud between Point Ville Le Martin and Port S. Nazaire,
when he got about forty hands at the pump, and seven large boats from from
Paimboeuf, which he at once got loaded with rice and tobacco. That having
perceived the first of February, the present month, that his ship had done
leaking, and the wind coming the next day at the north west, he has sailed for
Paimboeuf, and got on the mud there the third instant, at four o'clock in the
morning; and from these accidents and the length of his passage, said Williams,
declares that, both his ship and cargo, must be greatly damaged, and therefore
does solemnly protest against wind and weather, as he has already done, before
the officers of the customs, at Paimboeuf, and now signs the present protest
and instrument, with John Harper, his mate, and Joseph Henry, and Andrew
Forster, sailors on board of said ship Two Friends, who being duly sworn,
concur and agree in this said declaration and protest, which they affirm to be
true.

SAMUEL WILLIAMS, JOHN HARPER, ANDRES FOSTER, JOSEPH H. SPENCER.

IN faith of all which I have delivered this under my hand, and caused my seal
of office to be thereunto affixed, the day and year aforesaid.

P.F. DOBREE.




