AN ATTENTION TO THE SCRIPTURES: FOR AN ANSWER TO THE IMPORTANT INQUIRY,
Whether Unbelievers are under the law and under the Curse?

WITH AN ANNEXED LETTER To Mr. SAMUEL STILLMAN, MINISTER of the First BAPTIST
CHURCH in BOSTON. ALSO, A LETTER To Mr. JOHN CLARK, MINISTER of the First
CHURCH Gathered in BOSTON.

By SHIPPIE TOWNSEND.

Isaiah xlii. 21. -- The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness sake, HE
will magnify the law, and make it honorable. John xi. 26. -- Believe thou
this? BOSTON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by JOHN W. FOLSOM, No. 30,
Union-Street, by SAMUEL HALL in (...) and WILLIAM T. CLAP, at the corner of
(...): where may be had, a Collection entitled, GOSPEL (...), by the same
Writer. M,DCC,XCV.

THE Scriptures Consulted, etc.
IT having been publicly asserted in a large congregation as a scripture truth,
That unbelievers are under the law and under the curse, engaged me to look into
the scriptures for the satisfaction of my own mind, to see if these things were
so; and knowing the apostle to have this subject in view in his epistle to the
Galatians, I have repeatedly looked it over with attention, and found two
passages which seemed at first view, to favor the thought, that unbelievers
were under the law, etc. namely, Gal. iii. 10. As many as are of the works of
the law are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the book of the law, to do them. Are
not unbelievers of the works of the law? Do they not universally go about to
establish their own righteousness? and are they not consequently under the
curse?

For answer it may be said, They are so in their own apprehensions; their
unbelief places them there, and there they must remain in their own minds, till
they believe the report of the gospel, which is, Christ has delivered us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. Yet this gospel is true before
it is believed, yea, though it be not believed, shall our unbelief make the
faith of God of none effect? God forbid.

The other passage is Gal. v. 18. If ye be led by the Spirit of God ye are not
under the law. Does not this imply that they were under the law that were not
led by the Spirit? What is the meaning of the passage? What is meant by being
led by the Spirit? I think the simple meaning is, being led by the Spirit's
teaching, who takes of the things of Jesus, and shows them unto us; therefore,
if our minds receive the truth of the testimony concerning Jesus, we are led by
the Spirit; the Spirit's teaching leads to understand and believe the written
word; and that asserts, ye are not under the law, but under grace, therefore if
the mind gives in to the Spirit's teaching, it finds this a truth, for the
Spirit witnesses to the truth of the scriptures.

Let us then, as being led by the Spirit, follow his teaching by the apostle
and all the brethren that (says he) are with me who say, Gal. iv. 4. When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the law, to redeem them that were under the law. Here the following thoughts
offer to view, viz That all that were under the law were redeemed, therefore,
if there are any not redeemed, they must be those that were not under the law;
for, to assert that Jesus Christ did not accomplish what he came for, would
amount to a denial that Jesus is come in the flesh: but he came to redeem them
that were under the law, and the apostle says expressly, he accomplished it;
Gal. iii. 13. Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us. He has delivered us. Who? Them that were under the law. The
apostle and all the brethren with him believed it, and united in their
endeavors to bring back the foolish bewitched Galatians that were removed from
him that called them, into the grace of Christ to another gospel, to the belief
of it, which they would not have done if it were not an original truth. Now, if
Christ had not delivered us from the curse of the law, and we believed he had
not, we could not be denominated, Unbelievers: but since he has, and the
scriptures plainly and fully assert it, those must be denominated unbelievers,
that believe we are still under the law and under the curse; besides, "he that
believes enters into rest;" but what rest can he that believes that we are
under the law and under the curse, have on believing; if it were a truth, it
could never make any man free. But, he that believes the scripture testimony,
that Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us, believes a truth calculated to free the mind from the spirit of bondage, to
fear and introduce the spirit of adoption, crying, Abba Father.

If Christ has not delivered us from the curse of the law, it is impossible we
ever should be, for Christ dies no more, and it is impossible for the belief
of a lie to deliver us. Now, our deliverance from the law is by the body of
Christ, Romans vii. 4. and for this end; that we might be married to another, to
him who is raised from the dead.

Perhaps ministers little think, while they are endeavoring to prove
unbelievers under the law, and calling them to come to Christ, they are calling
them to spiritual adultery, to have two husbands, to be wedded to Christ while
the law is not dead, wherein they were held. The apostle asserts in
forementioned Romans vii. 4, 6. we are delivered from the law by the body of
Christ; But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were
held. Being become dead to the law by the body of Christ, not by believing, not
by any thing in or about us, or done by us, but by the body of Christ; and
being delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, no wonder
the apostle says, Romans vi. 14. "Ye are not under the law, but under grace."

The apostle to the Galatians says, chap. iii. 23 to 25, Before faith came we
were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith that should after be revealed;
wherefore the law was our schoolmaster unto Christ, that we might be justified
by faith; but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.
Before faith came, I suppose he means before Christ came, who is the object of
faith that was after to be revealed, which is, I apprehend, the revelation of
Jesus Christ and his gospel, which reports the faith to be believed, which is
that in the fullness of time God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the law to redeem them that were under the law.

Now when Jesus had fulfilled the law in his life, and suffered the penalty in
his death, being made a curse for us, his resurrection manifests our discharge,
so that we are no longer under a schoolmaster.

Moreover, it is said in Rev. xii. 10. The accuser of our brethren is cast
down, which accused them before our God day and night. Question. Who is the
accuser of our brethren? We have the answer from Christ himself, John v. 45. Do
not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that accuses you,
Moses, in whom ye trust. Moses, i. e. the law, accuses our brethren before our
God day and night; but the accuser of our brethren is cast down, and they
overcome by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony, not by
what is wrought in them or done by them; and they loved not their lives unto
the death. While under the law in their own apprehensions, nothing is more
terrible than the thought of death, being all their lives in bondage through
fear of death: but when they know the accuser is cast down, and they overcome
by the blood of the Lamb and the word of their testimony, this alteration
follows. No wonder John heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come
salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.

To what has been said, it may be objected, It is said, John iii. 36. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Mark xvi. 16. He that believes shalll be saved; and he that believes not
shall be damned; which two places seem to attribute our deliverance from the
wrath of God, and from damnation to believing; which phrases seem similar to
the curse of the law.

For answer it may be said, that in Mark xvi. 15, Jesus Christ says to his
eleven disciples, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature. They were authorized to tell the good news to every creature, which
was true concerning every creature, else he would not have sent it to them.

Observe, every creature is a sinner, the whole world guilty before God; to
every creature this news is sent. What news? The gospel, that God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing unto them their
trespasses: it asserts, he has made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him (not in ourselves). Christ has
delivered us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. This is the
gospel to be preached as a truth to every creature. He that believes it to be
a certain truth, is consequently saved from that perplexity, distress and
horror that arises in the mind from an apprehension of the wrath of God,
consequent on being self-condemned as a breaker of God's law; while he that
believes not, stands in his own mind, where he was, condemned already: the
sense of the wrath of God abiding on him. Yet, nevertheless, the good news of
the gospel is as true as if it were believed, but being discredited affords no
relief, and it is that which denominates an unbeliever, viz. not believing the
truth of the good news of the gospel. What is said on Mark xvi. may serve as an
answer to John iii. 36. only look of the foregoing verses.

To use a similitude: Having stepped into a court of justice among men, a
law-breaker is condemned for breach of law, and sentenced to what the law
inflicts in that case; I hear the sentence pronounced as I go in, and see the
offender sent back to prison till the sentence of law is satisfied, which he
has no hope ever to satisfy. I inquire, Why is he thus sentenced? I am
answered, He has broken the law.

After he is gone, some one has pity on him, pays that the law demands, and
procures a receipt from the clerk of the court, and sends the news to the
prisoner, who is on the point of rejoicing exceedingly; but some
fellow-prisoner tells him it is only a deception, it does not mean as it is
expressed; he may depend on it he will not be released till he has paid the
utmost farthing. If he believes the lie, he will still lie under the same
condemnation. Seeing him notwithstanding, cast down, I inquire the reason of
his distress and misery. Seeing the sentence of law is satisfied, the answer
is, Because he does not believe the truth reported to him; but believed a lie,
which is the reason why he retains in his mind the same condemnation. He that
believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed on the name of
the only begotten Son of God.

Unbelief keeps the mind under the law on the left hand, where can be heard
nothing but, Go ye cursed. The gospel reports that Christ has delivered us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. This being believed,
brings the mind under the gospel on the right hand, where it hears; Come ye
blessed.

I think this view of unbelievers being damned of self-condemned, being under
the wrath of God in their own apprehensions, may be illustrated from several
passages of scripture that speak of believers: we read of the younger widows
having damnation, because they cast off their first faith. Undoubtedly, what
they believed with their first faith was true; or their first faith was a true
faith, else they would not have damnation because they cast it off; but there
is nothing but damnation takes place in the mind if the first faith is cast
off, or they cease to believe the report of the gospel to be true.

To use a similitude: Take a piece of dry sole-leather, it is full of air, cast
it into the water; as the water enters, the air will go out, and you may see it
rise in bubbles till filled with water, and has expelled the air.

If the belief of the truth emerse the mind and fill it, it rejoices with
exceeding great joy. Unbelief stands crowding at the door of the mind with all
its objections, and so far as it gets in, it brings self-condemnation or
damnation with it. But our unbelief cannot destroy the truth of the gospel that
is preached to every creature: If we believe not, he abides faithful, he
cannot deny himself.

Hence the exhortations; "We, receiving a kingdom that cannot be moved, let us
hold fast the grace whereby we may serve God acceptably," "Hold faff the form
of sound words which thou have heard of me in faith and love, which is in
Christ Jesus." "Take heed brethren, left there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief; in departing from the living God; for we are made partakers of
Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end."

The apostle Peter in his second epistle, chap i. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. exhorts those
who have obtained like precious faith, to add to their faith, virtue; to
virtue; knowledge; to knowledge; temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness and charity: For, says he, if these things be in you and abound, they
make neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Mark what follows: But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see
far off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. It seems, his
being purged in Christ, was his first faith, he has forgotten it; what then
must take place in his mind but self-condemnation or damnation? while those
that do these things shall never fall; but so an entrance shall be ministered
abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
What motives have believers to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, knowing their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord? The
belief of the truth, that we are bought with a price, tends to fill the mind
with joy that we belong to such a Redeemer, to such a Purchaser; and an
excitation to glorify God in our spirits and bodies, which are his.

But those are damnable heresies that deny the Lord that bought them, and such
must unavoidably bring on themselves swift destruction: for, if Jesus has not
bought us with his blood, if he has not delivered us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us, there is nothing but destruction and misery,
inevitable swift destruction, there is no gospel to be preached to ANY creature.

But I recollect the apostle's expression, Be not deceived, evil communication
corrupt good manner; awake to righteousness and sin not. To that righteousness
in which the Father is well pleased; which has magnified the law, and made it
honorable: So that the Gospel may be preached to EVERY creature.

To Mr. Samuel Stillman, MINISTER of the First BAPTIST CHURCH in BOSTON.
SIR,
AS your Discourse at the public monthly evening Lecture, on the 29th of June,
1795, (wherein you asserted, That unbelievers are under the law and under the
curse) gave occasion to the collection of the foregoing thoughts, that here
present themselves to view. You are requested to attend to them, and think
whether they are not agreeable to the scriptures: If so, do not suffer your own
system, which may have wrapped your mind imperceivably, to prevent your telling
the glad tidings to all people.

Sir, be pleased to ask yourself, "Does not my system confine me from preaching
the gospel to every creature? from repeating without limitation, the gospel
preached to Abraham and confirmed to him by an oath, That in thy seed (which is
Christ) shall all the families of the earth be blessed; while the psalmist
assures us, He has remembered his covenant forever; the word he commanded to a
thousand generations which he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and
confirmed the same to Jacob by a law?"

It seems probable, that the law by which he confirmed the same to Jacob and to
Israel for an everlasting covenant, was the law of circumcision, originally
given as a token of the covenant, which was a seal of the righteousness of the
faith, which Abraham had, yet being uncircumcised. Is not this seal used by the
Jews among all nations to this day, as a standing testimony of the truth of the
gospel preached to Abraham, which insures the blessedness of all the nations,
kindreds, and families of the earth in Christ Jesus? Dare any of our Father's
children presume to break his will thus sealed, by saying, It did not mean all
the nations of the earth, it is only some out of all nations; it only meant me,
an elect believer Far be it from me to speak lightly of the doctrine of
Election, it is the abuse of it only, I wish to expose. This doctrine is
considered in the collection, entitled, Gospel News, page 100, 101, 102, 103;
which any one that reads, may judge if it is not spoken of agreeable to the
Scriptures.
, not thou, a reprobate unbeliever? What contentions must arise in the family,
whom he has directed to love one another, consequent hereupon, about the
Father's will, which is expressed so plainly, and confirmed by an oath, and
sealed with such a seal, manifest in all places, where the Jews are scattered
to this day.

Again, please to ask yourself, Can I publish without reserve, the truth of
Isaiah's testimony, chap. xliv. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins return unto me, for I have redeemed
thee. Or that in chap. xlv 21. I the LORD, and there is no God else beside me,
a just God and a Savior, none besides me. Or that by Jerem. iii. 14. Turn, O
backsliding children, for I am married to you. Or that by John i. 29. Behold
the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. Or 1 John ii. 2. And he
is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the whole
world. Or by Peter, Acts iii. 21, who spoke of the restitution of all things,
spoken of by the mouth of all God's holy prophets, before the world began; and
verse 26. says, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in
turning away every o ne of you from his iniquities. 2d epistle, iii. 9, The
Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. Or the profession of the believing Samaritans, who
heard Jesus themselves, and knew that it was the Savior of the world, John iv.
42. Or the doctrine of Paul, Romans v. from verse 6th to the end. 2 Corinthians. v.
14, For the love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for
them, and rose again. Verse 19, God was in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing to them their trespasses. Verse 21, For he has made him
sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. This he proves from Christ being heard and accepted when thus made sin for
us. "For he says," chap. vi. 2, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in a
day of salvation have I succored thee; behold now the accepted time, etc. 1 Timothy ii. 1 to 7; God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

Left I should tire, I will only mention Rev v. 13. And every creature which is
in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea,
and all that are in them, heard I say, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and
power unto him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Admit the truth, that Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us, and all these texts have no difficulty in them: deny
that truth, and you cannot possibly get along consistently with any of them.

The motive that has excited me thus to write, so far as I am able to judge, is
a threefold one. First, That I might speak of the glory of our Redeemer, who
has delivered us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; to the
glory of his name. Secondly, That I might have an opportunity to bring to view
to the afflicted minds and consciences of those who are taught to believe that
they are under the law and under the curse, the scripture testimony, that our
Divine Redeemer has delivered them Thirdly, That I might act a friendly,
faithful part, in love to you, in pointing to the scriptures, which I
apprehend, show that you herein mistake the truth.

I am aware it may be thought a repetition by some, inasmuch as the sentiment
may be gathered from that collection, entitled, Gospel News, already printed.
But, when I reflect on the importance of the subject, I am encouraged,
especially, as I have the example of Paul; who, when cautioning the Philippians
to beware of the concision or cutting off a part of the (...) Christ, says, To
write the same things to you to the indeed is not grievous, but for you it is
safe. And who used repetition in Gal. i 8, 9, and said, "As we said before, so
now say I again." etc. Which, reproves any man (whosoever he be, for God
excepteth no man's person) who shall preach any other gospel, than Paul and his
companions preached, and the first believers received.

Accept it from the love of your unfeigned Friend,

S. T.
BOSTON, July 30th, 1795.
To Mr. John Clark, MINISTER of the First GATHERED CHURCH in BOSTON.
SIR,
WITH great pleasure and satisfaction I have read the greatest part of your
Answer to the Question, Why am I a Christian? The excellency of the moral
precepts, and your unanswerable arguments for the truth of christianity, must
approve themselves to every man's conscience, and be delightful to every
christian reader. But will you bear with me in a spirit of meekness and love,
to take notice of (...) which appear to draw a vail over the glory of the
gospel, wherein the true God is distinguished from every one that is called
God, and appears (...), as it is expressed.

Micah vii. 8, 9, 10. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy, he will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the sea; thou will perform the truth to Jacob,
and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our fathers in the days of
old.

If we read the forogoing part of the chapter to the 7th verse, we shall see
that there is no reason in man for this gracious declaration. The prophet
appeared sensible of this in verse 7; Therefore I will look to the Lord, I will
wait for the God of my salvation. Verse 9; He will bring me forth to the light,
and I shall behold his righteousness. Neither is there any expressed in the
three verses first mentioned, it is because he delights in mercy: He will, he
will, he will is three times repeated. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob,
and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our fathers in the days of
old: The mercy and truth included in the gospel preached to Abraham; which is
an unconditional gospel.

All false religion that I have ever heard of proposes pardon to the penitent
and the fulfiller of certain conditions, according to their various orders.

The glory of the true God is made manifest in that he finds in himself a
divine reason, to forgive the most destitute and unworthy, for his name's sake,
for his mercy's sake, for his truth's sake, for his oath's sake, for the glory
of his name.

I would now proceed to take notice of the expressions alluded to. You say in
page 5th, speaking of Jesus Christ. "I believe he was authorized by God to
proclaim forgiveness to the penitent, and to reveal a state of immortal glory
and blessedness to those that fear God and work righteousness." When I had read
this sentence, I paused to make a mark in the margin of my book, as follows:

Glory be to God, Jesus Christ is exalted a Prince and Savior, to give
repentance as well as remission of sins, Acts v. 31. And he calls us to
repentance because he has found a divine reason of forgiveness in himself. I, I
am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Isa xliii. 25. I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy
transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins: Return unto me, for I have redeemed
thee, Isa. xliv. 22. I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not
depart from me.

As I progressed in reading in page 11th, you profess your belief, "That God
requires obedience to his laws, and consequently reseats the infraction; that
forgiveness is possible and repentance and reformation the conditions."

On reading this sentence, I paused; and, as it were, imagined myself, while
looking on the book, (with grateful admiration and reverence be it spoken)
surrounded by Moses and the prophets. Jesus Christ and his apostles, as a voice
behind me, saying. This is the way.

MOSES.
The Lord thy God did not set his love on you, nor choose you, because ye were
more than any people, but because the Lord loved you.

Deuteronomy. vii. 7. The PROPHETS.
Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee.

Jerem xxxi 3. O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself, but in me is thy help.

Hosea xiii. 9. I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely.

Hosea xiv. 4. JESUS CHRIST.
The poor have the gospel preached to them.

Matthew. xi. 5. The Son of Man is come to save that which is lost.

Matthew. xviii. 11. I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

John xii 47. The HEARERS of JESUS CHRIST.
We have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world.

John iv. 42. The APOSTLES.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world.

John i. 29. When he had by himself, purged our sins.

Heb. i. 3. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities will I remember no more.

Heb. viii. 12. Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.

Acts xiii. 38. The gift of God, is, eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Romans vi. 23. How will it do to add, Repentance and reformation are the
conditions, judge ye? Are they the conditions of everlasting love, which is
manifest in drawing with loving kindness; in helping the self-destroyed; in
healing the backsliding, and loving them freely; in sending the gospel to the
poor; in saving the lost; in the gift of God, which is, eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord?

The knowledge of divine love thus made manifest, is the spring from whence
flow repentance and reformation, but they are not the conditions of divine love
manifested in forgiveness. The expression appears to me to contain in embryo,
the whole doctrine of desert of grace, held in the Romish church.

It appears to me a matter of sober importance; suffer me therefore to add, let
it have its due weight, and come to a conclusion in your own mind. Either to
preach God our Savior saving for his own name's sake, and freely giving
repentance; as well as remission of sins: Or, saving only on condition of
repentance and reformation. Be pleased, Sir, to bring it home; you have a
respectable character among men, and are as likely perhaps, as any, to have
performed the conditions of conditional salvation; having had as many
advantages therefore as any man. Will or can you plead your repentance and
reformation, as the condition of your forgiveness, before God? Or must you be
obliged to go in the strength of the Lord God, and say with the psalmist, Psalm
lxxi. 16, I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. Let
what satisfies your mind, occupy your pen, and proceed from your mouth: permit
me to remind you of Psalm lxxi. 15. 24. as a safe example.

My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, thy salvation all the day, for I
know not the numbers. My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the
day long. If we know not the numbers, we shall find it is a subject that cannot
be exhausted, the numbers will flow and unfold, to furnish new discoveries of
grace, mercy, peace and love, to animate the new song, and employ the tongue
all day long, through time and eternity.

If you should think I take too much upon me in these interrogations, I will
present it in the language of scripture, and turn your attention to Isa. xliii.
25, 26. I, I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and
will not remember thy sins. Put me in remembrance; let us plead together:
declare thou that thou may be justified.

Thus I have taken notice of two exceptionable passages in your otherwise truly
valuable production, and cannot but hope, I have been constrained thereto from
a sense of duty; for the glory of God our Savior, and the benefit of those
whose minds are perplexed for want of the conditions you make mention of: And
wish you to esteem me your unfeigned Friend,

S. T.
BOSTON, December 1st, 1795.
Psalm xxxv. 27, 28: -- Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my
righteousness: yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, that
has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.

And my tonque shall speak of thy righteousness, of thy praise, all the day
long.

Galatians ii. 21. -- If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in
vain.
HAVING been favored by a friend with some thoughts on the glory of the Lord,
which appeared to me agreeable to the good news of the gospel, which is (as
says the wise man, Prove. xii. 25) that good word which makes the heart glad,
even when heaviness makes it stoop; they are here inserted, that those that
give credit to the gospel may be enlivened and quickened in looking for the
blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God, our Savior Jesus
Christ, as follows:

When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him,
then shall he sit on the throne of his glory.

Question. What are we to understand by his glory? and coming in his glory?

For answer we find, before he leaves this world, he calls upon his Father to
glorify him And why does he claim the glory? Because he had finished the work
given him to do. We then hear Jesus say, Father, I will that those which thou
have given me be with me, where I am, that they may behold my glory

Question. Who were given to Jesus?

All that the Father had; he had power over all flesh, the heathen are given to
him his inheritance, and the utmost part of the earth his possession. Query.
Shall not all that were given to him, come to him? shall they not behold his
glory, the glory of his finished work? We find him coming in his glory, with
all the holy angels with him. Is not this his glory that he finished, the work
that was given him to do? which was to seek and save that which was lost, to
destroy the works of the devil, that he might draw all men to him? Did he not
when on the cross, draw all men to him? We find all nations are gathered before
him in the passage first mentioned, Question. For what? Ans. That there might
be a complete and eternal separation between what he came to save, and what he
came to destroy, manifested to the assembled world; agreeable to what Isaiah
said, chap. xl. 5. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see together for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Again, All flesh
shall come and worship before me, says the Lord. chap. lxvi. 29. And we read,
Luke iii. 6, All flesh shall see the salvation of God.

When the angels come to celebrate the birth of the newborn king, they
proclaim good news and glad tidings to all people, because the Savior is born.
Then they sing the song, "Glory to God in the highest." Why do they sing this
song? The answer is, Because there is peace on earth, and good will toward men.

Paul tells us to judge nothing before the time, till the Lord comes, who, both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
counsels of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God. Query. Why
shall every man have praise of God, when he appears? Ans. Because he is the
head of every man, and he in this nature, and for this nature, fulfilled the
law they had broke; and he, by the grace of God, tasted that death for every
man. Therefore, he is called the just God and the Savior, and having finished
the work of salvation for all, he comes in his glory, and all the holy angels
with him, to make a full display of his glory, in the salvation of all his own,
in the eyes of all the nations, the complete and eternal separation and
destruction of the works of the devil, with all the plants that God did not
plant under the figure of the tares; or as the wood, hay, stubble, that is
built by man on the foundation, is to be burnt up; though the foolish builder
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

We find the beast and the false prophet, death and hell after they are
emptied, with the devil, are all together cast into the lake of fire, which is
the second death. Rev. xx. 13, 14.15. Is not the same figure held up under the
carcases in Isa. lxvi. 23, 24, when all flesh are brought to worship before the
Lord? All flesh had sinned, so that all flesh had carcases; all flesh come to
worship, separated from their carcases, their bodies of sin and death; and they
(the carcases) shall be abhorred of all flesh, when they go forth to look upon
them, agreeable to Ezekiel. xvi. 63. That thou may remember and be confounded,
and never open thy mouth any more, because of this shame, when I am pacified
toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God. The worm may
gnaw, and the fire burn, but the men are separated and saved from them; then
nothing shall hurt or destroy in all that holy mountain. Our God is one, and
his work one, and he is the (...) yesterday, today and forever, without
change, according to Mal. iii. 6. I the LORD. I change not; therefore, ye sons
of Jacob are not consumed. Here we see the salvation of men depends on the
unchangeable God, for he is of one mind, and none can turn him. All this is to
bring to pass his glory, for all things were made by him for his glory, and he
will not be disappointed, nor will he give his glory to another.

Blessed be our God, he changes not: But evil was permitted to enter this
world, that there might be a more full display of his glory, agreeable to
Romans viii. 20, 21.

We adore his power who has all power in heaven and on earth: we admire his
justice in destroying sin, and punishing the sinners in such a way, as to bring
them back again to their Father and their God, by the glory of the finished
work of Jesus Christ our Lord: we bless and praise his love, for God is love,
that he so loved the world, as to give them his Son, to suffer and die in our
room and stead; for he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification;
he fulfilled the law, and was made honorable; he, by the grace of God, tasted
death for every man, and his blood cleanses from all sin; he, the Lamb of God,
that bears away the sin of the world.

Therefore, by the eye of faith, let us see him come in his glory, and all the
holy angels with him, and see all nations gathered before him: Let us see the
separation of all evil, of all sorts, from his inheritance, and destroyed; and
all his own saved, all that he made and saw good, and blessed; and in this way
see a full display of his glory, his power to create, his justice to punish,
and his love to save, and bring back that which was driven away.

Let us therefore, who believe our God to be one, his work one, without change,
give unto him all honor, glory, blessing and praise, for he only is worthy;
and never harbor a thought, that our God will be disappointed of his glory, or
that any power can take any of his creatures from him, and in that way
disappoint him in his plan of government; but give unto him the glory that is
due to his name and be still, and know that he is God, and that the Judge of
all will do that which is right. He will come in his glory, and make a full
display of it; and all flesh shall see together.

SO BE IT. AMEN.
Isaiah live. 17. -- Their righteousness is of me, says the Lord. Chap. lxi.
11. -- Therefore the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring
forth before all the nations. Psalm lxxxvi. 9. -- And all nations whom thou
have made, shall come and worship before thee, and glorify thy name.
FINIS.

