AN ORATION DELIVERED IN ST. MICHAEL'S CHURCH, BEFORE THE INHABITANTS OF
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, On the 4th of July, 1795; IN COMMEMORATION OF
American Independence, BY THE APPOINTMENT OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA STATE SOCIETY
OF CINCINNATI, PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THAT SOCIETY, AND ALSO OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION SOCIETY.

BY THOMAS TUDER TUCKER, M. D.

Charleston: FROM THE PRESS OF TIMOTHY and MASON.

No. III.
South Carolina District, to wit --
(L. S.) BE it remembered, that on the eighth day of July, in the twentieth
year of the independence of the United States of America, Timothy and Mason,
printers, of said district, have deposited in this office, the title of a book,
the right whereof they claim, in the following words, to wit:

"An ORATION, delivered in St Michael's Church, before the inhabitants' of
Charleston, South Carolina, on the 4th of July, 1795, in commemoration of
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE; by the appointment of the South Carolina State Society
of Cincinnati, published at the request of that Society, and also of the
American Revolution Society, by THOMAS TUDER TUCKER, M. D." In conformity to
the act of Congress of the United States, entitled, "An act for the
encouragement of learning; by securing the copies of maps, charts, and books to
the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned."

THOMAS HALL, Clerk of South Carolina district.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY appointment of the Society of Cincinnati, the Author of the following pages
composed a Discourse for the 4th of July, 1795. But fiinding that he had made
it of much too great a length to be delivered in so warm a season, he was under
the necessity of abridging it; which he did, not by condensing the sentiments,
but by striking out large portions to the amount of more than half of the
original composition. This although it may be no just apology, will in some
degree account for the mutilated appearance of it in it is present form, and
evident want of connection in several of it is parts.

AN ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
TO cherish the remembrance of great and auspicious events, and to distinguish
by annual festivals the days on which they have happened, has been an early and
common practice among nations. It is a practice that originates in the feelings
of the heart, and whilst it continues to be directed to worthy objects, it is
useful in its tendency, and claims the approbation of reason. Its effects are,
to renew the joy and the gratitude to heaven which such events most reasonably
inspire, to accustom the mind to appreciate their importance, to stimulate men
to improve the benefits that flow from them, and to imitate, on proper
occasions, the bright examples that have contributed to produce them.

IF there is* in the political annals of mankind, a day that is entitled to
national devotion, if there is one that presents an useful lesson to the world
at large, it is that which we are now assembled to commemorate. It is the day
from which we date the commencement of our national existence, and our
deliverance from a degrading state of subordination to a distant power. It has
released us from the thraldom of force and of false opinion, and opened to our
view a new path whereby to pursue our political happiness. It has enabled us to
exhibit to the world an experimental proof, that the perpetual bondage of the
human race, is not written among the immutable decrees of divine providence:
but that it depends on his own proper exertions, and the temperate employment
of his reason, that the blessings of a dignified freedom shall become the
portion of man.

NINETEEN years have now passed away, since the people of these States, wearied
with unavailing expostulations against the exercise of arbitrary authority,
renounced their connection with the British government, and prepared to
maintain, by an appeal to arms, the rights of sovereignty and independence. In
the then destitute condition of our country, it was an enterprise of a
tremendous aspect. Weak in respect to numbers, and more weak by the total want
of military resources and experience, to engage in a war against the most
powerful nation on earth, appeared to be rash and desperate But the object was
above all price, and the cost and hazard were not to be counted. Not a few were
the difficulties to be encountered, not a few were the calamities to be
endured, not a few were the precious lives that were to fall victims in the
perilous contest. After a long and manly perseverance under the heaviest
discouragements, heaven smiled approbation on the labors employed in a
righteous cause, and crowned them with a glorious success.

RELEASED from the control of prescriptive authority, Americans determined
also to break the fetters of prescriptive opinion, and to make use of the light
of reason to guide them in their future arrangements. The Rights of Britons
made up the sum of their first demands, and of their wishes -- but in the
pursuit of this object, it was their peculiar happiness to discover and to
obtain what was infinitely more precious -- the rights of Human Nature. They
perceived no claim, in reason or justice, that any one man could have, to be,
by inheritance, a ruler over millions; nor could they find that the right of
hereditary pre-eminence, in any class of men, rested on more tenable ground. It
remained then to inquire, whether considerations of national interest dictated
an acquiescence in principles, which reason seemed to disclaim.

FROM the documents of history, it was evident that the pretended right of
Kings was not conceded from a general experience of its utility, but was a mere
usurpation, maintained by violence and fraud. Nor was there a want of proof,
that the powers of monarchy had been employed, less for the purpose of
diffusing happiness among men, than for that of rendering them subservient to
the ambition and pleasures of a few, who viewed and treated them as cattle,
only created to wear the yoke of despotism. It appeared that the great mass of
mankind had, in all past times, been held in a state of servitude; that their
mental faculties had been stifled by oppression, and the fruits of their bodily
labors seized on, to satisfy the rapacious luxury of their rulers. It was
perceived also, that the cruel and destructive wars, which, in all ages, had
spread horror and desolation over the earth, arose, not from an inherent enmity
in human nature against itself -- not from a savage desire in men to destroy
each other, but from the insatiable thirst of princes, after false glory,
conquest and empire. It was plain to be observed, that as the sense of mutual
dependence was lost among men, the obligations of humanity were forgotten; that
the insolence and cruelty of monarchs grew with the growth of their power; and
that their vanity exacted homage in proportion to the multitude and enormity of
their crimes. For the more effectual advancement of the interests of
illegitimate authority, fraud had been called in to the aid of force, the holy
name of the Almighty himself had been profaned and prostituted to the vile
purposes of deception, and religion reduced to a system of scandalous hypocrisy.

THIS is but a small selection from the endless catalogue of evils, that have
arisen from the abuses of monarchic power; and the aristocratic orders have
been generally branches from the common stock of despotism, whereby oppression,
in its most odious shape, has been brought home to the door of every
individual. In short, the whole history of monarchy is little other than a
detail of acts of tyrannical injustice, under which the chief employment of
nations has been, to forge their own chains, and to enslave or exterminate
their unoffending neighbors.

SUCH being the known state of recorded facts, for a people, who were free, to
offer voluntary submission to the dominion of princes, would have been as
unwise, as to expose themselves to the ferocious rage of prowling wolves and
tigers. They would have acted no better than the foolish insect, which, being
dazzled with the splendour of the flame, from which it has recently escaped,
immediately rushes into it again, to be entirely consumed.

BUT Britain, in the opinion of many, formed an exception to the general rule,
and claimed exemption from the general censure of monarchy. In that happy land
no such enormities were to be found, the rank weed of despotism being
eradicated from it is soil. Its government had been molded by the hand of
wisdom, and combined in it all the advantages of order, energy and freedom.
Under a monarchic form, the aristocratic and democratic principles were
introduced, as correctors of every evil, and were so nicely proportioned, and
so happily adjusted, that nothing could be wanting to the perfection of the
system.

THIS is the creed of Britons; and it is deemed criminal in a subject to utter
an expression of infidelity. It was once also the creed of Americans; but a
series of insulting attempts on their liberty, had somewhat dispelled the mist
of political error, and they found it necessary to subject to the inquisitions
of reason, aided by a knowledge of facts, those maxims, which had been
gratuitously admitted, from a blind deference to what was deemed a parental
authority. Such a precaution was the more necessary, as this supposed
masterpiece of human wisdom was manifestly not the result of philosophical
design, tested and justified by experiment, but of the fortuitous collisions of
opposing interests, under changeable circumstances, which might well be
expected soon to give a decided preponderancy to one or another of the three
principles, and to destroy that balance, from which the good effects were to
slow.

IT is neither my intention* nor my wish, to deny that the British government
has its advantages and merits, compared with most of the other governments in
Europe; nor to conceal, that the people of that nation have enjoyed,
comparatively, a large share of freedom and happiness. But I contend, that it
contains not that nice balance of principles which is ascribed to it, that it
is even theoretically unsound, and so far short of perfection, that for
Americans to look to it as a model to copy after, would have been a folly never
to be forgiven by their posterity.

AS hidden rocks are more dangerous to the mariner, than those which rise
boldly before his sight, so, in politics, the concealed and insidious
operations of false principles are more difficult to be guarded against, than
the direct invasions of open despotism. A short examination, therefore, of a
system, by whose delusive appearances we have been, and may again be, in danger
of being misled, could not be deemed an unprofitable employment of our time.
And if it should appear, that it contains many imperfections which we have
avoided, we should be taught to set a proper value on the benefits that result
from our revolution; -- for it is only by comparing our actual situation with
what it might have been, that we can rightly judge of our gain or loss by the
change.

SUCH a discussion was contemplated in my first design* but could not be
comprised within a suitable compass: I am therefore compelled to omit it. I
must here notify to my hearers, that, having planned my discourse upon too
large a scale, I have not been able to pair it down to a proper size for this
occasion. But as I am no volunteer in the business, and have not called you
together with a promise of either entertainment or instruction, I have a claim
to your candor and a right to expect from you an indulgent hearing of such
observations as I am able to offer. How muchsoever I may trespass on your
patience, my relief will be at least equal to yours, when I shall have arrived
at the conclusion of my task.

ALL circumstances being duly weighed, it would have been strange indeed, if
Americans had consented to admit into their plan, principles whose manifest
tendency is, to aggrandize a few at the expense of the multitude, to check the
progress of knowledge and civilization, and to lessen the aggregate of human
happiness. Animated with a love of freedom and a desire of transmitting it to
posterity, they resolved to raise the fabric of their government on the broad
and solid basis of equal and reciprocal obligation; on the immutable principles
of justice and truth.

THEY well knew, that, without a government organized and endued with strong
and efficient powers there can be neither order nor happiness; -- and that
anarchy, so far from being allied to freedom, is of all despotism the the most
grievous and insupportable; being the despotism of the licentious and
unprincipled part of a community, over the virtuous and well disposed. On the
other hand, they know also, that the love of power is among the most
ungovernable of human passions, and by the misfortunes of other nations they
were taught, that to confine it within due and wholesome limits, is a science,
in which mankind had made but little proficiency. The records of the Roman and
Grecian republics furnished ample testimony, that men are not always to be
judged of by their professions of patriotism, nor even by the actual services
they have rendered the state; -- since it freequently appears in the end, that
both the one and the other have proceeded from motives of ambition and private
interest. The candidate for public favor acts often in disguise, until he
arrives at the summit of power; then throws aside the mask, abuses the
confidence of his fellow citizens, and turns against them the weapons with
which they have furnished him. It was the freequency of such instances of
unbridled and treacherous ambition, that in a manner compelled the Athenians to
have recourse to the desperate and horrid expedient of the ostracism, whereby
crimes were anticipated, and, under the influence of general distrust and
jealously, many of their best citizens were unworthily doomed to a ten years
banishment.

TO guard against such direful evils, in our own country, power was at first
dealt out with a cautious and sparing hand; for, in entering upon a plan of
arrangements, in which are involved the most momentous concerns of future
generations, it was judged more wise to bear with some transient evils, than,
by hasty and precipitate steps, to quit the ground of safety, and bring into
jeopardy the grand object of our designs. State governments were planned on
democratic principles, and carried into operation; and a scheme of
confederation was adopted, whereby the whole were bound in perpetual union,
under a national administration.

THE exact quantum of power to be delegated, and the best mode of distributing
it, could only be ascertained by experiment; and a single experiment could only
throw light on the subject, without clearing it of all uncertainty. To go
beyond the proper point, was to give the staff out of the hands of the people,
and to make a sacrifice of their liberty; to stop short of it, was to incur
certain, but not incurable, inconveniences. The suggestions of common prudence
were in favor of the latter part of the alternative.

THE success of our arrangements proved in practice equal to what a reflecting
mind would have expected from a first essay, made with that degree of
circumspection, which was due to so weighty a business. It is, however to be
acknowledged, that the executive energy of our governments was not competent to
the fulfillment of its intentions; and that other imperfections were
discernable, that called for a remedy. But the particular situation of the
States, at that time, had necessarily the effect of magnifying, to a very high
degree, every appearance of imbecility and incapacity in our political system.
A long and calamitous war, carried on in the bosom of our country, had left the
people under a variety of embarrassments, naturally productive of
irregularities, which, in a new and unsettled state of affairs, could not
suddenly have been corrected, even by arbitrary power.

WHOEVER wonders to see the billows of a troubled ocean continue to rage for a
while, after the storm has ceased, betrays an ignorance of the power of
physical causes; -- and no less ignorant of moral nature is he, who expects
instantaneous order and tranquillity, after the devastations and convulsions of
a civil war.

MANY of the disorders we experienced were of a temporary nature, and would
have passed away with the pressure and remembrance of the circumstances, by
which they had been produced. Compared with those, which, on like occasions,
have happened in other countries, they were light and trivial. Some of the
state legislatures, however, bewildered with dificulties, which a little time
would have removed, protracted and increased the disease, by many an illjudged
attempt to administer a remedy. With unexperienced statesmen at the helm of our
public affairs, the ill success of one injudicious measure begot others equally
mischievous, until the instability and weakness of our councils became a
reproach to the principles of our government. It is not to be understood that
there were wanting among us, men of sound principles, strict uniformity, and
great abilities; men, who had conducted us through the war, with a wisdom and
moderation, that will do them everlasting honor. It is not too high a
commendation of the American character, to say, that in no country were such
men more abundant; and that, in no former struggle, had more virtue and
patriotism been displayed, in the cabinet, in the field, and in every
department of duty. Long be distinguished and revered the names of those, who,
undismayed by misfortunes, with persevering fortitude, hazarded every thing,
and suffered every thing, for the service of their country. But, in difficult
and untried circumstances, even among men of this description, joined in
council with others less consistent, there will be a contrariety of opinions,
and a mutability of measures, until experiment has pointed out the right road.
Other particulars of the history of American politics I unwillingly omit; --
because, it is only from a connected account of disagreeable, as well as
agreeable facts* that just and useful inferences can be drawn. -- By a candid
review of our follies, we are best enabled to acquire wisdom.

ABOUT the time when the American government was dubiously floating betwixt
opposite principles some of its citizens trying (...) fast to the anchorage
ground of democracy, whilst, in the (...) of others, the magic influence of
titular distinctions, and privileged orders, formed the essence of all dignity*
respectability and energy, in national arrangements; at this critical period,
when republicanism was the jest of despots in Europe, and of fools in America,
a new and wonderful revolution struck the world with astonishment, and changed
the face of affairs in this country. The French nation having for many
centuries, endured the most grievous oppressions, under a despotic government,
were at length roused to break their chains, and to vindicate the rights of
man. At a single stroke they cut down all privileged orders, as rank and
noxious weeds, that poisoned the soil, and stifled the very germ of freedom.
They ploughed up the ground of civil government, that no vestige might be left
of their ancient system.

THOSE among us, who fostered hopes, that they would soon be crushed by a
powerful combination of enemies, affected to laugh at their folly, in
attempting to go, at once, into the extreme of liberty, for which they were
unprepared. The weak, commonplace argument, that a nation is unprepared for a
change, is always resorted to by those, who are opposed to the melioration of
the condition of mankind. America was unprepared, France was unprepared, and
every nation will be unprepared in the opinion of the enemies of freedom, and
of those who have the weakness to become dupes to them. It is true, that, the
greater the change, that is to take place, the greater is likely to be the
convulsion in effecting it, and the longer the time, before tranquillity and
order can be restored. But, the grand and proper preparation, is unanimity with
respect to the object; -- divided councils are the bane of every laudable
undertaking.

THAT the French labored under heavy oppressions, was admitted. Had they been
content to reform actual abuses, had they been content to copy the British
Government, they would have done wisely; or, in plainer language, had they been
content to remain in the power of their oppressors, they would never have been
able to alarm the friends of monarchy, or to enlighten the world, by the
success of a new and grand experiment. Far be it from the soul of an American,
or of any friend of freedom, to contemplate, without horror, the effusions of
innocent blood* or the cruelties of unnecessary rigor toward the guilty. It is
a lamentable disgrace to the cause of liberty, that it should ever be indebted
to the aid of sanguinary monsters, or contemners of order and law. But these
horrors are, more properly, chargeable to the injustice of the previous
despotism, than to the inevitable violence of the explosion, which scatters it
in ruins. -- If men are bound in chains, and hoodwinked from the light of
information, can it be expected, that they should conduct themselves with
moderation and wisdom, at the moment of gaining their liberty? -- As well might
the torrent that has just torn away its banks, be expected to flow, in a gentle
stream, down the rough precipice, that lies in its course.

THE intemperate publication of Mr. Edmund Burke, was read in this country with
an approving avidity; and his sentiments and predictions retailed out by many,
with peculiar satisfaction. The steady friends, however, of republican
government, felt the French revolution as a cordial, that revived their hopes,
that the principle would yet be cherished, and tested by fair and impartial
reason. Gradually those, who had been abashed by the horselaugh of triumphant
scorn, finding a new and powerful support to the cause they had abandoned in
despair, returned again and rallied round the democratic standard. As the
progress of the revolution evinced the probability of its success; in many
instances, even the high toned aristocrat, the stickler for British principles
of government, began to soften his note, and, laying aside his plumes, prepared
to glide back, with the turning tide of popular opinion. In short the public
sentiment took a decided turn in favor of republicanism, and the bark of
liberty weathered the rocks, that had threatened her destruction.

BUT, as wisdom is only to be gained by experience; as the human mind is prone
to vibrate to opposite extremes, before it finds the middle point, of safety
and truth; it now happened, that the fire of democratic zeal kindled up to a
dangerous height, and the over sanguine voatries of freedom, whist they beheld
with enthusiasm the exertions of the French, mistook for democratic government
that revolutionary state, which is only a dreadful pilgrimage to it. The
mischief of this error was, a forgetfulness of the necessity of law, of order,
and of governmental authority; and a severish ardor, to take up arms in defense
of a sacred cause, without a due consideration, whether it was likely to derive
real benefit, or serious injury, from our precipitate efforts to succor it.
The most laudable and judicious exercise of legal power, for the maintenance of
order, for the preservation of the independent jurisdiction of our country, for
the support of the dignity of a government which was a deposit by the people in
the hands of their officers, to be guarded against all invasions, was
calumniated as an arbitrary stretch of official authority. The most faithful
discharge of public duty, in endeavoring to secure to the United States the
invaluable blessings of lasting peace, was construed as a declaration against
liberty, and in favor of a nation, from which we have received both insult and
injury.

MUCH reason has this nation to pride herself, that, at so critical a period,
she had, at the head of her affairs, a man, whose integrity was not to be
warped by any considerations; whose judgment was sound, and whose fortitude was
equal to the trying occasion: who saw, in the maintenance of order, of peace,
and of just authority, the true interest of the community, and of republican
freedom. Had the President of the United States done less for the assertion and
vindication of the national rights of his country, he would have been culpable,
as surrendering to others that power, which being lodged in his hands, he was
bound to preserve* and to exercise when circumstances required. Had he done
less for the preservation of peace with foriegn nations, he would have shown
himself too little sensible of the high value of it to America, or too little
solicitous to promote her prosperity. If he has felt the sting of unjust
reproach* it must be a consoling reflection* that those, who are most forward
to impeach the motives of an upright man, will also, if they live to see a
change, be the first to contrast his merits with the real, or supposed,
demerits of his successor.

THOSE* who complain of the too rigid measures to maintain the independent
jurisdiction of our country, ought to be informed, that the man, who violates
the rights of a nation, violates the rights of many men, and cannot be a friend
to the democratic principle; and that the power vested by the people in any of
their officers, is a sacred trust, the surrender of which vould be a high crime
against the state. Those, who complain that too much pains have been taken to
avoid war, have in fact, bestowed the highest possible encomium on the chief
magistrate of a republican government. They should consider, how immensely
valuable, at this time, is the peace of America, to herself, to France, and to
the republican interest in every part of the globe. They should reflect* that a
military character, of high reputation and great popularity, at the head of our
administration, were he actuated by motives of ambition, instead of a desire to
serve the public, could not wish for a more favorable opportunity of
accomplishing his designs, than what a foreign war must necessarily present;
and that his studious anxiety to avoid it, is the most certain proof of his
patriotic views, if proofs can still be wanting from one, who has already given
more than it can ever be the lot of any other man to give unless this country
should again be involved in misfortunes that, all good citizens must deprecate.
It is not the lover of peace, but the promoter of war, whose intentions are
most to be suspected.

TO expatiate on this subject, is not within the compass of my plan. Suffice it
to say, that peace is the voice of humanity, that it is the true policy of all
republican governments, that it is in a peculiar manner the true policy of
America, and more especially at this particular time, when the trial of her
principles is pending before the tribunal of reason. Every year of peace, at
present, adds immensely to our strength, and to our means of waging war, if
necessity should require it. The time will come, and that shortly, when we may
bid defiance, not to a single nation only, but to all the powers on earth, if
they could be combined against us. In the mean while, should we waste our
strength before it is matured, our prosperity will be of much more tardy
growth, and we may be engaged in continual wars, sending to augment our
national debt, to increase our taxes, to throw us off our guard against
usurpations of power, and finally to endanger the republican principle. But,
although war is at all times to be considered as an evil* yet if the necessity
should ever arrive -- should the moment even now be near at hand, America will
strike with a vigor, that will confound the hardiest of her foes, and convince
them, to their cost, that they have mistaken her spirit, her power, and her
resources.

ALTHOUGH we may, at times, be a little disturbed by temporary ebullitions of
unreflecting passion, we may entertain a well grounded hope, that these will
never lead to serious mischief. Our government is founded on democratic
principles, and the more fully and correctly these are understood* the more
will they conduce to the establishment of harmony and good order: and, although
I am ready to confess my opinion, that in the modification of our present
constitution those principles were not as well guarded as they ought to have,
been under the circumstances existing at the time of adopting it, yet, as the
French revolution came about opportunely in aid of them, and brought us timely
countenance and support, against the jeerings of the world, by which we were
almost put out of countenance and out of conceit of our own plans and
doctrines; and, as the experiment we have made without lofty titles and
privileged orders, has had a success, that refutes all the arguments in favor
of such distinction; and moreoever, as several of the nations of Europe seem to
be now verging toward republicanism, I am persuaded that there is just reason
to believe, that our principles are at length fixed on a basis, that will not
easily be shaken. Much, however, must depend on the discretion, with which we
manage the advantages we possess, and the care we take, to correct our errors.
Americans ought to look upon themselves, at present, as almost the sole
guardians and trustees of republican freedom; for, other nations are not, as we
are, at leisure to show it in its true and most enticing form.

WHILST we contemplate, with a laudable delight, the rapid growth of our
prosperity, let us ascribe it to its true cause, the wholesome operation of our
new political philosophy. Whatever blessings we enjoy, over and above what are
to be found under the British government, whatever evils we avoid, to which the
people of that government are exposed, for all these advantages are we indebted
to the separation that has taken place, and the new order of things that has
obtained amongst us. Let us continue, then, to celebrate with festivity the
great event, that has procured to us these rare benefits. Let us be thankful to
the parent of the universe that he has given to us the first enjoyment of that
freedom, which is intended in due time, for the whole race of man. Let us
diligently study the nature of our situation, that we may better know how to
preserve and improve its advantages But, above all, let us study the genuine
principles of democracy, and steadily practice them, that we may refute the
calumnies of those who who would bring them into disgrace.

LET us publish to the world and see our conduct verify our assertions, that,
by democracy, we mean not a state of licentiousness, nor a subversion of order,
nor a defiance of legal authority. Let us convince mankind, that we understand
by it a well ordered government, endued with energy to fulfill all its
intentions, to act with effect upon all delinquents, and to bring to punishment
all offenders against the laws; but, at the same time, not a government of
usurpation, not a government of prescrpition, but a government of compact, upon
the ground of equal right and equal obligation; in which the rights of each
individual, spring out of the engagement he has entered into, to perform the
the duties required of him by the community, whereby the same rights in others
are to be maintained inviolate. The supreme authority, or sovereignty, is in
the people collectively. The government, or administration, is an agency
appointed by the supreme authority, to exercise in their behalf, and for their
good, such powers as they have thought proper to delegate to them. The laws are
the will of the supreme authority, promulgated by its proper agents. Obedience
to the laws, is the duty of each individual to the sovereignty of the whole, by
whose authority they have been enacted. Opposition is treason against that
sovereignty, and is a violation of the rights of the whole body of the people,
collectively and individually. It is a denial of the sovereignty of the people,
and therefore is incompatible with the principles of democracy. The
constitution is an expression of the powers to be exercised by the government
for the general good. The legislature are bound, under the limitations of the
constitution, to pass such laws as they may deem wholesome. The executive
authority is bound to consider those laws, as the will of the community, and to
carry them strictly into execution. Eveery individual is bound to implicit
obedience.

IF the laws and measures of the government are sound to be injurious or
oppressive, the people will show their disapprobation, by changing their
agents, and the evil will soon be remedied. If a change is not made, the
inference is, that the measures are satisfactory, to the majority, at least, of
the community; and the minority must peaceably acquiesce; having a right
however, at all times, to endeavor, by fair and decent arguments, to prove the
truth of their own opinions.

EVERY individual has a right to speak, or publish, his sentiments on the
measures of government; but he ought to do it in such language, as to show that
he has a deference for the sentiments of others, that he is a democrat, and
therefore cannot wish to be a dictator -- that, whilst he asserts the right of
expressing and vindicating his own judgment, he acknowledges the obligation to
submit to the judgment of those, whose authority he cannot dispute. In his
statement of facts, he is bound to adhere strictly to the truth; for, any
deviation from truth is an imposition on the public, and a gross violation of
the democratic principle, being an attempt to gain, by deception, more than
that proportion of influence which belongs to truth and equality. In his
strictures on the conduct of men in public stations, he is bound to do justice
to their characters, and not to criminate them without substantial reason. The
right of character is a sacred and invaluable right, and is not forfeited by
accepting a public appointment. Whoever knowingly departs from any of these
maxims, is guilty of a crime against the community; he is guilty of an attempt
to usurp an undue influence, an influence by deception, and therefore is a
violator of of the principles of democracy.

IT is of high importance to us, to distinguish the genuine spirit of
democracy, and to detect the impositions of those, who, whilst they pretend to
be democrats, are acting the part of aristocrats and despots. Firmness* without
violence, forms the true character of a democrat. If he is in the majority, he
has no occasion to be violent, because he is with the ruling party; if in the
minority, he has no right to be so, for violent opposition to a majority, is
rebellion against democracy, and subversive of its fundamental maxim. But he
may, at all times, be firm, and endeavor to convince the opposite party, that
he is right; for it is by freedom of discussion, that truth is brought to light.

GOVERNMENTS may be variously modified, on the democratic principle. That,
which possesses the most energy, and, at the same time, best guards its
principles, is the most perfect. A democratic governmnnt ought to have the most
perfect energy; because there can be no excuse for disobedience to an authority
that is delegated by the community at large, and only held during their
pleasure. But, in communicating energy, without gradual and cautious
experiment, there is a danger of communicating with it, the power of sencing in
the government, and changing its principles: This was the danger apprehended by
many, at the time of adopting our present constitution: nor was it a groundless
apprehension. The democratic principle being at that time, as it were, forlorn,
destitute and despised by the world, was in danger of being laughed out of
countenance, even in this country, and of being banished from it, as a thing of
too mean an origin, to be admited into polished societies; but, having gained,
by the French revolution, an immense addition of support, the fashion of
opinion is much changed, and this danger proportionably diminished.

I REPEAT, that a democratic government ought to possess the most perfect
energy; and I add, that, without such energy, true freedom, and the real and
essential rights of man, are without protection. Many maxims taken from other
governments are inapplicable to ours, and therefore, with respect to us, are
erroneous. All monarchies, however modified, are governments of usurpation, or
prescription. In the exercise of their authority, the interest and pleasure of
the governing parties is more considered, than the general welfare: of course,
the more energetic such authority is, the greater is the oppression felt from
it. Hence arises the false idea, that energy in government is inimical to
freedom. This is only true in the cases I have mentioned. In governments by
compact, where, of course, the authority is legitimate, and exercised for the
general good, the reverse is true -- Energy, in such a government, is the best
support that freedom can desire; and freedom is more perfect in proportion to
the degree of energy.

EXECUTIVE officers, in a democratic government, are bound to enforce the laws
strictly, except where a discretional power is given them; or, except in great
emergencies, or circumstances unforeseen and unprovided for, by the
legislature, and which admit of no delay. Otherwise, they are not to be judges
of the propriety of the laws; and, to presume to dispense with their execution,
is to usurp a legislative power, and betray their trust. General laws made by
general consent, must be intended for the general good. An evasion of their
operation, is an evasion of the obligations, and therefore, a contempt of the
rights, of equality. The officer, who permits this violation of the democratic
principle, is criminal and responsible.

IF the laws of a democracy prove unwholesome in their effects, it is because
the members of the legislature have erred in their judgment, as the best and
wisest of men are liable to do: in which case, they will soon correct the
error; or, because they have been improperly chosen, in which case, it depends
on the people to correct it, at the next election. In the mean while, obedience
to the law is the duty of every one, and none should be allowed to refuse it.
If the people do their duty as electors* no lasting mischief can happen: If
they do not, they are themselves the authors of it. Hence it plainly appear how
very important it is, that every citizen should make a proper use of his right
of suffrage. It is the more important, because it is, with us, a received,
although an erroneous maxim, that a legislator ought not to be questionable for
any thing done in the legislative body. This sentiment is derived from the same
source as the former, and does not apply to our government. In a monarchy, or
mixed government, the doctrine is good, so far as it is intended as a barrier
against the power of the crown. In a democracy, a legislator, as well as every
other public functionary, ought to be responsible to the community for the
uprightness of his conduct. If he concurs in an unconstitutional act, he is
guilty of usurpation, and contempt of the sovereign authority, which has
forbidden him to pass the bounds prescribed by the constitution. He has
violated his oath, and the most sacred of all duties. To omit him at the next
election, is no adequate punishment for such a crime. Abuse of power is
despotism, and the democracy that does not guard against it, is defective. If,
in any department of government, a man may abuse, or exceed his powers, without
fear of punishment, the right of one man is at the mercy of another, and
freedom, in such a government, has no existence.

THERE is one other erroneous opinion, generally current with us, as well as
the rest of the world, which I think it proper to combat; because it tends to
produce an impatience of the restraints of good government, and to furnish in
the minds of weak restless men, a sort of plea for turbulence and sedition. It
is the long received doctrine, that, in a state of society or government, men
give up a portion of their natural rights, in order to have the residue secured
to them; by which it must be understood, that the rights possessed and enjoyed,
in a state of government, are necessarily fewer than those possessed in, what
has been called, a state of nature. A man who adopts this opinion, is naturally
enough inclined to look on government with a jealous eye, to esteem it, at
best, but as the least of two evils, and to feel the restraints, or
obligations, imposed by it, as an abridgment of his natural liberty. This
position conveys an idea altogether untrue, and highly derogatory to the
noblest of all human institutions; an institution so fundamentally necessary,
that without it, no other could take place of any nature whatever. Without it,
men must forever remain in a state of savage ignorance and wretchedness; in a
condition more miserable, and more contemptible, than that of the vilest
brutes: or reptiles. If we could suppose men in that state, which is falsely
called a state of nature, their rights would be extremely few, of very little
value, and wholly destitute of protection and security. And unless we include
among the natural rights of man, his right of connecting himself with others in
a state of civil society, his existence would be too wretched to be worth
preserving. By legitimate government, his rights* so far from being diminished,
are multiplied more than a thousand fold. To government he is indebted for
every comfort, every convenience, and every enjoyment of life. He binds himself
to certain duties, which are the conditions, by which he becomes entitled to
the benefits of government. But these duties, except on extraordinary
occasions, are extremely light, whilst the benefits they procure are immense in
value, and almost infinite in number. Were it possible, in the jurisprudence of
a democratic government* to deprive men of the benefits of government, in exact
proportion to the neglect of their obligations to it, it would be a code
founded in severe justice; and every one would become sensible, how
incomparably more numerous and valuable, are the rights acquired by the
stipulations of compact, than those which belong to a state of nature. All
would then be induced to make a proper estimate of the blessings of a well
ordered community, and to be in love with legitimate government, as the
fountain of true liberty, and of every thing valuable in human life. No one
should dare to talk of the rights of man, who is unwilling to perform the
duties of a citizen. Such a person would, in strict justice, have no rights,
but those of a savage: for, the essential rights of man are acquired by
purchase, and the price must be paid, to make the title good. This price is,
obedience to the laws.

HAD it been convenient, on this occasion, to give a connected history of
American politics, it would have appeared* that we have, at one time, been in
danger from the partialities early imbibed for the usages and opinions of the
British nation; and, at another time, from an over zealous desire to assist our
French friends, and to become, rather conspicuously active than essentially
useful, in the advancement of their success. We have had time to recover from
the phrenzy of both extremes, and to consider well the evils* into which either
of the errors might have led us. In the first case we were rushing headlong
into the vortex of monarchical opinion* and, mistaking pageantry for dignity*
the exaltation of a few for the interest of the whole, complexity for system,
the contrivances of artifice or the shifts of necessity for the wholesome
arrangements of wisdom; we had begun with servile imitation, to weave around
ourselves a net, in which we might long have been entangled. In the other case,
we mistook disorganization for freedom and were driving back to a state of
anarchy, dreading the exercise of lawful authority, and the necessary
restraints on the violators of order, as invasions of the rights of man.

WE have gained experimental knowledge, and are now fixing at the happy medium
of orderly democratic government. We know that anarchy and monarchy are equally
incompatible with freedom: -- but, the former is the most insupportable tyranny
of the two, for which reason, the latter has been so long tolerated by the
world. We have discovered, that order may be produced by authority returning
upon itself; or, rather by the conjunct authority of the whole community
occasionally acting back upon each individual: -- that this energy ought to be
most perfect, since the community can never oppress itself, and can have no
inducement to oppress any of the members, who compose it. We are giving to the
world a proof, that an orderly and well regulated government may be founded on
principles of equality, which take away all pretext for sedition and tumult,
and all or most of the incitements to legalize the horrors of murder.

BUT, the unqualified use of the word equality, has given rise to the most
erroneous and mischievous opinions, and furnished the enemies of democracy with
too just a plea, to charge it with the grossest absurdity. -- By equality is to
be understood, equality of civil rights, and not of condition, for, the latter
could never be produced, but by the total destruction of the former, and could
only have place in a state of barbarism and wretchedness. Equality of rights
necessarily produces inequality of possessions* because, by the laws of nature
and of equality, every man has a right to use his faculties in an honest way,
and the fruits of his labor are his own. But, some men have more strength than
others, some more health than others, some more industry, and some more
ingenuity, than others; and, according to these, and many other circumstances,
the products of their labor must be various, and their property must become
unequal. And this inequality, so far from being an evil, is absolutely
necessary to the well being of society; it is the cement that binds together
the various employments of life, and forms the whole into a beautiful system of
mutual dependencies. -- The rights of property must be sacred, and must be
protected; otherwise, there could be no exertion of either ingenuity or
industry, and, consequently, nothing but extreme poverty, misery and brutal
ignorance. No man can be a friend of equality, in its true and proper sense,
who has not the most sacred regard to the rights of property. Not the rich
only, but the most indigent, and the most infirm, are highly interested in the
truth of this doctrine. The aggregate of the property of individuals, is the
measure of the wealth and prosperity of a nation; and the prosperity of the
nation is beneficial to the poorest individual, because it affords him a better
chance of relief, if he is helpless, and a better chance of thriving* if he has
health and industry. Who is there, although he be poor himself, that does not
rejoice in the prosperity of his country? And what is this prosperity but the
aggregate of the wealth of individuals? Who is there, however indigent he may
be, that would not prefer a rich and plentiful country to a poor one? And for
what reason would he prefer the former? Is it not, because he would have a
better prospect of thriving, or of receiving support?

IF I could have taken time to state properly the nature and principles of our
government, it would have been made to appear, that the just administration of
it, and the preservation of the democratic principle, depends entirely on the
vigilance and circumspection of the people, in the choice of their agents. If
they always take care to choose good and able men, the government can never be
ill administered, nor changed in its principles. But, if they neglect the
duties of election (for election implies a duty as well as a right) they may,
when they least think of it, find themselves enthralled by illegitimate power.

THEY ought, also* to study diligently, and to practice faithfully, the genuine
principles of democracy; and not suffer themselves to be misled, by those, who
wish to disgrace it. They should consider, that democracy is a government of
the people, not by irregular, disorderly, and contradictory acts of power, but
by an indivisible union of the authority of the whole, organized, and acting by
rule and system: That the whole people collectively are the sovereign
authority, and that each individual is bound to a scrupulous obedience: --
That, it being impossible for the whole people to assemble together* and as
impossible if assembled, to transact, in their own persons, the business of
government, it becomes necessary, that the government should be administered by
agents: -- That, they have a right, by a constitutional compact* to vest in
those agents, conjunctly, or severally, such powers, as they judge proper: and,
the authority, exercised in pursuance of such delegated powers* is the
authority of the whole. Resistance to it, is rebellion against the sovereignty
of the people. and a violation of the principles of democracy.

IT behooves the people, also, to hold in mind, that it is essential to the
welfare of a democracy, that, whilst they are extremely watchful over the
conduct of their agents, and ready to detect, expose, and punish, every
departure from the strait line of duty, they should be equally liberal, in
making allowances for errors of judgment, and differences of opinion. If a
public servant is once caught tripping, let him be stigmatized, and never more
taken into favor. If he errs from gross ignorance, let him be dismissed without
severe reproach. But, if his errors are neither intentional nor egregious, let
it be considered, that perfection is not the portion of humanity, and that the
best, and wisest, must often err. To expect from man, more than belongs to
human nature, is to be less than men ourselves.

THE most inflexible integrity, is what we have a right to require, in every
public agent; -- and, when we have found that, we ought to be satisfied with
something beyond mediocrity, in other qualities. Whilst we vainly go in quest
of that perfection, which is not to be found, we may lose the benefit of
valuable services that are at our command. True merit should always be
encouraged and rewarded by popular approbation. It is often rather of a
retiring than of a forward nature, and will not bear to be goaded by undeserved
censure. When men of honor are driven from public stations, others of a
different cast, will be ready, with ostentatious pretensions, to worm
themselves into their places; and the public interest must suffer by the change.

IN a republican government, it is of no less consequence to distinguish and
encourage merit, than to detect and punish unfaithful conduct. Those,
therefore, do not act the part of real democrats, who are always seeking
occasion to wound, by sharp reproaches, the feelings of an honest man. Such
practices tend to clear the stage of every valuable character, and to make room
for those, who, for the sweets of power, and the uses to which they can convert
it, are willing to receive all the dirt of calumny and scurrility. Can it be
the interest of any community, to render its most faithful servants uneasy in
their stations, and disgusted with the service? Harrassed with never ceasing
murmurs and accusations, is it possible for men of the best intentions, to do
their duty with alacrity and effect? Under the influence or such a policy, are
the best, or the worst, of the citizens, most likely to be in the
administration of the government? To be watchful over the interests of the
community, to give notice of every danger, to expose every false character, is
the part of a patriot. But, to be dissatisfied with every thing, to delight in
finding fault, is neither patriotism nor wisdom.

IT is both our duty and our interest, to distinguish betwixt liberty and
licentiousness, and to show, that they are not companions, but irreconcilable
enemies, that can never exist together. To speak of liberty without law, is to
suppose an effect without a cause. We have done much for the advancement of the
republican cause, we have proved the practibility of its principles; -- It
remains, that we cleanse it of the vile dross of licentiousness, that the world
may contemplate it in its genuine purity. The lovers of licentiousness must
ever be considered as the promoters of monarchy; -- because, by introducing an
evil that cannot long be supported, they drive men to the necessity of flying
to the most speedy remedy, which is submission to arbitrary power.

WE should show, that we always consider the rights of nations as comprehended
in the rights of man; and that, however we may be convinced of the preference
due to our own system, we are willing to leave to others the right of judging
for themselves, so long as they act in the same liberal manner by us. It is
among the rights of every nation, to live under a monarchy, until they become
sensible of the superior dignity and happiness of a republican government: And
even princes are entitled to be treated with respect, when they deport
themselves as friends of the human race. Let us never quarrel with others for
being attached to monarchy, if they do not show a disposition to disturb us for
being republicans. Let us recommend the tree of democracy, by the excellence of
its fruit, and not frighten the world, by holding up to view the thorny and
noxious plant of anarchy, in its stead. We should never separate the idea of
the rights, from that of the duties, of a citizen, nor the idea of liberty from
that of law.

WHILST the French, and other nations in Europe, are contending for the
abolition of monarchy, it is the part of Americans, to show what is to be
substituted in its place. If anarchy were to take place of monarchy, the change
would be infinitely for the worse, and the end of the experiment must be, after
the effusion of a deluge of blood, and the waste of an immensity of treasure,
to revert back to the ancient system. But if we prove to demonstration, as we
certainly may, that democracy is the government of reason and philanthropy,
that it is truly a government of laws and not of men, that it is capable of
producing all the benefits and improvements of which human society is
susceptible, that it is calculated to advance, to its highest pitch, the true
dignity of the human character; we then remove from the world the clouds of
dark uncertainty, and exhibit to mankind a resting point, where they may find
the consummation and reward of their labors. In proportion as this truth is
disseminated over the world, the cause of democracy will gain strength; and the
rights and interests of human nature will derive more benefit from it, than
from the operations of a thousand armies The empire of reason will soon
prevail; and monarchs, perceiving it to be in vain to struggle against it, will
be ready, at the first requisition, to descend from their thrones, and, to lay
down their diadems and scepters at the feet of their subjects. -- Revolutions
will be produced without bloodshed, and the condition of man will be
universally improved.

HOW much better is this, than to endanger our principles by plunging rashly
into war, without a prospect of affording the smallest assistance to those we
mean to serve! How much better is it, than to leave the world still in darkness
with respect to the practicability of the republican principle, and to withold
from nations the powerful incitement, we are able to set before them, to engage
in its support! How much better is it, to inform mankind where they may fix
with safety, than to leave them to struggle in the confusion of discordant and
jarring opinions, and at length to relapse into former habits! In short, let us
not leave our task unfinished; let us do the duty of republicans and of
Americans, and not suffer any other nation to snatch from us the glory of
being, not only the first of moderns to fight in the cause of democracy, but
also the first to prove to the world, that we have fought in a good cause, that
we know how to make a proper use of our success, and to derive from it an ample
reward and compensation, for all the blood and treasure expended in its
defense. -- It is thus that we shall subdue all the empires of the earth -- not
by the terrors of war, but by the allurements of reason -- not to become our
vassals and slaves, but to taste with us the blessings of freedom and peace. It
is thus that we shall gain the noblest triumph over all our enemies, the
triumph of having loaded them with benefits. It is thus, that we shall render
this day glorious and splendid, not with the momentary blaze of a wasting
meteor, nor within the narrow bounds of a single empire; but, with the
permanent luster of a genial sun, destined to diffuse light and comfort over
the whole face of nature. It is thus that we shall prove America to be the
friend and benefactress of the world -- the names of her patriots shall adorn
the page of history, and their noble actions shall be recorded for the
imitation of future generations.

WHILST, on each anniversary of American independence, we indulge in the
pleasing contemplation of numerous and increasing benefits, which have grown
out of that great event; may the sincerity of our gratitude to the Divine
Being, and our just estimation of the services of our fallen compatriots be
evinced by our corresponding endeavors to raise to the highest respctability,
in the eye of reason and philosophy, that liberal system whose foundation we
have established. And whilst with the sensibility of fraternal affection, we
seek to render due honor to the martial achievements and the magnanimous
perseverance of those, whose lives or labors have been generously devoted to
the public good, let us not forget, that, on great and important occasions, the
mild influence of female merit is a powerful stimulus to the exertions of manly
virtue, and gives energy to its effects. Let it not be forgotten by the friends
of freedom, that to the virtuous daughters of America, the praise is due, of a
laudable and beneficent attachment to its cause, under the most trying
circumstances. With exemplary constancy, they have sustained the burden of
misfortune, and, to serve their country, have drank deep of the cup of
affliction. They have seen the gloomy day of adversity and woe, and felt the
ruthless hand of barbarian insolence triumphant over distress. They have been
torn, with savage cruelty, from their dearest relatives: They have been
deprived of their property, and insulted in their habitations, or driven from
them, with the sad prospect of never returning to enjoy the comforts of
domestic peace. These evils they have endured, without shrinking from their
duty, or betraying the honor of their sex. When flattering insidious
attentions, or brutal contempt, were in their option* with a dignified
firmness, they preferred the latter Superior to the temptations of luxury and
dissipation, they turned, with scorn, from the proud oppressor; and, with
benignant smiles* cheared the burdened soul of the captive. They poured the
balm of comfort into his wounds, and changed his misery into delight and
triumph. It was thus, that, with the powerful influence of feminine virtue,
they nobly supported the cause of liberty, and their country, and eminently
promoted its success. Many of us, who are here present, have been witnesses of
their worthy conduct and partakers of the sweet consolation it afforded: Let us
not suffer the remembrance of it to be obliterated from our minds, but
gratefully pay them that just tribute of praise, which may excite others, on
like occasions, to an emulation of their merits. From these examples and from
the promising virtues of those whom we now see in the early bloom of beauty and
youth, we may form a happy presage, that, in our country, the fascinating
powers of the more lovely part of the community, will always take such a
direction as to further the great ends of our revolution, and to heighten the
luster of the American name.

HAVING already consumed much more of your time than was reasonable on this
occasion, I will not add to the trespass, by drawing out my discourse to a
greater length, or by useless apologies for its want of correctness and
connection. It only remains for me to request, that what has been said may be
accepted with the same spirit of candor, with which, I trust, it has been
offered: And that, if the doctrines I have delivered, are such as merit your
approbation, you will concur with (...) endeavoring to propagate them, for the
honor of republican government, and the eventual advancement of human happiness.

FINIS.

