Tyrannical Libertymen.

A DISCOURSE UPON NEGRO-SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES:

COMPOSED AT --, IN NEWHAMPSHIRE; ON THE LATE FEDERAL THANKSGIVING-DAY.

"AND I BEHELD THE TEARS OF SUCH AS WERE OPPRESSED, AND THEY HAD NO COMFORTER;
AND ON THE SIDE OF THEIR OPPRESSORS THERE WAS POWER; BUT THEY HAD NO COMFORTER."

FROM THE EAGLE OFFICE.

HANOVER, NEWHAMPSHIRE, 1795.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
2 SAMUEL XII. 5. And David' s anger was greatly kindled against the man; and
he said to Nathan, As the LORD lives, the man that has done this thing shall
surely die.
UNWARY and vindictive monarch! He clearly sees, in its full magnitude, the
mote that blemishes another's eye, while, at the same time, without his seeming
to be sensible of it, a beam is in his own eye.

And we are his legitimate children. The blood of this royal dispenser of
justice flows in our veins. We sentence the Algerines, as he that villainous
sheep-stealer. We want only the power, and they would experience a most
exemplary chastisement; and, if some could be gratified, would be crased from
the catalogue of nations.

Prepare your ears to hear a most extraordinary anathema, pronounced against
that infatuated people by one of our first poets and eminent statesmen.

Great maledictions of eternal wrath,
Which like heaven's vialed vengeance singe and scathe!
Transfix with scorpion stings their callous heart,
Make blood-shot eye balls from their sockets start,
For balm pour brimstone in their wounded soul,
Then open perdition and ingulph the whole!
In the name of horror, why this raving and execration! O, the Algerines have
captured and enslaved five or six score of Americans, and keep them in abject
servitude and distress. For this they are condemned to death and perdition; and
I know not but heaven suggested the verdict.

But if this thing must be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the
dry? In these United States, not five or six score, but five or six hundred
thousand persons, are enslaved; -- not captured, like those Americans, upon the
high seas, where no one goes unapprized of the danger; but dragged defenseless
from their native fields; and frequently treated, as might easily be made to
appear, in a manner barbarous as our people are treated at Algiers.

In Massachusetts the negroes were freed long ago. In New Hampshire and
Vermont, they are few in number; but some were found, at the taking of the last
census, to be still in slavery even here. They might indeed be free, did they
know how to avail themselves of the bill of rights, which declares, that all
men are born equally free. But to our disgrace, they are and ought to be
considered as slaves, till government s^^^l take effectual measures, as their
guardians, to (...), that they are in fact free; and till, for the sake of
example, their freedom shall be made known to the world.

What if some states have passed acts of non-importation? That, so far as
respects the negroes now in slavery, is just nothing at all. How will the
non-importation of others repair the wrong done to these? Or, if no wrong is
done, why should importation be stopped? Those who are now slaves may pray, it
is true, like the rich man in hell, that none of their brethren may be brought
to this place of torment; but their prayers would avail but little, if granted,
in mitigation of their own tortures.

The injustice of enslaving our fellow creatures, even though they are black,
is pretty generally acknowledged; and in respect to our slaves, people affect
to lament their misfortune in being brought into a situation, which renders it
necessary, that they should be continued in bondage. It is just, no doubt, that
the negroes should have remained free; but they are slaves, and therefore let
them continue so. Let them, however, have this consolation, that we will leave
off our injustice gradually. There shall be an abolition; but it shall begin
moderately, and proceed leisurely, and be completed sometime or never. Thus the
poor slave may comfort himself, that at some distant period, when GOD only
knows, he, or his children, or his children's children, may hope for
deliverance.

Some are for setting them free immediately. They are not for continuing an
abuse of the most cruel nature, under any pretext whatever. And why are not all
of this opinion? It is because many are prejudiced, and many are indolent, and
very many are interested; not to mention, that most people pay but very little
attention to the subject.

Hence it has happened, that every advocate for an immediate emancipation has
been immediately silenced by some specious objection. The indolent have by this
means sound repose for their consciences; and the interested have rid
themselves of much odium, without any great danger of losing their vassals.

First, it is plead, that slaves are property. "The operation (said Mr. Madison
in Congress) of reducing the number of slaves was going on as quickly as
possible. The mention of such a thing in the house had in the mean time a very
bad effect on that species of property."

Secondly, without negro slaves the southern plantations can not be managed to
advantage.

Thirdly, the most plausible and confounding plea of the whole is, that if they
were all at once and immediately set at liberty, to run at large, they would be
a dangerous parcel of vagabonds, more unhappy themselves than at present, and
the terror and vexation of the community.

O, it is doubtless cruel, to deprive a master of the slave for whom he paid
perhaps forty guineas, and has had his labor for not more than forty years.
But to whom did he pay the guineas? In the name of conscience, who had any
right, in the first place, to sell negroes? If a shipload of Frenchmen were
offered for sale, the enquiry would quickly be made. The principle would soon
be established, that man could not be made the property of man.

But we ourselves are too secure to imagine the case our own; otherwise we
might appeal to that eternal rule of right, to do by others as they should do
by us. And with what feeling should we stand forth for sale, be slaves, be
called that species of property; we, who denied our parent country the right of
taxing us, and edged our swords to maintain our liberty, or to die! Should we
endure the oppressor's rod?

Money has been paid by the purchaser; but no equivalent has been given or can
be given to the negro. Liberty can not be estimated by guineas. If so, have I
no claim to my liberty, because a tyrant, stronger than I, has robbed me of it,
and sold me? This species of property, upon that principle, is not so highly
privileged as other species; for the laws take care, that stolen goods, though
purchased by an honest man at their full value, shall be given up to the right
owner; and shall they tolerate slavery?

But if there seems injustice, that individuals should wholly lose the labor
of those for whom they have paid so much money; let the state under the
countenance of which they have carried on this accursed traffic, make them some
consideration, and let every one who has acquiesced in the system of slavery
contribute to its abolition.

Yet every master is holden by every tie, whatever government may see cause to
do or not to do, to grant manumission to his slaves; and woe to the man who
takes advantage of any human institution, to injure his fellow creatures, when
his conscience testifies that it is an injury, and that the law is cruel, and
repugnant to all right.

A regular importation of negro slaves into America took place in consequence
of a suggestion of Casas, a Spanish clergyman. When the Spaniards conquered
Hispaniola, they reduced the Indians to servitude, and treated them with such
cruelty, that multitudes perished. Casas strove to relieve them; but failed in
every measure. At last he proposed the importing of negroes; in order, by
enslaving them, to free the Indians. So blind is man!

The second objection in my enumeration is no more an argument in favor of
continuing what negroes in slavery we already possess, than of importing new
ones. But experiments have proved, in different parts of the world, that
freemen will do more labor than slaves. Besides the objection is too
iniquitous to be harbored a moment; and I have been pained at hearing it urged
by some, who seem in other instances to be philanthropic.

The third objection pretends kindness to the negroes, and a regard to our own
security.

It is quite fashionable to observe, under color of the former principle, that
freed negroes generally go more meanly dressed than slaves. What then! Is
freedom to be sold for a fine coat, for calicoes? And what i^ some slaves fare
better than we? Who would be even a sycophant, much less a slave, for the sake
of better fare?

But the observation, made as a general one, is false. The bulk of slaves in
the southern states can not be more naked, and ill-used, and defenseless, than
they are now. Soul and body would separate. And even if freedom should be the
occasion of their being still more destitute, and it were possible that they
should yet continue to live; would they not likewise, on the other hand, get
clear of incessant drudgery, of dispiriting menaces, of merciless
flagellations? What they would lose in dress and diet they would save in sweat
and blood.

And do those who live worse with freedom than when slaves, if there are such,
do they commonly return to their cidevant masters, and say, I had rather be
your slave than be free? Such a thing may sometimes happen; but if it were a
general practice, where would be the hazard of setting them in general free? It
would only be losing their labor, while they could make a little experiment,
and then return to their abject condition, more obsequious than before.

The truth is, liberty is sweet, and slavery is horrible; and nothing can be an
equivalent for the one, and nothing but insensibility or a hope of deliverance
can render the other supportable.

The principle we are now examining talks of kindness. It would keep the
negroes in slavery for their own good, A very suspicious sort of humanity! Why
not re-enslave those who have been once freed? Why not import more? Or do they
live better in Congo, than those happy wretches who have had the good fortune
to become slaves? Why not subjugate the Indians to this enviable condition; or
raise the few indigent of our own nation to the rank of bondmen? Why does this
benevolent system embrace only negroes now in slavery? Perhaps we are under
peculiar obligations, to regard their good. Yes, GOD knows it, and I wish we
may be wise enough to discharge these obligations in due season.

But this pretension of kindness is only a cloak. The other part of the
objection is all that creates any difficulty. That I confess is of great
importance, and merits a wise and candid discussion.

We are in this dilemma: there is such a number of slaves in the country: --
and, on the one hand, we can not continue them in bondage without doing
violence to our consciences, and incurring the displeasure of heaven; nor, on
the other, can we free them without extraordinary measures. It will require
money, and labor, and wisdom, and vigilance. Of two evils, if the latter can
be degraded to such a name, we have to determine which is the least.

There is no reason to expect, but that, if so many myriads of wretches were
turned out of doors, destitute, to live as they list, uncultivated as they now
are, they would be a nuisance in society. Probably, besides idleness and
beggary, we should see uncomfortable disorders, perhaps outrages, perhaps fatal
crimes; some through ignorance, some through wantonness, some from impelling
hunger, and some from revenge. They are not fit to be their own guides; they
have been habituated, not to reason, but obey; their wills have been crushed;
they are scarce conscious of the power of willing; and, what is worse, they are
not taught the duties that arise from social relations, nor disciplined to good
morals.

What then can be done? This is the momentous question. But whenever we are as
sincerely desirous of freeing the negroes as we are of aggrandizing our own
nation, we shall soon devise ways and means sufficient for the purpose. We, who
descant upon the rights of man, who boast our improvements, our resources, our
enterprise, our energy, our patriots, our territory, and, in fine, our "asylum
for the unfortunate of other countries"; -- we, the most flourishing nation on
the globe, if our hearts were engaged, should ask for no foreign assistance, to
liberate our slaves.

But the question stills recurs, What can be done? The answer is, If they are
not fit for freedom, they must be fitted. They must be considered, for a ^^me,
as in a state of minority* It must be a state of dependence and discipline, not
servitude. They must therefore be taken away from their masters, and, by
direction of the magistrate, put under temporary guardians, governors, and
instructors, to be educated, to be made acquainted with their rights and
duties, and some honest method of acquiring a livelihood; to be prepared for
citizenship.

I do not say, that all should be treated alike. I do not know, but some should
be returned to Africa. Many are worn out with age and sore travail. They must
not be cast helpless into the high ways; but let them hear the glad news of
liberty to the captive, that tears of transport may run down the furrows which
have been deep-worn by tears of affliction. Does his master ask, how he shall
live -- who will support him? Live, wretch! how long have you revelled upon the
fruit of his labors, ungratefully; and do you ask, how he shall live, how he
shall be supported through the painful residue of a devoted life? Give him food
from you own table, and beg him to pray for your avaricious soul.

After all, some may choose, though under no inability or bias, to remain with
their masters. But, in this case, government ought to consider, whether it is
not their duty, to interfere so far, as to see, that, if any remain, they do
not remain slaves: and that, like other free persons, they can go whenever they
please, according to the established principles of reciprocal contract. In
short, they ought to have guardians.

Massachusetts gave a noble example; but, had they fallen upon the plan of
carrying their negroes through such a preparation state before manumission,
they would, I firmly believe, have found i^ a salutary measure, and have been
celebrated for teaching the world a new lesson of humanity.

But suppose the negroes prepared for freedom, are they then to settle among
us? Projectors are generally hissed at; but, as the object desired will
probably never be accomplished, before man (...) have been ^r^jected, why
should we fear (...)? One pro^osa^ (...) man be made of a plan, which appear to
me to be sensible, and to promise advantages. Let a portion of out new
territory be assigned for the purpose; and let the great body of the negroes be
sent to colonize it. Perhaps they may be taken right from their masters and go
through their ^^^-age or preparation state (...) the wilderness. An any rate,
they must not go e^pt^-handed. They must have wagg^n^ and cattle, provisions
and raiment, artificers and overseers. Religion must be tough, laws instituted,
and order maintained among them. They must be inured to industry and economy;
defended, if any should invade them; and awed by soldiery, if they should rebel.

Though doubtless difficulties would attend the atchievment, yet with
resolution it may be accomplished. And what a flattering prospect would it open
to the wellw^she^^ of mankind. We might reasonably expect soon to see a large
province of black freemen, industrious and well regulated, improving in arts
and learning, happy at home and a peace with us, affording some revenue and
adding some strength to the nation, an asylum for other unfortunate Africa^s* a
nursery from which might in true proceed (...) missionaries and teachers to the
land of negroes. (...) not the establishment of such a colony be of exc^^sive
influence in bringing about the unive^^^^ spread of ^^ght, liberty, and
benevolence. Ye (...) Pharaohs, how long will ye harden your hearts, and not
let the people go!

If the negroes should remain among us, though fully enfranchised, they will
not be treated upon terms of equality* and perhaps never rise to that rank
which they deserve. Let them go, therefore, be formed into a state, and, in due
^i^^, have a voice in Congress. They will never be men till they are treated
like men; they will never be citizens till they feel themselves so; they will
never be good citizens, till they know their duties and can appreciate their
immunities.

Let who will startle or laugh, I steadfastly maintain, that we must bring them
to an equal standing in p^in^ of privileges with whi^es. They must enjoy all
the rights belonging to human nature.

Some allege, that negroes would have no gratitude. I do not believe it. It
does not accord with human nature. I have known instances to the contrary. And
yet, simply for freedom, they would owe no gratitude. Liberty is their right;
and he treatment I have proposed is no more than a recompense for the injuries
we have done them. All then is a matter of justice; and is gratitude due for an
act of justice?

We are acting a very inconsistent part -- worse than the man who distressed
his fellow servant for a hundred pence, when himself owed ten thousand talents.
We b^uster about tyranny, and keep our arms ever burnished to defend our
rights; while we have legions of tyrants among us, and make no opposition to
their inflecting the scourge of b^^terness.

Nor can it be made to appear, that the People of this state have no concern in
the matter; unless it appears, that we have not a slave in the state, and that
we have no concern in the Algerine slavery, to which we are voluntarily about
to attend There was a contribution upon this day, for the purpose of redeeming
those Americans who are in slavery at Algiers: -- an object worthy of a
generous people. Their redemption, we hope, is not far distant. But, should any
body contribute money for this purpose which he had (...) out of a negro slave,
be would deserve less applause, than an actor in the comedy of Cas^s.
; -- and appears, that we have no concern in the internal affairs of the other
states, arising from our federal relation, so that should the negroes in one of
them make an insurrection, assume their liberty, and subjugate an equal number
of whites to be their slaves, we, equally sa^^sfied with black citizens or
white, should regard the revolution with cold neutrality; -- and appears
further, that our joining in the celebration of this national thanksgiving is
altogether a farce.

For, in this festival, we are to pay our acknowledgements to HEAVEN, in
concert with all the states, "for the manifold and signal mercies, which
distinguish our (...) as a nation, particularly for the possession of
constitutions of government, which unite, and by their union establish liberty
with order." So much in the words of the proclamation by our chief magistrate.

Our churches are probably ringing with rights and privileges -- emigration of
our forefathers from persecution -- destruction of the Indians -- protection
against British violence -- government of our own choosing -- free ^^^^rage --
learning and respectability -- p^ace in our borders and plenty in our
habitations -- not any to molest us or make us afraid.

But shame to the whole union, that more than a seventh part of the human
beings in these states can, with no manner of propriety, join in any of these
topics. They are not of the nation; and, therefore, have no national blessings
to acknowledge. They have no share in the commonwealth. They are politically
nothing. And by celebra^ing this day, we subscribe to their nonexistence.

Can the negroes praise GOD with the spirit and the understanding, that, in
violation of all rights, they were forced from beyond the Atlantic, to be our
slaves -- that the Indians were extirpated, to make room for their masters --
that the did not join the British in their war against us, and, by that means,
recover their freedom; but neglect^d the opportunity, and so continue a
servile, abused, and pitiable herd, without privilege, under government which
they have every reason to ^a^e, with no suffrage, depressed in ignorance and
meanness, having no borders for peace nor habitation for plenty; but exposed
always to somebody to molest them, and more than to make them afraid -- to
whip, wound, and maim them -- to tire and starve them -- and, in some places,
to mangle and even to kill them. It is a fact, which can not be controverted,
that negro slaves are not (...) so abused, as to die in consequence; and
instances are not wanting of their being killed outright.


These are the blessings which they, as a people, have to thank GOD ^or; and if
they are too stupid to experience proper sentiments upon the occasion, they are
the more to be commiserated.

The slave trade is a source of indescribable evils. It is the scourge of
Africa and the bane of America. The negro nations are ruined by it. The weaker
are continually a prey to the stronger. Crimes are committed, to which, if the
slave trade was abolished, there would be no temptation; and cruelties are
practiced, which would be impossible. Their governments are arbitrary; and,
while a subject can be bartered for commodities, the despot is (...) likely to
be very scrupulous about rights. His business is to satisfy, his own appetites.
The smallest offense, therefore, they punish by selling to slavery; and
pronounce a subject guilty upon the slightest evidence. Indeed, a forged
accusation is often sufficient, supported by no evidence.

Besides, the most peaceful villages are infested with unprincipled wretches,
who catch whom they can; -- not solely to oblige their christian customers, but
to obtain "as much vile trash as I could grasp thus." Wars too are waged
between despots for the purpose only, though perhaps not avowedly so, of
obtaining prisoners for the market. These are the means by which slaves are
procured for American planters. This is the depredation (...) which we are
accessory. For where is the difference of criminality, except in degree,
whether we only support a constitution which sanctions this villainy* or
forbear to remonstrate with a neighbor, who holds in slavery the descendant of
a negro, bought, by the neighbor's grandfather, of a English Ishmaelite, who
bought him of his barbarous brethren; or whether we forced him ourselves from
his father's cottage and rive^ted his chains with our own hands?

O, ill-fated Africans! What security have the most innocent, the most virtuous
among them! Where are all the "tender charities of life!" But we are invited to
believe, that these people are blocks and dross, mere brutes, destitute of
feeling. This is the slave-dealer's policy. As if the breasts of bereft mothers
and bereft lovers were exercised with (...) frantic pangs, when their children
and consorts are torn from their arms, to be carried ^o a region, where, their
country men suppose, because they never return The second African who ever
returned from American slavery, as we are told by Francis Moore, was one Job
Ben Solomon, a Pholey, son of the high priest of Bando in the interior parts
of Africa. Traveling acr^ss the country with his herds of cattl^ in the year
1731, he was robb^d, seized, and sold to slavery. He was brought to America and
Purchased by a Maryland planter. About a year after he found means to convey a
letter to England, written by himself, in Arabic. The letter fell into the
hands of Mr. Oglethorpe. It was translated at Oxford* and, such was the ^steem,
which it procured for the writer, that Mr. Oglethorpe immediately took measures
to redeem him and bring him to England.

He tarried in England upwards of a year, discovered great mi^dness of temper
and strength of intellect, and received much notice and liberal presents from
many of the nobility and the royal family.

Having then an opportunity, he with great eagerness embraced it, to return to
his native country. Alas! his father was no more; his wife had married another;
his whole country had been ravaged by war -- and, though before abounding in
herds of cattle, had not a cow left. His wife's new husband however, hearing of
his return, thought proper to abscond.

The gen^rous man was deeply penetrated at his father's death and the
misfortunes of his country; but his wife he forgave: For, said he, Mr. Moore,
she could not help thinking I was dead, for I was gone to a land, from whence
no Pholey ever yet returned. Therefore she is not to be blamed.

The story might doubtless be so told, that a tear would be no unnatural effect.


, that they are ^aten; -- a fate far preferable to tha^, which most of them
experience, who, more particularly in the southern states and the Westindies,
drag out a miserable ^^te under the lash of debauched drivers, and leave the
same miserable legacy entailed upon their miserable offspring.

Miserable indeed! And yet, they have no fellow-sufferer to expostulate, like
O'Brien at Algiers. They have no friends to redeem them. In general they can
neither read nor write, and have, therefore, no way to fill the world with
complaints. Their sufferings are their own, and they must bear them in silence.
Dispirited, trodden down, and trampled upon, they have lost all manhood, and
find relief only in their stupidity, he effect of cruelty and despair.

This is a real likeness; not drawn by the pencil of phrensy. And any who
doubts it may satisfy himself by reading or travel, that the half is not told
him.

But what if their grievances were less, and the treatment they receive more
humane, than the most favorable representations pretend: still they are
slaves, and ought to be set at liberty with all possible dispatch. Why do we
not drain this fountain of idleness, luxury, and licentiousness? Why do we no
silence the domineering tone of masters? At the same ^^me, we shall increase he
number of freemen, the bonds of society, the quantity of productive labor, the
aggregate of (...) happiness.

When will Americans show, that they are, what they affect to be thought,
friends to the cause of humanity at large, reverers of the rights of their
fellow creatures. Hitherto we have been oppressors; nay -- murderers! For many
a negro has died by the whip of his master; and many have lived when death
would have been preferable. Surely, the curse of GOD; and the reproach of man,
is against us. More than the seven plagues of Egypt will befall us. If Algiers
shall be perished seven sold, truly America seventy and s^v^n sold.

This is severe; but where is the conscience that does not acknowledge it just?
Do we feel indignation when perusing the history of tyranny; does resentment
kindle at the least abridgement of our rights; do we (...) death to the
corsair; -- The replication may be most poignantly given -- Thou art the man.
Thou art that marble-heart, that lordling, that pirate -- the object of thy own
curses.

Much has been said, volumes are on the shelves, upon the origin of nations and
their difference of color. Curious, but of little service; the philosopher's
pastime. To rescue a person from sufferings is an act of more merit, than to
trace back his pedigree to the first progenitor. Nay; I would rather give
happiness to an individual, than speculate upon the genealogy of nations with
unrivalled success, or be the inventor of the most unexceptionable hypotheses
respecting the diversity of human complexions and features. But I must not
prolong the discourse.

Let us thoroughly contemplate the subject, and act the consistent and the
beneficent part. Like the royal convict whose name is in the text, let us
acknowledge our guilt; and, like people of the most noble sentiments, let us
immediately change our system of conduct. We ought to sign a protest against
slavery; and publicly to declare our abhorrence of this national iniquity and
abomination. In short, we ought to do every thing in our power, to bring about
a constitutional reform; that there may be a universal abolition through the
states -- I might have said, through all nations. In particular, we ought
religiously to refrain from voting for any man to sustain a public office of
any kind, whatever may be his abilities, if he is known to be the owner of a
slave. This should debar him from every place of trust and honor in the
commonwealth. Above all, we ought to implore the PARENT of mankind, to diffuse
every where a spirit of christian charity, that oppression may cease through
the world, and kindness and gentleness mark all the dealings of man with his
fellow-pilgrims, till all are brought into ONE FAMILY.

ERRORS in TYPOGRAPHY.
*^*The word NEGRO, wherever it occurs, ought to begin with a capital; but that
would not comport with their state of degradation, which levels them with
cattle.


