TREATY OF AMITY, COMMERCE, AND NAVIGATION, BETWEEN His Britannic Majesty AND
The United States of America, CONDITIONALLY RATIFIED BY THE SENATE OF THE
UNITED STATES, AT PHILADELPHIA, JUNE 24, 1795. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A Copious
Appendix.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR MATTHEW CAREY, NO. 118 MARKET
STREET. Aug. 12, 1795.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE importance of the pending Treaty with Britain, and the frequent
references, in the discussion of its merits, to the Treaties with France, the
Federal Constitution, etc. have induced the Editor to make a compilation of as
many of the documents connected with this interesting subject, as might be
necessary to enable the reader to decide for himself, and not take, on trust,
the interested quotations of party writers.

From among the multiplicity of publications, pro and con, the "Features of Mr.
Jay's Treaty," and the "Vindication" of that instrument, have been selected, as
including nearly all the arguments that have been advanced by the writers on
both sides of the question.

CONTENTS.
TREATY agreed upon by Mr. Jay and Lord Grenville -- 5 Conditional Ratification
by the Senate of the United States -- 34 Letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr.
Hammond 35 Motion of Mr. Burr -- 37 Motion of Mr. Tazewell -- 39 Treaty of
Amity and Commerce between France and the United States, February 6th, 1778 --
41 Treaty of Alliance, eventual and defensive, between France and the United
States, February 6th, 1778 55 Definitive Treaty between Great Britain and the
United States, September 3d, 1783 -- 59 Constitution of the United States -- 61
Amendments to ditto -- 76 Explanation of the actual Situation of Mr. Jay's
Treaty -- 79 Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty -- 83 View of the Commerce of the
United States, as it stands at present, and as it is fixed by Mr. Jay's Treaty
-- 151 Resolutions of the Citizens of Boston, July 13th, 1795 -- 156 Address of
the Citizens of Portsmouth (New Hampshire) July 17th, 1795 -- 160 Resolutions
of the Citizens of New York, July 20th, 1795 -- 162 Memorial of the Citizens of
Philadelphia, July 25th, 1795 -- 172 Report of the Charleston Committee, July
19th, 1795 175 Resolutions of the Justices and Aldermen of Norfolk, July 11th,
1795 -- 181 Resolutions of the Citizens of Baltimore, July 27th, 1795 -- Ibid.
New Jersey Petition -- 182 Resolutions of the Citizens of Trenton, July 29th,
1795 -- 183 Resolutions of the Citizens of Flemington (New Jersey) July 23d,
1795 -- 186 Address of the Merchants of New York, July 17th, 1795 -- 187
Resolutions of the New York Chamber of Commerce, July 21st, 1795 -- 189
Observations on the Extent of the President's Power with respect to Treaties --
190 Curtius's Vindication of Mr. Jay's Treaty, in twelve Numbers -- 194 British
Proclamation, November 6th, 1793 -- 276 Ditto ditto January 1794 -- Ibid. Lord
Dorchester's Reply to the Indians, February 10th, 1794 -- 277 Commercial
Resolutions moved for by Mr. Madison, in the House of Representatives of the
United States, January 3d, 1794 -- 280 Mr. Dayton's Resolution for the
Sequestration of British Property -- 282 Resolutions moved for by Mr. Abraham
Clarke, for suspending the Intercourse with Britain -- 283
TREATY.
HIS Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, being desirous by a
Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, to terminate their differences in
such a manner, as, without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretensions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding: And also to regulate the commerce and
navigation between their respective countries, territories and people, in such
a manner as to render the same reciprocally beneficial and satisfactory; they
have, respectively, named their plenipotentiaries, and given them full power to
treat of, and conclude, the said treaty, that is to say; His Britannic Majesty
has named for his plenipotentiary, the Right Honorable William Wyndham, Baron
Grenville, of Wotton, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, and his Majesty's
principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and the President of the said
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof has
appointed for their plenipotentiary, the Honorable John Jay, Chief Justice of
the said United States and their envoy extraordinary to his Majesty, who have
agreed on and concluded the following articles:

ARTICLE I.
There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true, and sincere
friendship between his Britannic majesty, his heirs and successors, and the
United States of America; and between their respective countries, territories,
cities, towns, and people of every degree, without exception of persons or
places.

ARTICLE II.
His majesty will withdraw all his troops and garrisons, from all posts and
places within the boundary lines assigned by the treaty of peace to the United
States. This evacuation shall take place on or before the first day of June,
one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six, and all the proper measures shall in
the interval be taken by concert between the government of the United States,
and his majesty's governor general in America, for settling the previous
arrangements which may be necessary respecting the delivery of the said posts:
The United States in the mean time at their discretion, extending their
settlements to any part within the said boundary line, except within the
precincts or jurisdiction of any of the said posts. All settlers and traders
within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said posts, shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, all their property of every kind, and shall be protected
therein. They shall be at full liberty to remain there, or to remove with all
or any part of their effects; and it shall also be free to them to sell their
lands, houses, or effects, or to retain the property thereof, at their
discretion; such of them as shall continue to reside within the said boundary
lines, shall not be compelled to become citizens of the United States, or to
take any oath of allegiance to the government thereof; but shall be at full
liberty so to do if they think proper; and they shall make and declare their
election within one year after the evacuation aforesaid. And all persons who
shall continue there after the expiration of the said year, without having
declared their intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic majesty, shall
be considered as having elected to become citizens of the United States.

ARTICLE III.
It is agreed that it shall at all times be free to his majesty's subjects, and
to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians dwelling on
either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and repass by land or
inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two
parties, on the continent of America (the country within the limits of the
Hudson's Bay Company only excepted) and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and
waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the sea ports, harbors, bays, or creeks of his
majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers in his majesty's
said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal
and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent the
possibility of any frauds in this respect; nor to the admission of British
vessels from the sea into the rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
ports of entry for vessels from the sea. The river Mississippi shall, however,
according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties; and it is
further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty in Great
Britain.

All goods and merchandise whose importation into his majesty's said
territories in America, shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties, than would be payable by his Majesty's subjects
on the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories. And in
like manner, all goods and merchandise whose importation into the United States
shall not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be
carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by his majesty's subjects, and
such goods and merchandise shall be subject to no higher or other duties, than
would be payable by the citizens of the United States on the importation of the
same in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said States. And all
goods not prohibited to be exported from the said territories respectively, may
in like manner be carried out of the same by the two parties respectively,
paying duty as aforesaid.

No duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on peltries brought by
land, or inland navigation into the said territories respectively; nor shall
the Indians passing or repassing with their own proper goods and effects of
whatever nature, pay for the same any impost or duty whatever. But goods in
bales, or other large packages unusual among Indians, shall not be considered
as goods belonging bona fide to Indians.

No higher or other tolls or rates of ferriage than what are or shall be
payable by natives, shall be demanded on either side; and no duties shall be
payable on any goods which shall be merely carried over any of the portages or
carrying places on either side, for the purpose of being immediately reimbarked
and carried to some other place or places. But as by this stipulation it is
only meant to secure to each party a free passage across the portages on both
sides; it is agreed, that this exemption from duty shall extend only to such
goods as are carried in the usual and direct road across the portage, and are
not attempted to be in any manner sold or exchanged during their passage across
the same; and proper regulations may be established to prevent the possibility
of any frauds in this respect.

As this article is intended to render in a great degree the local advantages
of each party common to both, and thereby to promote a disposition favorable
to friendship and good neighborhood, it is agreed, that the respective
governments will mutually promote this amicable intercourse, by causing speedy
and impartial justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to
all who may be concerned therein.

ARTICLE IV.
Whereas it is uncertain whether the river Mississippi extends so far to the
northward as to be intersected by a line to be drawn due west from the Lake of
the Woods, in the manner mentioned in the treaty of peace between his majesty
and the United States: it is agreed that measures shall be taken in concert
between his majesty's government in America and the government of the United
States, for making a joint survey of the said river from one degree of latitude
below the falls of St. Anthony, to the principal source or sources of said
river and the parts adjacent thereto; and that if on the result of such survey,
it should appear that the said river, would not be intersected by such a line
as is above mentioned, the two parties will thereupon proceed by amicable
negotiation, to regulate the boundary line in that quarter, as well as all
other points to be adjusted between the said parties, according to justice and
mutual convenience, and in conformity to the intent of the said treaty.

ARTICLE V.
Whereas doubts have arisen what river was truly intended under the name of the
river St. Croix, mentioned in the said treaty of peace, and forming a part of
the boundary therein described; that question shall be referred to the final
decision of commissioners to be appointed in the following manner, viz.

One commissioner shall be named by his Majesty, and one by the President of
the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof,
and the said two commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third; or if they
cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two original
commissioners. And the three commmissioners so appointed, shall be sworn,
impartially to examine and decide the said question, according to such evidence
as shall respectively be laid before them on the part of the British government
and of the United States. The said commissioners shall meet at Halifax, and
shall have power to adjourn to such other place or places as they shall think
fit. They shall have power to appoint a secretary, and to employ such surveyors
or other persons as they shall judge necessary. The said commissioners shall,
by a declaration under their hands and seals, decide what river is the river
St. Croix intended by the treaty. The said declaration shall contain a
description of the said river, and shall particularize the latitude and
longitude of its mouth and of its source. Duplicates of this declaration and of
the statements of their accounts, and of the journal of their proceedings,
shall be delivered by them to the agent of his majesty, and to the agent of the
United States, who may be respectively appointed and authorized to manage the
business on behalf of the respective governments. And both parties agree to
consider such decision as final and conclusive, so as that the same shall never
thereafter be called in question, or made the subject of dispute or difference
between them.

ARTICLE VI.
Whereas it is alleged by diverse British merchants and others his majesty's
subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide contracted
before the peace, still remain owing to them by citizens or inhabitants of the
United States, and that by the operation of various lawful impediments since
the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has been delayed, but
also the value and security thereof have been, in several instances, impaired
and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings, the
British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and receive full and
adequate compensation for the losses and damages which they have thereby
sustained. It is agreed, that in all such cases where full compensation for
such losses and damages cannot for whatever reason be actually obtained, had
and received by the said creditors in the ordinary course of justice, the
United States will make full and complete compensation for the same to the said
creditors: but it is distinctly understood, that this provision is to extend to
such losses only as have been occasioned by the lawful impediments aforesaid,
and is not to extend to losses occasioned by such insolvency of the debtors, or
other causes as would equally have operated to produce such a loss, if the same
impediments had not existed: nor to such losses or damages as have been
occasioned by the manifes^^delay or negligence, or wilful omission of the
claimant.

For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses or damages, five
commissioners shall be appointed, and authorized to meet and act in manner
following, viz. Two of them shall be appointed by his Majesty, two of them by
the President of the United States by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate thereof, and the fifth by the unanimous voice of the other four; and if
they should not agree in such choice, then the commissioners named by the two
parties shall respectively propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the four original
commissioners. When the five commissioners thus appointed shall first meet,
they shall, before they proceed to act, respectively take the following oath or
affirmation, in the presence of each other, which oath or affirmation being so
taken and duly attested, shall be entered on the record of their proceedings,
viz. I, A. B. one of the commissioners appointed in pursuance of the sixth
article of the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, between his Britannic
majesty and the United States of America, do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I
will honestly, diligently, impartially, and carefully examine, and to the best
of my judgment, according to justice and equity, decide all such complaints,
as, under the said article, shall be preferred to the said commissioners: and
that I will forbear to act as a commissioner, in any case in which I may be
personally interested.

Three of the said commissioners shall constitute a board, and shall have power
to do any act appertaining to the said commission, provided that one of the
commissioners named on each side, and the fifth commissioner shall be present,
and all decisions shall be made by the majority of the voices of the
commissioners then present. Eighteen months from the day on which the said
commissioners shall form a board, and be ready to proceed to business, are
assigned for receiving complaints and applications; but they are nevertheless
authorized in any particular cases in which it shall appear to them to be
reasonable and just, to extend the same term of eighteen months for any term
not exceeding six months, after the expiration thereof. The said commissioners
shall first meet at Philadelphia, but they shall have power to adjourn from
place to place as they shall see cause.

The said commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them, are empowered and required, in pursuance of the true intent
and meaning of this article, to take into their consideration all claims,
whether of principal or interest, and balances of principal or interest, to
determine the same respectively, according to the merits of the several cases,
due regard being had to all the circumstances thereof, and as equity and
justice shall appear to them to require. And the said commissioners shall have
power to examine all such persons as shall come before them, on oath or
affirmation, touching the premises; and also to receive in evidence according
as they may think most consistent with equity and justice, all written
depositions, or books, or papers, or copies, or extracts thereof, every such
deposition, book, or paper, or extract, being duly authenticated, either
according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two countries, or
in such other manner as the said commissioners shall see cause to require or
allow.

The award of the said commissioners or of any three of them as aforesaid,
shall in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the
claim, and to the amount of the sum to be paid to the creditor or claimant: and
the United States undertake to cause the sum so awarded to be paid in specie to
such creditor or claimant without deduction; and at such time or times, and at
such place or places as shall be awarded by the said commissioners; and on
condition of such releases or assignments to be given by the creditor or
claimant, as by the said commissioners may be directed: provided always, that
no such payment shall be fixed by the said commissioners to take place sooner
than twelve months from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of this
treaty.

ARTICLE VII.
Whereas complaints have been made by diverse merchants and others, citizens of
the United States, that during the course of the war in which his majesty is
now engaged, they have sustained considerable losses and damage, by reason of
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels and other
property, under color of authority or commissions from his majesty; and that
from various circumstances belonging to the said cases, adequate compensation
for the losses and damages so sustained cannot now be actually obtained, had
and received by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings; it is agreed, that
in all such cases, where adequate compensation cannot, for whatever reason, be
now actually obtained, had and received by the said merchants and others in the
ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for the same will be
made by the British Government to the said complainants. But it is distinctly
understood that this provision is not to extend to such losses or damages as
have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful omission of
the claimants.

That for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses and
damages, five commissioners shall be appointed and authorized to act in London,
exactly in the manner directed with respect to those mentioned in the preceding
article, and after having taken the same oath or affirmation (mutatis mutandis)
the same term of eighteen months is also assigned for the reception of claims,
and they are in like manner authorized to extend the same in particular cases.
They shall receive testimony, books, papers, and evidence in the same latitude,
and exercise the like discretion and powers respecting that subject; and shall
decide the claims in question according to the merits of the several cases, and
to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. The award of the said
commissioners, or any such three of them as aforesaid, shall, in all cases, be
final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim and the amount of the
sum to be paid to the claimant; and his Britannic majesty undertakes to cause
the same to be paid to such claimant in specie, without any deduction, at such
place or places, and at such time or times as shall be awarded by the said
commissioners, and on condition of such releases or assignments to be given by
the claimants, as by the said commissioners may be directed.

And whereas certain merchants and others his Majesty's subjects complain, that
in the course of the war they have sustained loss and damage, by reason of the
capture of the vessels and merchandise, taken within the limits and
jurisdiction of the states and brought into the ports of the same, or taken by
vessels originally armed in ports of the said states:

It is agreed that in all such cases where restitution shall not have been made
agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated
at Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1793, a copy of which is annexed to this Treaty; the
complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are referred to the commissioners
to be appointed by virtue of this article, who are hereby authorized and
required to proceed in the like manner relative to these as to the other cases
committed to them; and the United States undertake to pay to the complainants
or claimants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such sums as shall be
awarded to them respectively by the said commissioners, and at the times and
places which in such awards shall be specified; and on condition of such
releases or assignments to be given by the claimants as in the said awards may
be directed: And it is further agreed, that not only the now existing cases of
both descriptions, but also all such as shall exist at the time of exchanging
the ratifications of this treaty, shall be considered as being within the
provisions, intent, and meaning of this article.

ARTICLE VIII.
It is further agreed, that the commissioners mentioned in this and in the two
proceeding articles, shall be respectively paid in such manner as shall be
agreed between the two parties; such agreement being to be settled at the time
of the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty. And all other expenses
attending the said commissions shall be defrayed jointly by the two parties,
the same being previously ascertained and allowed by the majority of the
commissioners. And in the case of death, sickness, or necessary absence, the
place of every such commissioner respectively shall be supplied in the same
manner as such commissioner was first appointed, and the new commissioners
shall take the same oath or affirmation, and do the same duties.

ARTICLE IX.
It is agreed that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of
the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in the dominions of
his Majesty, shall continue to hold them according to the nature and tenure of
their respective estates and titles therein; and may grant, sell or devise the
same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were natives; and that
neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall, so far as may respect the said
lands and the legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded as aliens.

ARTICLE X.
Neither the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals (...)
the other, nor shares, nor moneys which they may have in the public funds, or
in the public or private banks, shall ever in any event of war or national
differences, be sequestered or confiscated, it being unjust and impolitic that
debts and engagements contracted and made by individuals having confidence in
each other, and in their respective governments, should ever be destroyed or
impaired by national authority on account of national differences and
discontents.

ARTICLE XI.
It is agreed between his Majesty and the United States of America, that there
shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and commerce
between their respective people, in the manner, under the limitations and on
the conditions specified in the following articles:

ARTICLE XII.
His Majesty consents that it shall and may be lawful during the time herein
after limited, for the citizens of the United States to carry to any of his
Majesty's islands and ports in the West Indies from the United States, in their
own vessels, not being above the burden of seventy tons, any goods or
merchandises being of the growth, manufacture or produce of the said States,
which it is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands or ports from the
said states in British vessels; and that the said American vessels shall be
subject there to no other or higher tonnage duties or charges, than shall be
payable by British vessels in the ports of the United States; and that the
cargoes of the said American vessels shall be subject there to no other or
higher duties or charges, than shall be payable on the like articles if
imported there from the said states in British vessels.

And his Majesty also consents, that it shall be lawful for the said American
citizens to purchase, load, and carry away in their said vessels to the United
States from the said islands and ports, all such articles being of the growth,
manufacture or produce of the said islands, as may now by law be carried from
thence to the said states in British vessels, and subject only to the same
duties and charges on exportation, to which British vessels and their cargoes
are or shall be subject in similar circumstances.

Provided always, that the said American vessels do carry and land their
cargoes in the United States only, it being expressly agreed and declared, that
during the continuance of this article, the United States will prohibit and
restrain the carrying away any molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa or cotton in
American vessels, either from his Majesty's islands, or from the United States
to any part of the world except the United States, reasonable sea stores
excepted. Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful, during the same
period, for British vessels to import from the said islands into the United
States, and to export from the United States to the said islands, all articles
whatever being of the growth, produce or manufacture of the said islands, or of
the United States respectively, which now may, by the laws of the said states,
be so imported and exported. And that the cargoes of the said British vessels
shall be subject to no other or higher duties or charges, than shall be payable
on the same articles if so imported or exported in American vessels.

It is agreed that this article and every matter and thing therein contained,
shall continue to be in force during the continuance of the war in which his
Majesty is now engaged; and also for two years from and after the day of the
signature of the preliminary or other articles of peace, by which the same may
be terminated.

And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term, the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce in this
respect according to the situation in which his Majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arrangements as may
best conduce to the mutual advantage and extension of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and what cases, neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what cases provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may become
such. But in the mean time their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be regulated by the articles herein after inserted on those subjects.

ARTICLE XIII.
His Majesty consents that the vessels belonging to the citizens of the United
States of America, shall be admitted and hospitably received, in all the
seaports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies. And that
the citizens of the said United States, may freely carry on a trade between the
said territories and the said United States in all articles of which the
importation or exportation respectively, to or from the said territories, shall
not be entirely prohibited. Provided only, that it shall not be lawful for them
in any time of war between the British government and any other power or state
whatever, to export from the said territories, without the special permission
of the British government there, any military stores, or naval stores, or rice.
The citizens of the United States shall pay for their vessels when admitted
into the said ports no other or higher tonnage duty than shall be payable on
British vessels when admitted into the ports of the United States. And they
shall pay no other or higher duties or charges, on the importation and
exportation of the cargoes of the said vessels, than shall be payable on the
same articles when imported or exported in British vessels. But it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories, to any port or
place, except to some port or place in America, where the same shall be
unladen, and such regulations shall be adopted by both parties, as shall from
time to time be sound necessary to enforce the due and faithful observance of
this stipulation. It is also understood that the permission granted by this
article, is not to extend to allow the vessels of the United States to carry on
any part of the coasting trade of the said British territories; but vessels
going with their original cargoes, or part thereof, from one port of discharge
to another, are not to be considered as carrying on the coasting trade. Neither
is this article to be construed to allow the citizens of the said states to
settle or reside within the said territories, or to go into the interior parts
thereof, without the permission of the British government established there;
and if any transgression should be attempted against the regulations of the
British government in this respect, the observance of the same shall and may be
enforced against the citizens of America in the same manner as against British
subjects or others transgressing the same rule. And the citizens of the United
States whenever they arrive in any port or harbor in the said territories, or
if they should be permitted in manner aforesaid, to go to any other place
therein, shall always be subject to the laws, government and jurisdiction of
what nature established in such harbor, port or place, according as the same
may be. The citizens of the United States, may also touch for refreshment at
the island of St. Helena, but subject in all respects to such regulations as
the British government may from time to time establish there.

ARTICLE XIV.
There shall be between all the dominions of his Majesty in Europe and the
territories of the United States, a reciprocal and perfect liberty of commerce
and navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries respectively,
shall have liberty freely and securely, and without hindrance and molestation,
to come with their ships and cargoes to the lands, countries, cities, ports,
places, and rivers, within the dominions and territories aforesaid, to enter
into the same, to resort there, and to remain and reside there, without any
limitation of time. Also to hire and possess-houses and warehouses for the
purposes of their commerce, and generally the merchants and traders on each
side, shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their commerce;
but subject always as to what respects this article, to the laws and statutes
of the two countries respectively.

ARTICLE XV.
It is agreed that no other or higher duties shall be paid by the ships or
merchandise of the one party in the ports of the other, than such as are paid
by the like vessels or merchandise of all other nations. Nor shall any other or
higher duty be imposed in one country on the importation of any articles of the
growth, produce or manufacture of the other, than are or shall be payable on
the importation of the like articles being of the growth, produce or
manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed
on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from the territories of
the two parties respectiveiy, which shall not equally extend to all other
nations.

But the British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe, a tonnage duty
equal to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of
America: And also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of
duty now payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods, when
imported into the United States in British or in American vessels.

The two parties agree to treat for the more exact equalization of the duties
on the respective navigation of their subjects and people, in such manner as
may be most beneficial to the two countries. The arrangements for this purpose
shall be made at the same time, with those mentioned at the conclusion of the
twelfth article of this treaty, and are to be considered as a part thereof. In
the interval it is agreed, that the United States will not impose any new or
additional tonnage duties on British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting
difference between the duties payable on the importation of any articles in
British or in American vessels.

ARTICLE XVI.
It shall be free for the two contracting parties, respectively to appoint
consuls for the protection of trade, to reside in the dominions and territories
aforesaid; and the said consuls shall enjoy those liberties and rights which
belong to them by reason of their function. But before any consul shall act as
such, he shall be in the usual forms approved and admitted by the party to whom
he is sent; and it is hereby declared to be lawful and proper, that in case of
illegal or improper conduct toward the laws or government, a consul may either
be punished according to law, if the laws will reach the case, or be dismissed,
or even sent back, the offended government assigning to the other their reasons
for the same.

Either of the parties may except from the residence of consuls such particular
places, as such party shall judge proper to be so excepted.

ARTICLE XVII.
It is agreed, that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained on
just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying to the enemy
any of the articles which are contraband of war; the said vessel shall be
brought to the nearest or most convenient port; and if any property of an enemy
should be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs to the enemy
shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed with the
remainder without any impediment. And it is agreed, that all proper measures
shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or cargoes so
brought in for adjudication; and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification, adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters or owners of such
ships.

ARTICLE XVIII.
In order to regulate what is in future to be deemed contraband of war, it is
agreed, that under the said denomination shall be comprised all arms and
implements serving for the purposes of war, by land or sea, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenadoes, carcasses, saucisses, carriages
for cannon, muskets rests, bandoliers, gunpowder, match, saltpeter, ball,
pikes, swords, head pieces, cuirasses, halberts, lances, javelins, horse
furniture, holsters, belts, and generally all other implements of war; as also
timber for ship-building, tar or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and
cord-age, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of
vessels, unwrought iron and fir planks only excepted; and all the above
articles are hereby declared to be just objects of confiscation, whenever they
are attempted to be carried to an enemy.

And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions and other articles not generally contraband may be regarded as such,
renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles so becoming contraband according to the existing laws of
Nation, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated, but
the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels the full value of all
articles, with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

And whereas it frequently happens that vessels sail for a port or place
belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded or invested; it is agreed, that every vessel so circumstanced may be
turned away from such port or place, but she shall not be detained, nor her
cargo, if not contrabrand, be confiscated, unless after notice she shall again
attempt to enter; but she shall be permitted to go to any other port or place
she may think proper: Nor shall any vessel or goods of either party, that may
have entered into such port or place, before the same was besieged, blockaded
or invested by the other, and be found therein after the reduction or surrender
of such place, be liable to confiscation, but shall be restored to the owners
or prop^i^tors thereof.

ARTICLE XIX.
And that more abundant care be taken for the security of the respective
subjects and citizens of the contracting parties, and to prevent their
suffering injuries by the men of war, or privateers of either party, all
commanders of ships of war, privateers and all others the said subjects and
citizens, shall forbear doing any damage to those of the other party, or
committing any outrage against them, and if they act to the contrary, they
shall be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates to make
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be.

For this cause all commanders of privateers, before they receive their
commissions, shall hereafter be obliged to give before a competent judge,
sufficient security by at least two responsible sureties, who have no interest
in the said privateer, each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of fifteen hundred pounds sterling, or
if such ships be provided with above one hundred and fifty seamen or soldiers,
in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, to satisfy all damages and
injuries, which the said privateer, or her officers or men, or any of them may
do or commit during their cruise, contrary to the tenor of this treaty, or to
the laws and instructions for regulating their conduct; and further, that in
all cases of aggressions the said commissions shall be revoked and annulled.

It is also agreed that whenever a judge of a court of admiralty of either of
the parties, shall pronounce sentence against any vessel, or goods or property
belonging to the subjects or citizens of the other party, a formal and duly
authenticated copy of all the proceedings in the cause, and of the said
sentence, shall, if required, be delivered to the commander of the said vessel,
without the smallest delay, he paying all legal fees and demands for the same.

ARTICLE XX.
It is further agreed that both the said contracting parties, shall not only
refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or towns, or
permit any of their inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal or assist
them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such inhabitants
as shall be guilty of such acts or offenses.

And all their ships with the goods or merchandises taken by them and brought
into the port of either of the said parties, shall be seized as far as they can
be discovered, and shall be restored to the owners, or their factors or agents,
duly deputed and authorized in writing by them (proper evidence being first
given in the court of admiralty for proving the property) even in case such
effects should have passed into other hands by sale, if it be proved that the
buyers knew or had good reason to believe, or suspect that they had been
piratically taken.

ARTICLE XXI.
It is likewise agreed, that the subjects and citizens of the two nations,
shall not do any acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor accept
commissions or instructons so to act from any foreign prince or state, enemies
to the other party; nor shall the enemies of one of the parties be permitted to
invite, or endeavor to enlist in their military service any of the subjects or
citizens of the other party; and the laws against all such offenses and
aggressions shall be punctually executed. And if any subject or citizen of the
said parties respectively, shall accept any foreign commission, or letters of
marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party, to treat and punish the said subject or citizen, having such
commission or letters of marque, as a pirate.

ARTICLE XXII.
It is expressly stipulated, that neither of the said contracting parties will
order or authorize any acts of reprizal against the other, on complaints of
injuries or damages, until the said party shall first have presented to the
other a statement thereof, verified by competent proof and evidence, and
demanding justice and satisfaction, and the same shall either have been refused
or unreasonably delayed.

ARTICLE XXIII.
The ships of war of each of the contracting parties shall at all times, be
hospitably received in the ports of the other, their officers and crews paying
due respect to the laws and government of the country. The officers shall be
treated with that respect which is due to the commissions which they bear, and
if any insult should be offered to them by any of the inhabitants, all
offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of the peace and
amity between the two countries, -- And his majesty consents, that in case an
American vessel should, by stress of weather, danger from enemies or other
misfortunes, be reduced to the necessity of seeking shelter in any of his
majesty's ports, into which such vessel could not in ordinary cases claim to be
admitted, she shall, on manifesting that necessity to the satisfaction of the
government of the place, be hospitably received and permitted to refit, and to
purchase at the market price, such necessaries as she may stand in need of,
conformable to such orders and regulations as the government of the place,
having respect to the circumstances of each case, shall prescribe. She shall
not be allowed to break bulk or unload her cargo, unless the same shall be bona
fide necessary to her being refitted. Nor shall she be permitted to sell any
part of her cargo, unless so much only as may be necessary to defray her
expenses, and then not without the express permission of the government of the
place. Nor shall she be obliged to pay any duties whatever, except only on such
articles as she may be permitted to sell for the purpose aforesaid.

ARTICLE XXIV.
It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers (not being subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties) who have commissions from any other
prince or state in enmity with either nation, to arm their ships in the ports
of either of the said parties, nor to sell what they have taken, nor in any
manner to exchange the same; nor shall they be allowed to purchase more
provisions, than shall be necessary for their going to the nearest port of that
prince or state from whom they obtained their commissions.

ARTICLE XXV.
It shall be lawful for the ships of war and privateers belonging to the said
parties respectively, to carry whithersover they please, the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any fee to the officers
of the admiralty, or to any judges whatever; nor shall the said prizes when
they arrive at, and enter the ports of the said parties be detained or seized;
neither shall the searchers or other officers of those places visit such
prizes, (except for the purpose of preventing the carrying of any part of the
cargo thereof on shore in any manner contrary to the established laws of
revenue, navigation, or commerce) nor shall such officers take cognizance of
the validity of such prizes; but they shall be at liberty to hoist sail, and
depart as speedily as may be, and carry their said prizes to the place
mentioned in their commissions or patents, which the commanders of the said
ships of war or privateers shall be obliged to show. No shelter or refuge shall
be given in their ports to such as have made a prize upon the subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties; but if forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to
hasten their departure, and to cause them to retire as soon as possible.
Nothing in this treaty contained shall, however, be construed or operate
contrary to former and existing public treaties with other sovereigns or
states. But the two parties agree, that while they continue in amity, neither
of them will in future make any treaty that shall be inconsistent with this or
the preceding article.

Neither of the said parties shall permit the ships or goods belonging to the
subjects or citizens of the other to be taken within cannon shot of the coast,
nor in any of the bays, ports, or rivers of their territories by ships of war,
or others having commission from any prince, republic, or state whatever. But
in case it should so happen, the party whose territorial rights shall thus have
been violated, shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain from the o fending
party, full and ample satisfaction for the vessel or vessels so taken, whether
the same be vessels of war or merchant vessels.

ARTICLE XXVI.
If at any time a rupture should take place (which God forbid) between his
Majesty and the United States, the merchants and others of each of the two
nations, residing in the dominions of the other, shall have the privilege of
remaining and continuing their trade, so long as they behave peaceably and
commit no offense against the laws; and in case their conduct should render
them suspected, and the respective governments should think proper to order
them to remove, the term of twelve months from the publication of the order
shall be allowed them for that purpose, to remove with their families, effects
and property; but this favor shall not be extended to those who shall act
contrary to the established laws; and for greater certainty, it is declared
that such rupture shall not be deemed to exist while negociations for
accommodating differences shall be depending, nor until the respective
ambassadors or ministers, if such there shall be, shall be recalled, or sent
home on account of such differences, and not on account of personal misconduct,
according to the nature and degrees of which both parties retain their rights,
either to request the recall, or immediately to send home the ambassador or
minister of the other; and that without prejudice to their mutual friendship
and good understanding.

ARTICLE XXVII.
It is further agreed, that his Majesty and the United States on mutual
requisitions, by them respectively, or by their respective ministers or
officers authorized to make the same, will deliver up to justice all persons,
who, being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other, provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality as, according to
the laws of the place, where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had
there been committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be
borne and defrayed, by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive.

ARTICLE XXVIII.
It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this treaty shall be permanent,
and that the subsequent articles, except the twelfth, shall be limited in their
duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which the
ratifications of this treaty shall be exchanged, but subject to this condition,
That whereas the said twelfth article will expire by the limitation therein
contained, at the end of two years from the signing the preliminary or other
articles of peace, which shall terminate the present war in which his Majesty
is engaged, it is agreed, that proper measures shall by concert be taken, for
bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty and discussion, so
early before the expiration of the said term, as that new arrangements on that
head, may by that time be perfected and ready to take place. But if it should
unfortunately happen, that his Majesty and the United States, should not be
able to agree on such new arrangements, in that case all the articles of this
treaty, except the first ten, shall then cease and expire together.

LASTLY.
This treaty, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty, and by the
President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of their
Senate, and the respective ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be binding
and obligatory on his Majesty and on the said States, and shall be by them
respectively executed, and observed, with punctuality and the most sincere
regard to good faith; and whereas it will be expedient, in order the better to
facilitate intercourse and obviate difficulties, that other articles be
proposed and added to this treaty, which articles, from want of time and other
circumstances, cannot now be perfected -- it is agreed, that the said parties
will from time to time, readily treat of and concerning such articles, and will
sincerely endeavor so to form them, as that they may conduce to mutual
convenience, and tend to promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and that
the said articles, after having been duly ratified, shall be added to, and make
a part of this treaty. In faith whereof, we, the undersigned ministers
plenipotentiary of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, and the United States
of America, have signed this present treaty, and have caused to be affixed
thereto the seal of our arms.

Done at London, this nineteenth day of November, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Ninety-four. GRENVILLE. (Seal.) JOHN JAY. (Seal.)


CONDITIONAL RATIFICATION On the part of the United States,
In Senate. June 24, 1795.
RESOLVED that the Senate do consent to, and advise the President of the United
States to ratify the Treaty of amity, commerce and navigation, between his
Britannic majesty and the United States of America, concluded at London, the
19th of November, 1794, on condition that there be added to the said treaty, an
article whereby it shall be agreed to suspend the operation of so much of the
12th article, as respects the trade which his said majesty thereby consents may
be carried on between the United States and his islands in the West Indies, in
the manner, and on the terms and conditions therein specified.

And the Senate recommend to the President, to proceed without delay, to
further friendly negociations with his majesty, on the subject of the said
trade, and of the terms and conditions in question.

LETTER
FROM MR. JEFFERSON TO MR. HAMMOND.
Philadelphia, September 5, 1794. SIR,
I am honored with yours of August 30. Mine of the 7th of that month assured
you that measures were taken for excluding from all further asylum in our
ports, vessels armed in them to cruize on nations with which we are at peace,
and for the restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince William Henry,
and the Jane of Dublin; and that should the measures for restitution fail in
their effect, the President considered it as incumbent on the United States to
make compensation for the vessels.

We are bound by our treaties with three of the belligerent nations, by all the
means in our power to protect and defend their vessels and effects in our
ports, or waters, or on the seas near our shores, and to recover and restore
the same to the right owners when taken from them. If all the means in our
power are used, and fail in their effect, we are not bound by our treaties with
those nations to make compensation.

Though we have no similar treaty with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the
President, that we should use toward that nation, the same rule, which, under
this article, was to govern us with the other nations; and even to extend it to
captures made on the high seas, and brought into our ports: if done by vessels
which had been armed within them.

Having for particular reasons, sorebore to use all the means in our power for
the restitution of the three vessels mentioned in my letter of August 7th, the
President thought it incumbent on the United States to make compensation for
them; and though nothing was said in that letter of other vessels taken under
like circumstances, and brought in after the fifth of June, and before the date
of that letter, yet when the same forbearance had taken place, it was, and is
his opinion, that compensation would be equally due.

As to prizes made under the same circumstances, and brought in after the date
of that letter, the President determined that all the means in our power should
be used for their restitution. If these fail, as we should not be bound by our
treaties to make compensation to other powers in the (...) case, he did not
mean to give an opinion that it ought to be done to Great Britain. But still,
if any cases shall arise subsequent to that date, the circumstances of which
shall place them on similar ground with those before it, the President would
^^nk compensation equally incumbent on the United States.

Instructions are given to the governors of the different states, to use all
the means in their power for restoring prizes of this last description found
within their ports. Though they will of course take measures to be informed of
them, and the general government has given them the aid of the custom-house
officers for this purpose, yet you will be sensible of the importance of
multiplying the channels of their information as far as shall depend on
yourself, or any other person under your direction, in order that the governors
may use the means in their power for making restitution.

Without knowledge of the capture they cannot restore it. It will always be
best to give the notice to them directly; but any information which you shall
be pleased to send to me, also, at any time, shall be forwarded to them as
quickly as distance will permit.

Hence you will perceive, Sir, that the President contemplates restitution or
compensation in the cases before the 7th of August; and after that date
restitution if it can be effected by any means in our power. And that it will
be important that you should substantiate the fact, that such prizes are in our
ports or waters.

Your list of the privateers illicitly armed in our ports is, I believe,
correct.

With respect to losses by detention, waste, spoilation sustained by vessels
taken as before mentioned, between the dates of June 5th and August 7th, it is
proposed as a provisional measure, that the collector of the customs of the
district, and the British consul, or any other person you please, shall appoint
persons to establish the value of the vessel and cargo, at the time of her
capture and of her arrival in the port into which she is brought, according to
their value in that port. If this shall be agreeable to you, and you will be
pleased to signify it to me, with the names of the prizes understood to be of
this description, instructions will be given accordingly, to the collectors of
the customs where the respective vessels are.

I have the honor to be, etc. (Signed) THOMAS JEFFERSON.

Geo. Hammond, Esquire
WHILST the Treaty was under discussion in the Senate, the following
propositions were brought forward and respectfully offered as substitutes to
the resolution of Ratification, which ultimately prevailed.
MR. BURR's MOTION.
THAT the further consideration of the Treaty concluded at London the 19th of
November 1794, be postponed, and that it be recommended to the President of the
United States to proceed without delay, to further friendly negotiation with
his Britannic Majesty, in order to effect alterations in the said treaty, in
the following particulars:

That the 9th, 10th and 24th Articles, and so much of the 25th as relates to
the shelter or refuge, to be given to the armed vessels of states or sovereigns
at war with either party, be expunged.

2d Art. That no privilege or right be allowed to the settlers or traders
mentioned in the 2d Article, other than those which are secured to them by the
treaty of 1783, and existing laws.

3d Art. That the 3d Article be expunged, or so modified that the citizens of
the United States may have the use of all rivers, ports and places within the
territories of his Britannic Majesty in North America, in the same manner as
his subjects may have of those of the United States.

6th Art. That the value of the negroes and other property, carried away
contrary to the 7th article of the treaty of 1783, and the loss and damages
sustained by the United States by the detention of the posts, be paid for by
the British government; the amount to be ascertained by the commissioners who
may be appointed to liquidate the claims of the British creditors.

12th Art. That what relates to the West India trade, and the provisos and
conditions thereof in the 12th article, be expunged, or be rendered much more
favorable to the United States, and without any restraint on the exportation
in vessels of the United States, of any articles, not the growth, produce or
manufacture of the said islands of his Britannic Majesty.

15th Art. That no clause be admitted which may restrain the United States from
reciprocating benefits by discriminating between foreign nations in their
commercial arrangements, or prevent them from increasing the tonnage, or other
duties on British vessels, on terms of reciprocity, or in a stipulated ratio.

21st Art. That the subjects or citizens of either party, be not restrained
from accepting commissions in the army or navy of any foreign power.

MR. TAZEWELL's MOTION.
THAT the President of the United States be informed, that the Senate will not
consent to the ratification of the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation,
between the United States and his Britannic Majesty, concluded at London on the
19th of November, 1794, for the reasons following --

1. Because so much of the treaty as was intended to terminate the complaints,
flowing from the inexecution of the treaty of 1783, contains stipulations that
were not rightfully or justly requirable of the United States, and which are
both impolitic and injurious to their interest; and because the treaty has not
secured that satisfaction from the British government, for the removal of
negroes, in violation of the treaty of 1783, to which the citizens of the
United States were justly entitled. 2. Because the rights of individual states
are by the 9th article of the treaty, unconstitutionally invaded. 3. Because,
however impolitic or unjust it may generally be, to exercise the power
prohibited by the 10th article, yet it rests on legislative discretion, and
ought not to be prohibited by treaty. 4. Because so much of the treaty, as
relates to commercial arrangements between the parties, wants that reciprocity,
upon which alone, such like arrangements ought to be sounded, and will operate
ruinously to the American commerce and navigation. 5. Because the treaty
prevents the United States from the exercise of that control over their
commerce and navigation, as connected with other nations, which might better
the condition of their intercourse with friendly nations. 6. Because the treaty
asserts a power in the President and Senate, to control and even annihilate
the constitutional right of the Congress of the United State, over their
commercial intercourse with foreign nations. 7. Because, if the construction of
this treaty should not produce an infraction of the treaties now subsisting
between the United States and their allies, it is calculated to excite
sensations, which may not operate beneficially to the United States.
Notwithstanding the Senate will not consent to the ratification of this
treaty, they advise the President of the United States to continue his
endeavors by friendly discussion with his Britannic Majesty, to adjust all the
real causes of complaint between the two nations.

These propositions were both rejected by a vote of 20 to 10. We are informed
that the members who voted in the affirmative were,

Brown, Bioodworth, Burr, Butler, Jackson, Langdon, Martin, Mason, Robinson,
Tazewell.
In the negative,
Bingham, Bradford, Cabot Elsworth, Frelinghuysen, Foster, Gunn, Henry, King,
Latimer, Pain, Potts, Read, Ross, Rutherford, Strong, Trumbull Vining,
Livermore, Marshall.
Treaty of Amity and Commerce BETWEEN His Most Christian Majesty and the
thirteen United States of America.
THE most christian king, and the thirteen united States of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia, willing to fix, in an equitable and permanent manner,
the rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties desire to establish between their respective
countries, states, and subjects; his most christian majesty, and the said
united states, have judged, that the said end could not be better obtained,
than by taking for the basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and
reciprocity, and by carefully avoiding all those burdensome preferences, which
are usually sources of debate, embarrassment, and discontent -- by leaving also
each party at liberty to make, respecting commerce and navigation, those
interior regulations, which it shall find most convenient to itself -- and by
founding the advantage of commerce solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just
rules of free intercourse -- reserving withal to each party, the liberty of
admitting, at its pleasure, other nations to a participation of the same
advantages. It is in the spirit of this intention, and to fulfill these views,
that his said majesty having named and appointed for his plenipotentiary,
Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of Strasbourg, secretary of
his majesty's council of state -- and the united states on their part, having
fully empowered Benjamin Franklin, deputy from the state of Pennsylvania to the
general congress, and president to the convention of said state -- Silas Deane,
late deputy from the state of Connecticut, to the said congress -- and Arthur
Lee, counselor at law: the said respective plenipotentiaries, after exchanging
their powers, and after mature deliberation, have concluded and agreed upon the
following articles:

ART. I. THERE shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal peace, and a true and
sincere friendship, between the most christian king, his heirs and successors,
and the united states of America, and the subjects of the most christian king
and of the said states, and between the countries, islands, cities, and towns,
situate under the jurisdiction of the most christian king, and of the said
united states, and the people and inhabitants of every degree, without
exception of persons or places, and the terms herein after-mentioned, shall be
perpetual between the most christian king, his heirs, and successors, and the
said united states.

II. The most christian king, and the united states, engage mutually not to
grant any particular favor to other nations, in respect of commerce and
navigation, which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who
shall enjoy the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made -- or on
allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

III. The subjects of the most christian king, shall pay in the ports, havens,
roads, countries, islands, cities, or towns of the united states, or any of
them, no other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be,
or by what name soever called, than those which the nations most favored are
or shall be obliged to pay: and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said states to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations do
or shall enjoy.

IV. The subjects, people and inhabitants of the said united states, and each
of them, shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, isles, cities, and places,
under the domination of his most christian majesty in Europe, any other or
greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by what name
soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be
obliged to pay: and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation, and commerce, whether in
passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another, or in going
to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations
do or shall enjoy.

V. In the above exemption is particularly comprised, the imposition of one
hundred sols per ton, established in France on Foreign ships, unless when the
ships of the united states shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion: in which case, the said ships shall pay the
duty above mentioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it: but it is understood, that the said united states, or any of
them, are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

VI. The most christian king shall endeavor, by all the means in his power, to
protect and defend all vessels, and the effects, belonging to the subjects,
people, or inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them, being in his
ports, havens or roads, or on the seas near to his countries, islands, cities
or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their agents, or
attorneys, all such vessels and effects, which shall be taken within his
jurisdiction: and the ships of war of his most christian majesty, or any convoy
sailing under his authority, shall upon all occasions take under their
protection, all vessels belonging to the subjects, people, or inhabitants of
the said united states, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going
the same way, and shall defend such vessels as long as they hold the same
course, or go the same way, against all attacks, force, and violence, in the
same manner as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the
subjects of the most christian king.

VII. In like manner the said united states, and their ships of war sailing
under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the tenor of
the preceding article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of
the most christian king, and use all their endeavors to recover, and cause to
be restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within the
jurisdiction of the said united states, or any of them.

VIII. The most christian king will employ his good offices and interposition
with the king or emperor of Morocco or Fez -- the regencies of Algiers, Tunis,
and Tripoli, or with any of them -- and also with every other prince, state, or
power, of the coast of Barbary in Africa -- and the subjects of the said king,
emperor, states, and powers, and each of them, in order to provide, as fully
and efficaciously as possible, for the benefit, convenience and safety of the
said united states, and each of them, their subjects, people, and inhabitants,
and their vessels and effects, against all violence, insult, attacks, or
depredations, on the part of the said princes and states of Barbary or their
subjects.

IX. The subjects, inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters, and
mariners of the states, provinces, and dominions of each party respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed by the other party. The most christian king's subjects shall not fish
in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts, or places, which the said united
states hold, or shall hereafter hold: and in like manner, the subjects, people,
and inhabitants of the said united states, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the most christian king possesses, or
shall hereafter possess: and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing,
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated: it is however, understood that
the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so long
and so far, as the most christian king or the united states shall not in this
respect have granted an exemption to some other nation.

X. The united states, their citizens, and inhabitants shall never disturb the
subjects of the most christian king in the enjoyment and exercise of the right
of fishing on the banks of Newfoundland -- nor in the indefinite and exclusive
right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island, which is
designed by the treaty of Utrecht -- nor in the rights relative to all and each
of the isles, which belong to his most christian majesty, the whole conformable
to the true sense of the treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

XI. The subjects and inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them,
shall not be reputed aubains in France: and consequently shall be exempted from
the (...) d'aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name soever. They may,
by testament, donation, or otherwise, dispose of their goods, moveable and
immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good: and their
heirs, subjects of the said united states, residing whether in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them, ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded, under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities, or private persons. And the said heirs, whether such by particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called droit de
detraction, or other duty of the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties, as much and as long as similar ones are not established by
the united states, or any of them. The subjects of the most christian king
shall enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said states, an entire
and perfect reciprocity relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: but it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shall remain in all their force and vigor: and the united states on
their part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws, relative to
that matter, as to them shall seem proper.

XII. The merchant-ships of either of the parties, which shall be making into a
port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whose voyage, and
the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of suspicion,
shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas, as in the ports and
havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly showing
that her goods are not of the number of those which have been prohibited as
contraband.

XIII. If, by the exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party
discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned f^^ a part under the obedience of his
enemies, it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to
open any chest, coffers, packs, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or
to remove the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belongs to the
subjects of France, or the inhabitants of the said united states, unless the
lading be brought on shore, in the presence of the officers of the court of
admiralty, and an inventory thereof made: but there shall be no allowance to
sell, exchange, or alienate the same in any manner, until after that due and
lawful process shall have been had against such prohibited goods, and the court
of admiralty shall, by a sentence pronounced, have confiscated the same; saving
always as well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which by this
treaty are to be esteemed free: neither may they be detained on pretense of
their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods; much less shall they
be confiscated as lawful prize: but if not the whole cargo, but only part
thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of
the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor, who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship, and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound: but in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

XIV. On the contrary, it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be laden
by the subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to the
enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not of
the sort of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandises as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war, or even after such declaration if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration: so that the goods of the
subjects and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as
are prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the same with
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it shall not be anyways
lawful to carry them afterward to any ports belonging to the enemy. The two
contracting parties agree, that the term of two months being passed after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

XV. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the subjects
and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men of war
or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of his most
christian majesty and of the said united states, and all their subjects and
inhabitants, shall be forbidden doing any injury or damage to the other side;
and if they act to the contrary, they shall be punished: and shall moreover be
bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof,
by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their person and goods.

XVI. All ships and merchandises, of what nature soever, which shall be rescued
out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be brought
into some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody of the
officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true proprietor,
as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning the property
thereof.

XVII. It shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and privateers,
freely to carry, whithersoever they please, the ships and goods taken from
their enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers of the
admiralty, or any other judges: nor shall such prizes be arrested or seized,
when they come to and enter the ports of either party: nor shall the searchers
or other officers of those places search the same, or make examination
concerning the lawfulness of such prizes: but they may hoist fail at any time,
and depart, and carry their prizes to the places expressed in their
commissions, which the commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to
show: on the contrary, no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to
such as shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of either of
the parties; but if such shall come in, being forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, all proper means shall be vigorously used, that they go
out and retire from thence as soon as possible.

XVIII. If any ship, belonging to either of the parties, their people, or
subjects, shall, within the coasts or dominions of the other, stick upon the
sands, or be wrecked, or suffer any other damage -- all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in danger
thereof. And letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for their
free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his own
country.

XIX. In case he subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their shipping,
whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced through
stress of weather, pursuit of pirates, or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads, or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help: and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with vi^tuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance o^ their persons, or reparation of their ships, and convenience of
their voyage: and they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they
please, without any let or hinderance.

XX. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed, that if
a war shall break out between the said two nations, six months after the
proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants, in the cities and towns
where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and merchandises: and
if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them within that term,
by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction shall
be made for the same.

XXI. No subjects of the most christian king shall apply for or take any
commission or letters of marque, for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said united states, or any of them, or against the
subjects, people, or inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them, or
against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of them, from any prince
or state with which the said united states shall be at war: nor shall any
citizen, subject, or inhabitant of the said united states, or any of them,
apply for or take any commission or letters of marque, for arming any ship or
ships to act as privateer^ against the subjects of the most christian king, or
any of them, or the property of any of them, from any prince or state with
which the said king shall be at war: and if any person of either nation shall
take such commissions or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

XXII. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers, not belonging to
subjects of the most christian king, nor citizens of the said united states,
who have commissions from any other prince or state in enmity with either
nation, to fit their ships in the ports of either the one or the other of the
aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other manner
whatsoever to exchange their ships, merchandises, or any other lading: neither
shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall be
necessary for their going to the next port of that prince or state from which
they have commissions.

XXIII. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the most
christian king, and the citizens, people, and inhabitants of the said united
states, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandises laden
thereon, from any port to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall be
at enmity with the most christian king or the united states. It shall likewise
be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships
and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or
either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned, to neutral places; but
also from one place belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same prince, or under
several. And it is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods; and that every thing shall be deemed to be free and exempt, which
shall be found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although the whole lading or any part thereof should appertain to
the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers and in actual service of the enemy.

XXIV. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, excepting those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs, with the fusecs and other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberds, mortars, petards, grenades, saltpetre, muskets, musket ball,
bucklers, helmets, breast plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds of arms,
proper for arming soldiers, musketrests, belts, horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which follow,
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to say, all
sorts of cloths, and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever; all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with the species whereof they are used to be made; gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as also wheat and
barley, and any other kind of corn and pulse, tobacco, and likewise all manner
of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter, beer,
oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all provisions,
which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life;
furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails,
sail-cloths, anchors, and any parts of anchors, also ships, masts, planks,
boards, and beams of what trees soever: and all other things proper either for
building or repairing ships, and all other goods whatever which have not been
worked into the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war by land or by
sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already
wrought and made up for any other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among
free goods; as likewise all other merchandises and things which are not
comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of
contraband goods, so that they may be transported and carried in the freest
manner by the subjects of both confederates, even to places belonging to an
enemy -- such towns or places being only excepted, as are at that time
besieged, blocked up, or invested.

XXV. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided and
prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of the
parties hereto should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging to the
subjects or people of the other ally, must be furnished with sea letters or
passports, expressing the name, property, and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship, that
it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of
one of the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to
the form annexed to this treaty. They shall likewise be recalled every year,
that is, if the ship happens to return home within the space of a year; it is
likewise agreed, that such ships, being laden, are to be provided not only with
passports as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whither
she is bound; that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods
be on board the same; which certificates shall be made out by the officers of
the place whence the ship set sail. in the accustomed form: and if any one
shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates the person
to whom the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

XXVI. The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties
coming upon any coasts belonging to either of the said allies, but not willing
to enter into port, or being entered into port, and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules
prescribed or to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

XXVII. If the ships of the said subjects, people, or inhabitants of either of
the parties, shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts, or on the high
seas, by any ships of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of
war or privateers for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon
shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship, which they shall so
meet with; and may enter her to the number of two or three men only; to whom
the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport,
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present treaty: and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage; so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase, or force her to
quit her intended course.

XXVIII. It is also agreed, that all goods, when once put on board the ships or
vessels of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no
further visitation; but all visitation or search shall be made beforehand; and
all prohibited goods shall be stopped on the spot before the same be put on
board, unless there be manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice: nor
shall either the persons or goods of the subjects of his most christian
majesty, or the united states, be put under any arrest, or molested by any
other kind of embargo for that cause; and only the subject of that state to
whom the said goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to
sell or alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

XXIX. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each in
the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents and commissaries, whose
functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

XXX. And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects of
the united states may have with France, the most christian king will grant them
in Europe, one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all the
produce and merchandise of the thirteen united states: and his majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said states, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America; of all which free ports the
said subjects of the united states shall enjoy the use, agreeably to the
regulations which relate to them.

XXXI. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if
possible.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles, both in the French and English languages; declaring, nevertheless,
that the present treaty was originally composed and concluded in the French
language; and they have hereto affixed their seals.

Done at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight.

C. A. GERARD, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) SILAS DEANE, (L. S.) ARTHUR LEE,
(L.S.)


Treaty of Alliance EVENTUAL AND DEFENSIVE, BETWEEN His Most Christian Majesty
and the thirteen United States of America.
THE most christian king, and the united states of North America, to wit, New
Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and
Georgia, having this day concluded a treaty of amity and commerce, for the
reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have thought it necessary
to take into consideration the means of strengthening those engagements, and of
rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity of the two parties;
particularly in case Great Britain, in resentment of that connection, and of the
good correspondence which is the object of the said treaty, should break the
peace with France, either by direct hostilities, or by hindering her commerce
and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of nations, and the peace
subsisting between the two crowns. And his majesty and the said united states,
having resolved in that case, to join their councils and efforts against the
enterprises of their common enemy --

The respective plenipotentiaries, empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper to fulfill the said intentions, have, after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles.

I. If war should break out between France and Great Britain, during the
continuance of the present war between the united states and England, his
majesty and the said united states shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels, and their forces,
according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful allies.

II. The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to
maintain effectually the liberty, sovereignty, and independence, absolute and
unlimited, of the said united states, as well in matters of government, as of
commerce.

III. The two contracting parties shall, each on its own part, and in the
manner it may judge most proper, make all the efforts in its power against
their common enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

IV. The contracting parties agree, that in case either of them should form any
particular enterprise, in which the concurrence of the other may be desired,
the party, whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join
to act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own
particular situation will permit. And in that case, they shall regulate by a
particular convention, the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and
the time and manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages
which are to be its compensation.

V. If the united states should think fit to attempt the reduction of the
British power remaining in the northern parts of America, or the islands of
Bermudas, those countries or islands, in case of success, shall be confederated
with, or dependent upon the said united states.

VI. The most christian king renounces for ever, the possession of the islands
of Bermudas, as well as of any part of the continent of North America, which
before the treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the united states,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the king and crown of Great Britain.

VII. If his most christian majesty shall think proper to attack any of the
islands situated in the gulf of Mexico, or near that gulf, which are at
present under the power of Great Britain, all the said isles, in case of
success, shall appertain to the crown of France.

VIII. Neither of the two parties shall conclude either truce or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained: and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the independence of the
united states shall have been formally or tacitly assured, by the treaty or
treaties that shall terminate the war.

IX. The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on its
own part, the clauses and conditions of the present treaty of alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after-claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever mav be the event of the war.

X. The most christian king and the united states agree to invite or admit
other powers, who may have received injuries from England, to make a common
cause with them, and to accede to the present alliance, under such conditions
as shall be freely agreed to, and settled between all the parties.

XI. The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time and for ever,
against all other powers, to wit, the united states to his most christian
majesty, the present possessions of the crown of France in America, as well as
those which it may acquire by the future treaty of peace: and his most
christian majesty guarantees; on his part to the united states, their liberty,
sovereignty, and independence, absolute and unlimited, as well in matters of
government, as commerce -- and also their possessions, and the additions or
conquests that their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the
dominions now or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America,
conformable to the fifth and sixth articles above written; the whole, as their
possessions shall be fixed and assured to the said states, at the moment of the
cessation of their present war with England.

XII. In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the preceding
article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture between
France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said article,
shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break out: and
if such rupture shall not take place, the mutual obligations of the said
guarantee shall not commence until the moment of the cessation of the present
war, between the united states and England, shall have ascertained their
possessions.

XIII. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the ratification
shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if possible.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries, to wit, on the part of the
most christian king, Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of
Strasbourg and secretary of his majesty's council of state -- and on the part
of the united states, Benjamin Franklin, deputy to the general congress from
the state of Pennsylvania, and president of the convention of said state --
Silas Deane, heretofore deputy from the state of Connecticut -- and Arthur Lee,
counselor at law, have signed the above articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring, nevertheless, that the present treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language; and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

Done at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight.

C. A. GERARD, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) SILAS DEANE, (L. S.) ARTHUR LEE,
(L. S.)


The Definitive Treaty BETWEEN Great Britain and the thirteen United States of
America.
In the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity.
IT having pleased the divine providence to dispose the hearts of the most
serene and most potent prince George the third, by the grace of God, king of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, duke of Brunswick
and Lunenburg, arch treasurer and prince elector of the holy Roman empire, etc.
and of the united states of America, to forget all past misunderstandings and
differences, that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore -- and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony -- and having for this desirable end
already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the provisional
articles, signed at Paris, on the 30th of November 1782, by the commissioners
empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the treaty of peace proposed to be concluded between the crown of
Great Britain, and the said united states, but which treaty was not to be
concluded until terms of peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain and
France, and his Britannic majesty should be ready to conclude such treaty
accordingly -- and the treaty between Great Britain and France having since
been concluded, his Britannic majesty and the united states of America, in
order to carry into full effect the provisional articles above mentioned,
according to the tenor thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say,
his Britannic majesty on his part, David Hartley, esquire member of the parliament
of Great Britain; and the said united states on their part, John Adams, esquire
late a commissioner of the united states of America, at the court of
Versailles, late delegate in congress from the state of Massachusetts, and
chief justice of the said state, and minister plenipotentiary of the said
united states, to their high mightinesses the states general of the united
Netherlands; Benjamin Franklin, esquire late delegate in congress, from the state
of Pennsylvania, president of the convention of the said state, and minister
plenipotentiary from the united states of America at the court of Versailles;
and John Jay, esquire late president of congress, chief justice of the state of New
York, and minister plenipotentiary from the said united states at the court of
Madrid -- to be the plenipotentiaries for the concluding and signing the
present definitive treaty; who, after having reciprocally communicated their
respective full powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following articles.

Art. I. His Britannic majesty acknowledges the said united states, viz. New
Hampshire, Massachusettsbay, Rhode Island, and Providence plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be free, sovereign, and
independent states; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, propriety, and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

II. And that all disputes, which might arise in future, on the subject of the
boundaries of the said united states, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed and
declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. from the
northwest angle of Nova Scotia, viz. That angle which is formed by a line drawn
due north from the source of St. Croix river to the highlands, along the said
highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river St.
Lawrence from those which fall into the Atlantic ocean, to the
north-westernmost head of Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line
due west on said latitude, until it strikes the river Iroquois or Catar^quy;
thence along the middle of said river into lake Ontario; through the middle of
said lake until it strikes the communication by water between that lake and
lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into lake Erie;
through the middle of said lake until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and lake Huron; thence along the middle of said water
communication into the lake Huron; thence through the middle of said lake to
the water communication between that lake and lake Superior; thence through
lake Superior northward of the isles Royal and Philipeaux to the Long lake;
thence through the middle of said Long lake and the water communication between
it and the lake of the Woods, to the said lake of the Woods; thence through the
said lake to the most north-western point thereof, and from thence on a due
west course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the
middle, of the said river Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost
part of the thirty-first degree of north latitude. South, by a line to be drawn
due east from the determination of the line last mentioned in the latitude of
thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicola, or Catahouche; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint river; thence strait to the head of St. Mary's river; and thence
down along the middle of St. Mary's river to the Atlantic ocean. East, by a
line to be drawn along the middle of the river St. Croix, from its mouth in the
bay of Fundy, to its source, and from its source directly north to the
aforesaid highlands, which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic ocean,
from those which fall into the river St. Lawrence, comprehending all islands
within twenty leagues of any part of the shores of the united states, and lying
between lines to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid
boundaries between Nova Scotia on the one part, and East Florida on the other,
shall respectively touch the bay of Fundy, and the Atlantic ocean, excepting
such islands as now are, or heretofore have been within the limits of the said
province of Nova Scotia.

III. It is agreed, that the people of the united states shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and
on all the other banks of Newfoundland, also in the gulf of St. Lawrence, and
at all other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at
any time heretofore to fish. And also, that the inhabitants of the united
states shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast
of Newfoundland, as British fishermen shall use (but not to dry or cure the
same on that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all other of
his Britannic majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen
shall have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors
and creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen islands, and Labrador, so long as the same
shall remain unsettled; but so soon as the same or either of them shall be
settled, it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure fish at
such settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose, with the
inhabitants, proprietors, or possessors of the ground.

IV. It is agreed, that creditors on either side, shall meet with no lawful
impediment to the recovery of the full value, in sterling money, of all bona
fide debts heretofore contracted.

V. It is agreed, that the congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
legislatures of the respective states, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights, and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects: and also of the estates, rights, and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the said united states; and that persons of any other
description, shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of the
thirteen united states, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested, in
their endeavors to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights,
and properties, as may have been confiscated; and that congress shall also
earnestly recommend to the several states, a re-consideration and revision of
all acts or laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts
perfectly consistent, not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation, which, on the return of the blessings of peace, should
universally prevail: and that congress shall also earnestly recommend to the
several states, that the estates, rights, and properties of such last mentioned
persons shall be restored to them, they refunding to any persons who may be now
in possession, the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such
persons may have paid, on purchasing any of the said lands, rights, or
properties since the confiscation. And it is agreed, that all persons, who have
any interest in confiscated lands, either by debts, marriage-settlements, or
otherwise, shall meet with no lawful impediment in the prosecution of their
just rights.

VI. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any prosecutions
commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the part which he
or they may have taken in the present war: and that no person shall, on that
account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person, liberty, or
property: and that those, who may be in confinement on such charges, at the
time of the ratification of the treaty in America, shall be immediately set at
liberty, and the prosecution, so commenced, be discontinued.

VII. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic majesty
and the said states, and between the subjects of the one, and the citizens of
the other; wherefore all hostilities both by sea and land shall from henceforth
cease: all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty: and his Britannic
majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any destruction,
or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the American inhabitants,
withdraw all his armies, garrisons, and fleets from the said united states, and
from every post, place, and harbor within the same, leaving in all
fortifications the American artillery that may be therein; and shall also order
and cause all archives, records, deeds, and papers belonging to any of the said
states, or their citizens, which in the course of the war, may have fallen into
the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored, and delivered to the
proper states and persons to whom they belong.

VIII. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the ocean,
shall for ever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain and the
citizens of the united states.

IX. In case it should so happen, that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the united states, should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said provisional articles
in America, it is agreed that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

X. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and due
form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties in the space of six
months, or sooner, if possible, to be computed from the day of the signature of
the present treaty. In witness whereof, we the undersigned, their ministers
plenipotentiary, have, in their name, and in virtue of our full powers, signed
with our hands, the present definitive treaty, and caused the seals of our arms
to be affixed thereto.

Done at Paris, this third day of September, one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-three.

DAVID HARTLEY, (L. S.) JOHN ADAMS, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) JOHN JAY, (L.
S.)


CONSTITUTION OF THE United States.
WE, the people of the united states, in order to form a more perfect union,
establish justice insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution for the united
states of America.

ARTICLE I.
SECTION I.
ALL legislative powers herein granted, shall be vested in a congress of the
united states, which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.

SECTION II.
1. The house of representatives shall consist of members chosen every second
year, by the people of the several states; and the electors, in each state,
shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the state legislature.

2. No person shall be a representative, who shall not have attained to the age
of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the united states;and
who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall
be chosen.

3. Representatives, and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several
states, which may be included in this union, according to their respective
numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to serve for a term of years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the congress of the
united states; and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as
they shall by law direct. The number of representatives shall not exceed one
for every thirty thousand: but each state shall have at least one
representative: and, until such enumeration shall be made, the state of
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three; Massachusetts eight;
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one; Connecticut five; New York six;
New Jersey four; Pennsylvania eight; Delaware one; Maryland six; Virginia ten;
North Carolina five; South Carolina five; and Georgia three.

4. When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

5. The house of representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers;
and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SECTION III.
1. The senate of the united states shall be composed of two senators from each
state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years: and each senator shall
have one vote.

2. Immediately after they shall be assembled, in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided, as equally as may be, into three classes. The
seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year; of the second class, at the expiration of the fourth year; and
of the third class, at the expiration of the sixth year: so that one-third may
be chosen every second year. And if vacancies happen, by resignation or
otherwise, during the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

3. No person shall be a senator, who shall not have attained to the age of
thirty years, and ^een nine years a citizen of the united states; and who shall
not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.

4. The vice president of the united states shall be president of the senate;
but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

5. The senate shall choose their other officers, and also a president pro
tempore, in the absence of the vice president, or when he shall exercise the
office of president of the united states.

6. The senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting
for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the president of
the united states is tried, the chief justice shall preside: and no person
shall be convicted, without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members
present.

7. Judgment, in cases of impeachment, shall not extend further than to removal
from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor,
trust, or profit, under the united states. But the party convicted shall,
nevertheless, be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, and
punishment according to law.

SECTION IV.
1. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof:
but the congress may, at any time, by law, make or alter such regulations,
except as to the places of choosing senators.

2. The congress shall assemble at least once in every year: and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

SECTION V.
1. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications
of its own members: and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do
business but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be
authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner, and
under such penalties as each house may provide.

2. Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings; punish its members
for disorderly behavior; and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a
member.

3. Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings; and, from time to
publish the same exepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy:
and the yeas and nays, of the members of either house, on any question, shall,
at the desire of one fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

4. Neither house, during the session of congress, shall, without the consent
of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than
that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

SECTION VI.
1. The senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for their
services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the united
states. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of the
peace, be privileged from arrest, during their attendance at the session of
their respective houses, and in going to, and returning from the same: and for
any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

2. No senator or representative sshall, during the time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil office, under the authority of the united
states, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have
been increased, during such time: and no person, holding any office under the
united states, shall be a member of either house, during his continuance in
office.

SECTION VII.
1. All bills, for raising revenue, shall originate in the house of
representatives: but the senate shall propose or concur with amendments, as on
other bills.

2. Every bill, which shall have passed the house of representatives and the
senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the president of the
united states. If he approve, he shall sign it: but if not, he shall return it,
with his objections, to that house, in which it shall have orginated, who shall
enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it.
If, after such reconsideration two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the
bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house, by
which it shall likewise be reconsidered: and, if approved by two-thirds of that
house, it shall become a law. But, in all such cases, the votes of both house^
shall be determined by yeas and nays: and the names of the persons voting for
and against the bill, shall be entered on the journal of each house
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the president, within ten
days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same
shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the congress, by
their adjournment, prevent its return; in which case it shall not be a law.

3. Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the senate
and house of representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
adjournment) shall be presented to the president of the united states; and,
before the same shall take effect, be approved by him; or, being disapproved by
him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of both houses, according to the rults and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

SECTION VIII.
The congress shall have power

1. To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts,
and provide for the common defense, and general welfare, of the united states:
but all duties, imposts, and excises, shall be uniform throughout the united
states.

2. To borrow money on the credit of the united state^.

3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states,
and with the Indian tribes.

4. To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the
subject of bankruptcies, throughout the united states.

5. To coin money; regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin; and fix the
standard of weights and measures.

6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the united states.

7. To establish post-offices and post-roads.

8. To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing, for
limited times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries.

9. To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court.

10. To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and
offenses against the law of nations.

11. To declare war; grant letters of marque and reprisal; and make rules
concerning captures on land and water.

12. To raise and support armies. But no appropriation of money for that use,
shall be for a longer term than two years.

13. To provide and maintain a navy.

14. To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval
forces.

15. To provide for calling forth the militia, to execute the laws of the
union, supppess insurrections, and repel invasions.

16. To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for
governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the united
states: reserving to the states respectively the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by congress.

17. To exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatsoever over such
district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular
states, and the acceptance of congress, become the seat of the government of
the united states; and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by
the consent of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for the
erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings:
and

18. To make all laws, which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution in the government of the united states, or in any department or
officer thereof.

SECTION IX.
1. The migration or importation of such persons, as any of the states now
existing, shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the congress,
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight: but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

3. No bill of attainder, or ex post facto law, shall be passed.

4. No capitation or other direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to
the census or enumeration, herein before directed to be taken.

5. No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state. No
preserence shall be given, by any regulation of commerce or revenue, to the
ports of one state over those of another: nor shall vessels, bound to or from,
one state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

6. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law: and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

7. No title of nobility shall be granted by the united states. And no person,
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

SECTION X.
1. No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant
letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any
thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or
grant any title of nobility.

2. No state shall, without the consent of congress, lay any imposts or duties
on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any
state on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury of the united
states; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the
congress. No state shall, without the consent of congress, lay any duty on
tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time of peace, enter into any
agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or engage in
war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of
delay.

ARTICLE II.
SECTION I.
1. The executive power shall be vested in a president of the united states of
America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together
with the vice president, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:

2 Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of senators and
representatives, to which the state may be entitled in the congress. But no
senator, or representative, or person holding any office of trust or profit,
under the united states, shall be appointed an elector.

3. The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for
two persons, of whom one, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same
state with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for,
and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify,
and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the united states,
directed to the president of the senate. The president of the senate shall, in
the presence of the senate and house of representatives, open all the
certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the
greatest number of votes shall be the president, if such number be a majority
of the whole number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who
have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the house of
representtives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for president:
and if no person have a majority, then, from the five highest on the list, the
said house shall in like manner choose the president. But in choosing the
president, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each
state having one vote: a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or
members from two-thirds of the states: and a majoritiy of all the states shall
be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the president, the
person having the greatest number of votes of the electors, shall be the
vice president. But if there should remain two or more, who have equal votes,
the senate shall choose from them, by ballot, the vice president.

4. The congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day
on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout
the united state.

5. No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the united
states, at the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to
the office of president. Neither shall any person be eligible to that office,
who shall not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen
years a resident within the united states.

6. In case of the removal of the president from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the vice president; and the congress may, by
law, provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of
the president and vice president, declaring what officer shall then act as
president: and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a president shall be elected.

7. The president shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished, during the
period for which he shall have been elected? and he shall not receive, within
that period, any other emolument from the united states, or any of them.

8. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation:

I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of
president of the united states; and will, to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the coustitution of the united states.

SECTION II.
1. The president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
united states, and of the militia of die several states, when called into the
actual service of the united states. He may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officers in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices: and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons, for offenses against the united states, except in
cases of impeachment.

2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to
make treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present concur: and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the united states, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the congress
may, by law, vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the president alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

3. The president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen,
during the recess of the senate, by granting commissions, which shall expire at
the end of their next session.

SECTION III.
He shall, from time to time, give to the congress information of the state of
the union; and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge
necessary and expedient. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both
houses, or either of them, and, in case of disagreement between them, with
respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he
shall think proper. He shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers. He
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed; and shall commission all
the officers of the united states.

SECTION IV.
The president, vice president, and all civil officers of the united states,
shall be removed from office, on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason,
bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

ARTICLE III.
SECTION I.
The judicial power of the united states shall be vested in one supreme court,
and in such inferior courts, as the congress may, from time to time, ordain and
establish. The judges, both of the supreme and inferior courts, shall hold
their offices during good behavior; and shall, at stated times, receive for
their services, a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their
continuance in office.

SECTION II.
1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising
under this constitution, the laws of the united states, and treaties made, or
which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting ambassadors,
other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction; to controversies to which the united states shall be a party; to
controversies between two or more states, between a state and citizens of
another state, between citizens of different states, between citizens of the
same state, claiming lands under grants of different states, and between a
state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects.

2. In all cases, affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls,
and those in which a state shall be a party, the supreme court shall have
original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the supreme
court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such
exceptions, and under such regulations, as the congress shall make.

3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury:
and such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any state, the trial shall be at such
place or places, as the congress may by law have directed.

SECTION III.
1. Treason against the united states, shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.

2. The congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason: but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
SECTION I.
Full faith and credit shall be given, in each state, to the public acts,
records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. And the congress may,
by general laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and
proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

SECTION II.
1. The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several states.

2. A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who
shall flee from justice, and be found in another state, shall, on demand of the
executive authority of the state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
removed to the state having jurisdicton of the crime.

3. No person, held to service or labor in one state, under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor; but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

SECTION III.
1. New states may be admitted by the congress into this union; but no new
state shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state --
nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts of
states -- without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned, as
well as of the congress.

2. The congress shall have power to dispose of, and make all needful rules and
regulations, respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united
states: and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed, as to prejudice
any claims of the united states, or of any particular state.

SECTION IV.
The united states shall guarantee to every state in this union, a republican
form of government; and shall protect each of them against invasion, and o^
application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature
cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

ARTICLE V.
The congress, whenever two-thirds of both house^ shall deem it necessary,
shall propose amendments to this constitution, or, on the application, of the
legislatures of two-thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for
proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of
three-fourths of the several states, or by conventions in three-fourths
thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the
congress; provided, that no amendment, which may be made prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and
fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no state,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate.

ARTICLE VI.
1. All debts contracted, and engagements entered into, before the adoption of
this constitution, shall be as valid against the united states, under this
constitution as under the confederation.

2. This constitution, and the laws of the united states which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the united states, shall be the supreme law of the land: and the
judges, in every state, shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution
or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
several state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of
the united states and of the several states, shall be bound, by oath or
affirmation, to support this constitution ^ but no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the united
states.

ARTICLE VII.
The ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the
establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.

Done in convention, by the unanimous consent of the states present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven, and of the independence of the united states of
America the twelfth. In witness whereof, etc.

GEO. WASHINGTON, president.

CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES,
Begun and held at the city of New York, on Wednesday, the fourth of March, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine.

The conventions of a number of the states having, at the time of their
adopting the constitution, expressed a desire, in order to prevent
misconstruction or abuse of its powers, that further declaratory and
restrictive clauses should be added -- and as extending the ground of public
confidence in the government, will best insure the beneficent ends of its
institution --

RESOLVED, by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of
America, in congress assembled, two-thirds of both houses concurring, that the
following articles be proposed to the legislatures of the several states, as
amendments to the constitution of the united states, all, or any of which
articles, when ratified by three-fourths of the said legislatures, to be valid,
to all intents and purpose, as part of the said constitution, viz.

ARTICLES, in addition to, and amendment of, the constitution of the united
states of America, proposed by congres^, and ratified by the legislatures of
the several states, pursuant to the fifth article of the original constitution.

I. After the first enumeration, required by the first article of the
constitution, there shall be one representative for every thirty thousand,
until the number shall amount to one hundred; after which, the proportion shall
be so regulated by congress, that there shall be not less than one hundred
representatives -- nor less than one representative for every forty thousand
persons -- until the number of representatives shall amount to two hundred;
after which, the proportion shall be so regulated by congress, that there shall
not be less than two hundred representatives, nor more than one representative
for every fifty thousand persons.

II. No law, varying the compensation for the services of the senators and
representatives, shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall
have intervened.

III. Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

IV. A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state,
the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.

V. No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without the
consent of the owner; nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by
law.

VI. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated: and
no wa^rants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation -- and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized.

VII. No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise insamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment by a grand jury, except in cases
arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service,
in time of war, or public danger: nor shall any person be subject for the same
offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in
any criminal case, to be a witness against himself; nor be deprived of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law: nor shall private property be
taken for public use, without just compensation.

VIII. In, all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury, of the state and district,
wherein the crime shall have been committed; which district shall have been
previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his savor; and to have the
assistance of counsel for his defense.

IX. In suits at common law, where the value in controversy, shall exceed
twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved: and no fact
tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the united
states, than according to the rules of common law.

X. Excessive bail shall not be required; nor excessive sinc^ imposed; nor
curel and unusual punishments inssicted.

XI. The enumeration, in the constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others, retained by the people.

XII. The powers, not delegated to the united states, by the constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to
the people.

FREDERICK AUGUSTUS MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the house of representatives. JOHN
ADAMS, vice president of the united states, and president of the senate.
Attest.
JOHN BECKLEY, clerk of the house of representatives. SAMUEL A. OTIS, secretary
of the senate.

N. B. By the returns made into the secretary of state's office, it appears
that the first article of the above amendments is agreed to by only seven
states -- the second by only four -- and therefore these are not obligatory.
All the remainder, having been ratified by nine states, are of equal obligation
with the constitution itself.



Explanation of the actual situation of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
FROM THE AURORA.
MR. BACHE,
I HAVE lately read with attention the treaty between Great Britain and the
United States, as also the resolution of the senate, conditionally consenting
to its ratification -- What the senate intended by this resolution is extremely
difficult to discover. I hope, however, the following remarks will contribute
to place it upon the least exceptionable ground.

The resolution is in these words --

"Resolved that the senate do consent to, and advise the president of the
United States to ratify, the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation, between
his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, concluded at London the
19th of November, 1794, on condition that there be added to the said treaty, an
article, whereby it shall be agreed to suspend the operation of so much of the
twelfth article, as respects the trade, which his said majesty thereby consents
may be carried on between the United States and his islands in the West Indies,
in the manner, and on the terms and conditions therein specified.

"And the senate recommend to the president to proceed, without delay, to
further friendly negociations with his majesty, on the subject of the said
trade, and of the terms and conditions in question."

So much of the twelfth article of the treaty as is not proposed to be
suspended by the foregoing resolution, is in these words --

"And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term, the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce, in this
respect, according to the situation in which his majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arrangements as may
best conduce to the mutual advantage and extension of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and in what cases neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what cases provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may become
such. But in the mean time their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be regulated by the articles herein after inserted on those subjects."

The twenty-eighth article of the treaty is in these words --

Art. XXVIII. "It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this treaty shall
be permanent, and that the subsequent articles, except the twelfth, shall be
limited in their duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which
the ratifications of this treaty shall be exchanged, but subject to this
condition -- that whereas the said 12th article will expire by the limitation
therein contained, at the end of two years from the signing of the preliminary
or other articles of peace, which shall terminate the present war in which his
majesty is engaged, it is agreed, that proper measures shall by concert be
taken for bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty and
discussion, so early before the expiration of the said term, as that new
arrangements on that head, may by that time be perfected and ready to take
place. But if it should unfortunately happen, that his majesty and the United
States should not be able to agree on such new arrangements, in that case all
the articles of this treaty, except the first ten, shall then cease and expire
together."

If the treaty had been unconditionally conseated to by the senate and ratified
by the president, and if no new arrangements in relation to the subjects of the
twelfth article, could be agreed on between the parties, before or at the
expiration of two years from the termination of the present war, then at that
period the whole of the treaty (except the first ten articles) would expire
together -- Except those ten articles, the whole treaty is made to depend on
the operation of the twelfth article, or its substitute. Whenever, therefore,
the twelfth article ceases to operate, if an agreeable substitute is not ready
to take its place, the whole treaty, except the ten first articles, must expire
with it. It is obviously immaterial, whether the determination of the twelfth
article is occasioned by its regular expiration, two years after the
termination of the war, or by the consent of the contracting nations, at an
earlier period. -- In either case, the effect must be the same.

The resolution of the senate makes the suspension of the material parts of the
twelfth article, a condition upon which they will consent to the ratification
of the treaty. If this condition is not accepted by the British king, every
part of the treaty is without the sanction of the senate. If it is accepted,
then the substantial parts of the twelfth article cease to operate, by the
mutual consent of the contracting nations; and therefore every part of the
treaty, except the first ten articles, must expire with it. The foundation
being taken away, the superstructure must fall.

The senate, aware of this conclusion, add to their resolution a recommendation
to the president, to proceed without delay to procure a substitute for the
twelfth article, by new negociations with the British king. If such a
substitute can be obtained, so as to begin its operation when the suspension of
the twelfth article takes place, then it may be contrived to give existence to
the whole treaty; but without it, the British king's assent to the condition
contained in the senate's resolution must annihilate the whole of the treaty,
or at any rate (...) whole of it except the ten first articles.

Under this view of the senate's resolution, it may become a question, whether
the president can constitutionally complete the final act of ratificaition,
without again resorting to the senate for their approbation. If new
arrangements are made to supply the place of the twelfth article, they must
form a part of the present treaty -- They do not now exist, and consequently
they cannot be said to have obtained the consent of the senate -- Without the
consent of the senate, a treaty cannot constitutionally be made -- If no new
arrangements are agreed on, and the condition upon which the senate have
consented to the ratification, is assented to, then as the condition itself
will destroy all the treaty, except the first ten articles, the discussion of
the question, as to the president's consititutional power, becomes unimportant,
as to all the treaty, except the ten first articles. The operation of the
condition, when assented to, upon the president's power to ratify the ten first
articles, is a question I do not now intend to examine, because the proceedings
of the senate have unequivocally shown, amidst all their perplexity, that they
did not intend to ratify the ten first articles in the view of a distinct
ratify the ten first articles in the view of a distinct treaty with
Great Britain.

AMERICANUS.

FROM THE AMERICAN DAILY ADVERTISER. Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty.
I. The origin and progress of the negotiation for the Treaty, are not
calculated to excite confidence.
1. THE administration of our government have, seemingly at least, manifested a
policy favorable to Great Britain, and adverse to France.

2. But the house of representatives of congress, impressed with the general
ill conduct of Great Britain toward America, were adopting measures, of a mild
though retaliating nature, to obtain redress and indemnification. The injuries
complained of were, principally, 1st, The detention of the western posts --
2dly, The delay in compensating for the negroes carried off at the close of the
war -- and 3dly, The spoliations committed on our commerce. The remedies
proposed were, principally, 1st, The commercial regulations of Mr. Madison --
2dly, The non-intercourse proposition of Mr. Clarke -- 3dly, The sequestration
motion of Mr. Dayton -- 4thly, An embargo -- and 5thly, Military preparation.

3. Every plan of the legislature was, however, suspended, or rather
annihilated, by the interposition of the executive authority; and Mr. Jay, the
chief justice of the United States, was taken from his judicial seat, to
negociate with Great Britain, under the influence of the prevailing sentiment
of the people, for the redress of our wrongs. Query -- Are not his commission
and the execution of it, at variance? Is any one of our wrongs actually
redressed? Is not an atonement to Great Britain, for the injuries which she
pretends to have suffered, a preliminary stipulation?

4. The political dogma of Mr. Jay are well known; his predilection, in
relation to France and Great Britain, has not been disguised; and even on the
topic of American complaints, his reports, while in the office of secretary for
foreign affairs, and his adjudications while in the office of chief justice,
were not calculated to point him out as the single citizen of America, fitted
for the service in which he was employed. Query -- Do not personal feelings too
often dictate and govern the public conduct of ministers? But whatever may have
been his personal disqualifications, they are absorbed in the more important
consideration of the apparent violence committed by Mr. Jay's appointment, on
the essential principles of the constitution. That topic, however, has already
been discussed, and we may pass to the manner of negociating the treaty in
England, which was at once obscure and illusory. We heard of Mr. Jay's
diplomatic honors; of the royal and ministerial courtesy which was shown to
him, and of the convivial boards to which he was invited: but, no more! Mr.
Jay, enveloped by a dangerous confidence, in the intuitive faculties of his own
mind, or in the inexhaustible fund of his diplomatic information, neither
possessed nor wished for external aid; while the British negociator, besides
his own acquirements, entered on the points of negotiation, fraught with all
the auxiliary sagacity of his brother ministers, and with all the practical
knowledge of the most enlightened merchants of a commercial nation. The result
corresponds with that inauspicious state of things. Mr. Jay was driven from the
ground of an injured, to the ground of an aggressing, party; he made atonement
for imaginary wrongs, before he was allowed justice for real ones; he converted
the resentments of the American citizens (under the impressions of which he was
avowedly sent to England) into amity and concord; and seems to have been so
anxious to rivet a commercial chain about the neck of America, that he even
forgot, or disregarded, a principal item of her own produce (cotton) in order
to make a sweeping sacrifice to the insatiable appetite of his maritime
antagonist. But the idea of the treaty, given by Mr. Pit in answer to Mr. Fox,
who, before he had seen, applauded it as an act of liberality and justice
toward America, was the first authoritative alarm to our interests and our
feelings. "When the treaty is laid before the parliament (said the minister)
you will best judge, whether any improper concession has been made to America!"

5. The treaty being sent hither for ratification, the president and the senate
pursue the mysterious plan in which it was negociated. It has been intimated,
that till the meeting of the senate, the instrument was not communicated even
to the most confidential officers of the government: and the first resolution
taken by the senate was to stop the lips and ears of its members against every
possibility of giving or receiving information. Every man, like Mr. Jay, was
presumed to be inspired. In the course of the discussion, however, some
occurrences flashed from beneath the veil of secrecy; and it is conjectured
that the whole treaty was at one time in jeopardy. But the rhetoric of a
minister (not remarkable for the volubility of his tongue) who was brought post
haste from the country; the danger of exposing to odium and disgrace the
distinguished American characters, who would be affected by a total rejection
of the treaty; and the feeble, but operative, vote of a member transported from
the languor and imbecility of a sick room, to decide in the senate a great
national question, whose merits he had not heard discussed; triumphed over
principle, argument and decorum!

6. But still the treaty remains unratified; for, unless the British government
shall assent to suspend the obnoxious twelfth article (in favor of which,
however, many patriotic members declared their readiness to vote) the whole is
destroyed by the terms of the ratification: and if the British government shall
agree to add an article allowing the suspension, the whole must return for the
re-consideration of the senate. But the forms of mystery are still preserved by
our government; and attempts to deceive the people have been made abroad, upon
a rain presumption, that the treaty could remain a secret, till it became
obligatory as a law.

For instance; in Fenno's paper of the 25th of June, it is unequivocally
declared, the "the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation was ratified
yesterday by the senate of the United States;" and, even while he corrects that
mistake in the paper of the following day, he commits an error of a more
extraordinary kind (particularly when we consider that he is the confidential
person, who printed the treaty for the use of the senate) by asserting, that in
the twelfth article, "the United States are prohibited from exporting to Europe
from the said states, sugar, coffee, cotton and cocoa, the produce of any of
the West India islands." The fact must have been known to Mr. Fenno, that the
prohibition operates universally; whether the prohibited articles are the
produce of the West India islands, of the East Indies, of the United States, or
of any other part of the world. The next essay to render the envelopements of
the treaty still more opaque, appeared in the American Daily Advertiser of the
27th of June. The writer (who is said to be a member of the senate) likewise
regards the ratification, in his introduction, as a perfect one; and after
giving a gloss to the general texture of the treaty, he ascribes the obnoxious
principle of the twelfth article, to an error which, it appears, has been
inadvertently introduced. An error inadvertently introduced into an instrument,
which was under the consideration of the chief justice of the United States,
and the British minister, for a term of eight months! and introduced too, into
a part of that very article, which is made the sole foundation of the whole
commercial superstructure!! Whenever the twelfth article ceases, the treaty
declares, every other article, except the ten first articles, shall also cease!
But the author of that sketch proceeds one step further -- he says, "that every
cause of offense or collision toward the French, seems to have heen studiously
avoided, in the progress of the negotiation;" for "no article of the treaty
clashes in the smallest degree, with the obligations and engagements contracted
with that gallant nation!" Let the treaty, speak for itself -- it is more to be
hoped than expected, that the voice of France should not likewise be heard in
opposition to so bold an assertion.

II. Nothing is settled by the Treaty.
1. The western posts are to be given up.

2. The northern boundary of the United States is to be amicably settled.

3. The river meant by St. Croix river in the treaty, is to be settled.

4. The payment for spoliations is to be adjusted and made.

5. The ultimate regulation of the West India trade is to depend on a
negotiation to be made in the course of two years after the termination of the
existing war.

6. The question of neutral bottoms making neutral goods is to be considered at
the same time.

7. The articles that may be deemed contraband are to be settled at the same
time.

8. The equalization of duties laid by the contracting parties on one another,
is to be hereafter treated of.

9. All the commercial articles depend on the existence of the twelfth article,
which may continue twelve years, if it is so agreed within two years after the
expiration of the war; but if it is not so agreed, it expires, and with it all
the dependent parts of the treaty. Query -- Does not the senate's suspension of
the twelfth article, bring us to the same ground?

10. The whole business of Mr. Jay's negotiation is left open by the
twenty-eighth article, for alteration, amendment and addition, by new articles,
which, when agreed upon and ratified, shall become a part of this treaty.

Query -- Does not the history of treaties prove, that whenever commissioners
have been appointed by the parties, to take all the subjects of their dispute
ad referendum, for the sake of getting rid of an immediate pressure, and
patching up a peace, the matter terminates in creating, not in settling
differences?

III. The Treaty contains a colorable, but no real Reciprocity.
1. The second article provides for the surrender of the western posts in June,
1796; but it stipulates, that in the mean time the citizens of the United
States shall not settle within the precincts and jurisdiction of those posts;
that the British settlers there shall hold and enjoy all their property of
every kind, real and personal; and that when the posts are surrendered, such
settlers shall have an election either to remain British subjects, or to become
American citizens. Query -- Were not the western posts, and all their precincts
and jurisdiction, the absolute property of the United States by the treaty of
peace? Query -- What equivalent is given for this cession of the territory of
the United States to a foreign power? Query -- How far do the precincts and
jurisdiction of the posts extend? Query -- Does not the treaty give an implied
assent to major Campbell's claim, by adopting its language, as far as the falls
of the Miami, and to the northern claim upon the territories of New York and
Vermont?

2. The third article stipulates that the two contracting parties may frequent
the ports of either party on the eastern banks of the Mississippi. Query --
What ports has Great Britain on the eastern banks of the Mississippi?

3. The third article likewise opens an amicable intercourse on the lakes; but
excludes us from their seaports, and the limits of the Hudson's bay company;
and excludes them from navigating our Atlantic rivers, higher than the highest
port of entry in each. Query -- What are the limits of the Hudson's bay
company? Query -- What equivalent do the United States obtain for the general
freedom of navigation, portage and passage? For it must be remembered, that the
British rivers penetrate the heart of the country, but of those we can take no
advantage; while Great Britain is in fact admitted to all the advantages of
which our Atlantic rivers are susceptible.

4. The sixth and seventh articles provide for satisfying every demand which
Great Britain has been able, at any time, to make against the United States
(the payment of the British debts due before the war, and the indemnification
for vessels captured within our territorial jurisdiction) but the provision
made for the American claims upon Great Britain, is not equally explicit or
efficient in its terms, nor is it coextensive with the object. -- Query -- Why
is the demand for the negroes, carried off by the British troops, suppressed,
waved, or abandoned? The preamble to the treaty recites an intention to
terminate the differences between the nations: was not the affair of the
negroes a difference between the nations? and how has it been terminated?

5. The ninth article stipulates that the subjects of Great Britain and the
citizens of the United States, respectively, who now hold lands within the
territories of either nation, shall hold the lands in the same manner as
natives do. Query -- What is the relative proportion of lands so held? Query --
The effect to revive the claims of British subjects, who, either as traitors or
aliens, have forfeited their property within the respective states? Query --
The operation of such a compact on the internal policy of the union, combined
with the solemn recognition of a colony of British subjects, professing and
owing allegiance to the British crown, though settled within the acknowledged
territory of the United States, by virtue of the second article?

6. The tenth article declares that neither party shall sequester or confiscate
the debts or property in the funds, etc. belonging to the citizens of the
other, in case of a war, or of national differences. Great Britain has fleets
and armies; America has none. Query -- Does not this, supported by other
provisions, which forbid our changing the commercial situation of Great
Britain, or imposing higher duties on her than on other nations, deprive the
United States of her best means of retaliation and coercion? Query -- Is it not
taking from America her only weapon of defense; but from Great Britain the
least of two weapons which she possesses? What is the relative proportion held
by the citizens of the contracting nations respectively in the funds, etc. of
each other?

7. The twelfth article opens to our vessels, not exceeding seventy tons, an
intercourse with the British West India islands, during the Present war, and
for two years after: but it prohibits our exporting from the United States,
melasses, sugar, cocoa, coffee, or cotton, to any part of the world, whether
those articles are brought from British, French, or Spanish islands, or even
raised (as cotton is) within our own territory. -- Query -- Are vessels of
seventy tons equal to maintain the most beneficial part of our trade with the
West Indies, the transportation of lumber, etc.? Query -- Do we not in time of
war (and the continuance of the privilege for more than two years after the
war, depends on the situation in which his majesty of Great Britain shall then
find himself in relation to the islands) enjoy a greater privilege under the
temporary proclamations of the colonial governors than this article admits?
Query -- Have not the articles, which we are prohibited from exporting, formed
of late a valuable part of our trade? Is not cocoa chiefly cultivated by the
Spaniards? Is not cotton a staple of America? Is our own consumption equal to
our importation, or growth of the prohibited articles? Will not the want of a
vent for any surplus quantity, affect the other branches of our commerce,
diminish the demand for ship building, and injure our agriculture? If we are
now thrown out of this branch of the carrying trade, shall we be ever able to
recover it? and, in short, will not the loss be of lasting detriment to all our
maritime exertions?

8. The thirteenth article admits us to trade in the British settlements in the
East Indies: but it excludes us from any share in the coasting trade of that
country; it forbids our penetrating the interior of the country, or holding an
intercourse with the natives, unless under a license from the local British
government; and it compels us to land all the articles that are there shipped,
in the United State. Is not China the independent territory of the emperor? Is
not Canton an open port, accessible to all nations? Do we not obtain there, and
at independent places in the East Indies with which we have, at present, an
uninterrupted communication, tea, porcelain, nankeens, silk, etc. upon the
principles of a free trade? Does not a very advantageous part of the trade in
that quarter of the globe, consist in the exchange of the products and
manufactures of the East Indies for those of China, and vice versa? Do not our
importations of East India goods far exceed our consumption? Is not the trade
which we carry on with those goods in Europe, highly beneficial? Are not sugar
and coffee a part of our importations, from India, and does not the 12th
article prohibit our re-exporting them? Does our trade to Europe, founded on
the previous intercourse with India, depend on the British license; and can it
be maintained under the disadvantage of a double voyage? Are we not every
voyage making favorable impressions on the natives of China? Do we not
participate at present in the carrying trade of that country? Does not our
interest in it increase rapidly?

9. The several articles that regulate the rights and privileges of the
contracting parties within their respective territories, in case either of them
is engaged in a war, may cease in two years after the present war is
terminated, and cannot be protracted beyond twelve years. Query -- Are not all
these advantages, in effect, exclusively favorable to Great Britain, a
principal maritime power of Europe; often engaged in wars; and interested to
obtain for her ships, her colonies, and herself, the ports and supplies of this
extensive continent?

Is it probable that during the longest possible existence of this treaty
(twelve years) America will be engaged in maritime wars, will want English
ports as a refuge for men of war, or as a retreat for prizes? Or that it will,
during that period, be of importance to her objects, to prevent her enemies
from arming in English ports, or selling their prizes there?

10. The twenty-second article provides for ships of war being hospitably
treated in the ports of the respective contracting parties; and that officers
shall be treated with the respect that is due to the commissions which they
bear? Query -- Could not the principle of reciprocity, as well as humanity,
suggest to Mr. Jay, that some provision should be made to protect our citizen
sailors from the fangs of British press gangs in England; and from the horrors
of their prison ships in the West Indies? Were the commissions of his Britannic
majesty of more regard than the liberties of American freemen? Or, was it
unknown that thousands of our sailors have been occasionally enslaved by the
impress tyranny of the British government? Or that thousands have lost their
lives in noxious prisons, while their vessels were carried into British ports
for "LEGAL ADJUDICATION?"

11. The fourteenth article provides for a perfect liberty of commerce and
navigation, and for the accommodation of traders; but subject always to the
laws and statutes of the two countries respectively: Query -- Are not the laws
and statutes of England infinitely more rigid on the subjects of this article,
than the laws and statutes of America?

IV. The Treaty is an Instrument of Party.
1. The discussions, during the session of congress, in which Mr. Jay's mission
was projected, evinced the existence of two parties, upon the question whether
it was more our interest to be allied with the republic of France, than with
the monarchy of Great Britain. Query -- Does not the general complexion of the
treaty decide the question in favor of the alliance with Great Britain? Query
-- Whether that complexion does not manifestly arise from the provisions, for
admitting a British colony within our territory in the neighborhood of the
western posts; for admitting the whole British nation without an equivalent
into a participation of our territory on the eastern bank of the Mississippi;
for naturalizing all the holders of lands; for opening a general intercourse
with their traders on the lakes in the interior of our country, rendering (as
it is idly said) the local advantages of each party common to both; for
regulating the external trade of the two nations with each other; for admitting
citizens to be punished as pirates, who take commissions, etc. from a
belligerent power adverse to either contracting party; for fettering the
operations of our treaty with France; for surrendering criminals, etc. etc. etc.

2. The measures proposed by one party to retaliate the injuries offered by
Great Britain to our territorial, commercial and political rights, were opposed
by the other, precisely as the treaty opposes them. For instance: --

(1.) Mr. Madison projects a regulation of our commerce with Great Britain, by
which the hostile spirit of that nation might be controuled on the footing of
its interest. The treaty legitimises the opposition which was given to the
measure in congress, by declaring in article fifteen, "that no other or higher
duties shall be paid by the ships or merchandise of the one party in the ports
of the other, than such as are paid by the like vessels or merchandise of all
other nations; nor shall any other or higher duty be imposed in one country on
the importation of any articles of the growth, produce, or manufactures of the
other, than are or shall be payable on the importation of the like articles of
the growth, etc. of any foreign country. (2.) Mr. Clarke proposes to manifest
and enforce the public resentment by prohibiting all intercourse between the
two nations. The treaty destroys the very right to attempt that species of
national denunciation, by declaring in the same article, that "no prohibition
shall be imposed on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from
the territories of the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend
to all other nations." (3.) But Mr. Dayton moves, and the house of
representatives support his motion, for the sequestration of British debts,
etc. to ensure a fund for paying the spoliations committed on our trade. The
treaty (without regarding the respect due to the commission which is borne by
our members of congress) not only despoils the government of this important
instrument to coerce a powerful, yet interested adversary into acts of justice,
but enters likewise into a commentary, which, considering the conduct of one of
the branches of our legislature, Lord Grenville, consistently with decorum,
could not have expressed, or at least Mr. Jay, for the sake of our national
dignity, ought not to have adopted. The tenth article declares, that "neither
the debts due from individuals of the one nation to individuals of the other,
nor ^^^es nor moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the public
or private banks, shall ever, in any event of war or national difference, be
sequestered or confiscated, it being unjust and impolitic, that debts and
engagements contracted and made by individuals having confidence in each other
and in their respective governments, should ever be destroyed or impaired by
national authority on account of national differences and discontents." The
terms are very similar to those that gave Mr. Dayton offense in a speech
pronounced by Mr. Ames; and certainly it will be deemed no mitigation, that the
charge of committing " an unjust and impolitic act," has been wantonly
engrafted upon the most solemn of all instruments, -- a public treaty! Query:
-- Would Lord Grenville have consented to brand his Royal Master with the title
of Great Sea Robber, if Mr. Jay's urbanity could have permitted him to borrow
the epithet from another member of congress, in order to insert it, in the
article that relates to the British spoliations on our trade? But perhaps, Mr.
Jay forgot, that the commentary operated as a reflection on the government of
the United States, and only meant it as a reproach to Great Britain, for
sequestering during the late war, and retaining at this moment, the property
belonging to Maryland, lying in the bank of England. It might, likewise, be
intended as a satire upon the parliamentary sequestration of French property in
the famous "Intercourse Act:" or, perhaps, Mr. Jay anticipated the revolution
in Holland, and designed his commentary as a warning against the seizing of
Dutch property, public and private; which, however, has since taken place, in
spite of his solemn admonition.
3. The trials that had occurred relative to the equipment of French privateers
in our ports; and the enlistment of our citizens in the service of the
republic, had produced some embarrassment in the course of party pursuits.
These are obviated by the treaty. The British nation by which the empress of
Russia has always been supplied with naval officers, and whose fleets and
armies are always crowded with volunteers from other nations, consents that her
subjects shall not serve against us; and stipulates that our citizens shall not
serve against her. This contract is made with a power actually engaged in a
war; and seldom more than seven years clear of one; by a power at peace, not
liable, from her local position, and political constitution, to be involved in
war, and in strict alliance with the nation against whom the stipulation will
immediately operate. Captain Barney and the other Americans, who have joined
the arms of France, are thus involved in the most serious dilemma. If they
expatriate themselves, they may possibly escape the vengeance of the American
government; but will that save them from the vengeance of Great Britain, whose
concessions on the doctrine of expatriation are not quite so liberal? By the
bye, it may here be seasonably repeated, that while Mr. Jay was so willing to
prevent American citizens from entering into the service of France, he might
surely have taken some pains to secure them from being pressed into the service
of England. He would have found, on enquiry, that the instances of the latter
kind are infinitely more numerous than of the former. But it is enough that the
measure will be introductory of a law, favorable to the view of a party which
reprobates every idea of assisting the French, and cultivates every means of
conciliating the British.

4. It has, likewise, been thought by some politicians, that the energies of
our executive department require every aid that can be given to them, in order
more effectually to resist and control the popular branches of the government.
Hence we find the treaty-making power employed in that service; and congress
cannot exercise a legislative discretion on the prohibited points (though it
did not participate in making the cession of its authority) without a
declaration of war against Great Britain. George the third enjoys by the treaty
a more complete negative to bind us as states, than he ever claimed over us as
colonies.

V. The Treaty is a violation of the general principles of neutrality, and is
in collision with the positive previous engagements which subsist between
America and France.
1. It is a general principle of the law of nations, that during the existence
of a war, neutral powers shall not, by favor or by treaty, so alter the
situation of one of the belligerent parties, as to enable him more
advantageously to prosecute hostilities against his adversary. If, likewise, a
neutral power shall refuse or evade treating with one of the parties, but
eagerly enter into a treaty with the other, it is a partiality, that amounts to
a breach of neutrality. These positions may be supported by the authority of
the most esteemed writers on the subject; but it will be sufficient in the
present case, to cite the conduct of Great Britain herself. Thus, it has been
adjudged by Lord Mansfield, "that if a neutral ship trades to a French colony,
with all the privileges of a French ship, and is thus adopted and naturalized,
it must be looked upon as a French ship, liable to be taken." See Judge
Blackstone's reports, I vol. p. 315, 314. According to the principle on which
this judgment was given, the act of issuing the memorable orders of the 6th of
November, 1793, and the consequent seizure of all our vessels, are attempted to
be justified. Great Britain alleges (when it is injurious to France) that
trading with the French islands, on a sooting not allowed before the war, is a
breach of neutrality, and cause of confiscation: and, therefore, Great Britain
must also admit, at least America will not deny, that trading with the British
islands, on a footing not allowed before the war; or, in different words,
altering and enlarging the commercial relations of the two countries, is
equally a breach of our neutrality toward France. When the, sword is found to
cut both ways, the party who uses it has no right to complain.

2. That we have on the one hand, evaded the overtures of a treaty with France,
and on the other hand, solicited a treaty from Great Britain, are facts public
and notorious. Let us enquire then what Great Britain has gained on the
occasion, to enable her more advantageously to prosecute her hostilities
against France.

(1.) Great Britain has gained time. As nothing is settled by the treaty, she
has it in her power to turn all the chances of the war in her favor; and, in
the interim, being relieved from the odium and embarrassment of adding America
to her enemies, the current of her operations against France is undivided, and
will of course flow with greater vigor and certainty. We have been for so many
years satisfied with the promises of the treaty of peace, that Great Britain
has cause to expect at least an equal period of credit, for the promises of the
treaty of amity. If, indeed, it is true, that the reasons assigned by lord
Grenville to Mr. Jay, for declining an immediate surrender of the posts, were,
first, that the British traders might have time to arrange their out-standing
business; a privilege that is expressly granted by the treaty, and could not,
therefore, furnish a real excuse for delay; and secondly, that the British
government might be able to ascertain what would be the probable effect of the
surrender, on the Indians; a reservation that demonstrates an intention to be
governed by events; we can very well account for the late extensive shipment of
artillery and ammunition to Canada; and may easily calculate the importance of
gaining time, in order to promote the American, as well as European, objects of
Great Britain.

(2.) Great Britain gains supplies for her West India colonies; and that for a
period almost limited to the continuance of the war, under circumstances which
incapacitate her from furnishing the colonial supplies herself; and, indeed,
compel her to invite the aid of all nations, in furnishing provisions for her
own domestic support. The supplies may be carried to the islands either in
American bottoms not exceeding seventy tons, or in British bottoms of any
tonnage.

(3.) Great Britain gains an advantage over France, by prohibiting the
exportation of sugar, etc. in consequence of which the colonies of France must,
in a great measure, remain unsupplied with provisions, etc. as they can only in
general pay for them in those articles, whose use is confined to the American
consumption. It will be remembered, that the produce of the French islands has
of late constituted a great part of our European remittances. If, therefore,
that trade is cut off, and at the same time, besides employing our own small
craft of seventy tons, Great Britain is allowed, to any extent of tonnage, to
be our West India factor, it is obvious that our consumption of sugar, coffee,
etc. etc. will be abundantly supplied, without maintaining an intercourse with
the French, or even with the East Indies, to procure any of those articles.
Perhaps this method, though less bold, will be more effectual to prevent our
furnishing the French islands with provision, than declaring them to be in a
state of blockade, and seizing the vessels that attempt to visit them.

(4.) It is another important gain to Great Britain (which might, likewise,
have been adverted to under the feature of reciprocity) that, to any extent of
tonnage, her vessels may carry on the West India trade for us, either to supply
our domestic consumption, or European engagements, subject to no other or
higher duties than our own vessels, while our own vessels are restricted to a
pitiful size, and circumscribed to a particular voyage. But whatever may be
thought of the benefit in acquiring for America even this scanty participation
in the West India trade, no one (after the rejection of the twelfth article)
will deny that the whole measure changes the relative situation of the two
countries, avowedly in favor of Great Britain, and operatively injurious to
France; and every such change is derogatory to our boasted neutral character.

(5.) The admission of Great Britain to all the commercial advantages of the
most favored nation, and the restraints imposed upon our legislative
independence, as stated in the party feature of the treaty, are proofs of
predilection and partiality in the American government, which cannot fail to
improve the resources of Great Britain, and to impair the interests, as well as
the attachments, of France.

(6.) The assent to the seizure of all provision-ships, and that, in effect,
upon any pretext, at a period when Great Britain is distressed for provisions,
as well as France; and when the system of subduing by famine has been adopted
by the former against the latter nation, is clearly changing our position, as
an independent republic, in a manner detrimental to our original ally. That our
merchants will be paid a reasonable profit for their cargoes, etc. may render
the measure more palatable to us; even under the loss of the return cargo, the
derangement of the voyage, and the destruction of the spirit of commercial
enterprise; but that consideration cannot render it less offensive to France.
It may properly be here remarked, that Sweden and Denmark have obtained, by a
spirited resistance, an actual indemnification for the seizures which have
heretofore taken place, and an exemption from all such outrages in future;
while America has only put those which are past, in a train of negotiation, and
has given a legitimate effect to those which are to come The order, which the
English gazettes say, has recently been issued for seizing American
provision-ships, on their passage to France, ought not, therefore, to be
complained of, as it is merely an exercise, by anticipation, of the right
granted by the treaty.

(7.) Great Britain has gained the right of preventing our Citizens from being
volunteers in the armies or ships of France! This is not simply the grant of a
new right to Great Britain, but is, at the same time, a positive deprivation of
a benefit, hitherto enjoyed by France. Neither the laws of nations, nor our
municipal constitution and laws, prohibited our citizens from going to another
country, and there, either for the sake of honor, reward, or instruction,
serving in a foreign navy, or army: -- Colonel Oswald and many others have done
it: -- Captain Barney and many others are doing it. But a proclamation must
issue to recall all such volunteers, and punishment must follow disobedience,
if the twenty-first article of the treaty is to be effectuated, as the supreme
law of the land.

(8.) Great Britain has gained a right to treat and punish as pirates, any of
our citizens who shall accept, even while they are in France, any commission to
arm a privateer, or letter of marque. It is true, that a similar provision is
contained in other treaties; but we are now only considering the alterations
which are made by the treaty under discussion, in favor of Great Britain, and
injurious to France. How far there exists a power to define piracy, by treaty,
will be remarked in delineating another feature of Mr. Jay's diplomatic
offspring.

(9.) Great Britain has doubly gained, by obtaining in our ports, an asylum for
her ships of war, privateers, prizes, etc. and stipulating for an exclusion of
those of her enemies, other (it is admitted) than France. The twenty-fourth and
twenty fifth articles of the projected treaty, are nearly copied from the
subsisting treaty with France. It would be curious, however, to reflect on the
very different motives, which must justify (if the idea of a justification
could in the late instance be at all admissible) these analagous grants. The
concession to France was made when we were at war, and she was not; it was made
upon a certainty of reciprocal advantage; and it was made as a price for
obtaining the aid of that gallant nation in the establishment of our
independence. The conecssion is made to Great Britain when she is at war, and
we are not; -- without any rational prospect of deriving any reciprocal
advantage from it; and under such circumstances of injury and insult, as might
have admonished us to reserve it as the price for obtaining aid from other
nations in resisting her hostilities, instead of paying it for smiles without
affection, and promises without sincerity. When we were making treaties with
Holland, Prussia, etc. did we not expressly exclude them from such important,
and as we have already seriously experienced; such dangerous privileges?

But it will be asked, perhaps, what mighty benefit has Great Britain gained in
this case at the expense of France, since the prior similer privileges of
France are exclusive? Answer: -- That as the privilege of Great Britain will
operate against every other nation, it will immediately affect the French
republic's alliance, offensive and defensive, with the United Provinces, which
preceded the ratification, at least, of the treaty: and it may eventually have
the same pernicious influence in relation to Prussia, Spain and Portugal, whose
disposition to change sides, in the present war, has been unequivocally
expressed. Thus, though Holland and Prussia made treaties with us long before
Great Britain would admit the idoa of a negotiation, and though Spain and
Portugal are the only customers, who furnish us with a ready money balance, for
the very purpose of paying our annual accumulation of debt to Britain, the
harbors of America are open to their vessels as prizes, but shut to them as
friends: They may be brought hither and sold by their enemies; but if they have
captured their enemy, all, but common necessaries, shall be denied to them! The
habits, bias, and opinions of a people, ought not to be altogether disregarded
is making a treaty. What honest, feeling American, could patiently see an
Englishman, our sunshine ally, bringing into our ports as prizes, the ships of
Holland, our ally in the times that tried men's souls; -- a republic,
indissolubly united with France, -- that earliest, latest, best of friends?
What honest, feeling American, even submitting to a scene so painful, would
willingly assist in expelling from our ports the ships of Holland, which had
merely retaliated, by the capture of their foe?

3. But it is time to advert to the cases collision between the two treaties;
and these are of such in nature as to produce a violation of the spirit, though
not a positive violation of the words of the previous engagements, that subsist
between France and America -- They are causes of offense, and clash in the
highest degree.

(1.) By the ninth article of the treaty of alliance with France, we guarantee
the possessions of that nation in America. It is true, that our situation is
such as to incapacitate, and of course to excuse us from a direct fulfillment of
this guarantee; but it is equally true, that we violate our faith, whenever we
do any thing that will, either directly or indirectly, endanger those
possessions. -- Query -- Whether facilitating the means of supplying the
British forces in the West Indies will not be the effect of the arrangements
relative to the trade with the British islands? Query -- Whether restraining
our intercourse with the French islands, as a consequence of the treaty already
predicated, will not expose them to want, and of course to the necessity of
yielding to their enemies? Does not every such advantage given to Great
Britain, clash with our engagements to France?

(2.) By our treaty with France, and indeed with several other nations, it is
expressly stipulated, that free vessels shall make free goods. At the time of
entering into the stipulation, and even at this moment, the maritime strength
of France (always superior to that of Denmark and Sweden, which has, under
similar circumstances, been successful) could command the respect of the world
for her engagements. It is true America neither was, nor is, in a situation to
produce the same complaisance; and on the ground of that weakness, France has
hitherto heartily dispensed with a strict performance of the treaty. But though
America cannot enforce, she ought not to abandon her engagements: she may
submit to imperious necessity, but she cannot voluntarily bring into question
the right of protecting, as a neutral power, the property of France; while
France is not only ready and able to afford her property the stipulated
protection, but in conformity to the stipulation, actually allows the property
of Great Britain to pass free, under the sanction of the American flag. When,
therefore, the treaty with Great Britain agrees, that within two years after
the termination of the existing war, it shall be discussed "whether in any, and
what cases, neutral vessels shall protect enemies' property" -- does it not
clash with our previous promise to France, that free ships shall make free
goods? And when the treaty with Great Britain, in formal and explicit terms,
further agrees, "that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or detained,
on suspicion of having on board enemies' property, etc. the part which belongs
to the enemy shall be made prize " -- Is not this an evident collision with our
previous agreement with France, and with the security which British property
enjoys in consequence of it? While France adheres to her treaty, by permitting
British goods to be protected by American bottoms, is it honest, honorable, or
consistent, on our part, to enter voluntarily into a compact with the enemies
of France, for permitting them to take French goods out of our vessels? We may
not be able to prevent, but ought we to agree to the proceeding? Let the
question be repeated -- Does not such an express agreement clash with our
express, as well as implied, obligations to France?

(3.) By enumerating, as contraband articles, in the treaty with Great Britain,
certain articles which are declared free in the treaty with France, we may,
consistently with the latter, supply Great Britain; but, consistently with the
former, we cannot supply France.

Thus our treaty with France (and indeed, every treaty which we have) expressly
declares, that, "in general all provisione which serve for the nourishment of
mankind and the sustenance of life; furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp,
flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sail cloths, anchors and any parts of anchors,
also ships, masts, planks, boards and beams of what trees soever; and all other
things proper either for building, or repairing ships, and all other goods
whatever, which have not been worked into the form of any instrument for war,
by land or by sea, shall not be reputed contraband."

The treaty with Great Britain expressly declares, "that timber for ship
building, tar or rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and
generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels, unwrought
iron, and fir planks only excepted, shall be objects of confiscation, whenever
they are attempted to be carried to an enemy."

Whether this stipulation can be considered as founded on a principle of
reciprocity, since the articles declared to be contraband are among our
principal exports, but among the principal imports of Great Britain, might have
been adverted to, in tracing a former feature of the treaty; but let it be now
heartily answered, whether it is not in collision with our previous engagements
with France? The right to make such a stipulation, is not, at present,
controverted; but only the assertion, that exercising the right does not clash
in any degree with the terms and spirit of the French treaty. France exempts
those important materials of our commerce from confiscation, in favor of all
the world: Great Britain condemns them to confiscation whenever they shall be
carried to her enemies; and the compact is made, while France is one of her
enemies!!

VI. The Treaty with Great Britain is calculated to injure the United States,
in the friendship and favor of other foreign nations.
1. That the friendship and favor of France will be affected by the formation
of so heterogeneous an alliance with her most implacable enemy, cannot be
doubted, if we reason upon any scale applicable to the policy of nations, or
the passions of man. From that republic, therefore, if not an explicit
renunciation of all connection with the United States, we may at least expect
an alteration of conduct: and finding the success which has flowed from the
hostile treatment that Great Britain has shown toward us, she may be, at
length, tempted to endeavor at extorting from fear, what she has not been able
to obtain from affection. She will, probably, declare Great Britain in a state
of blockade, for the purpose of seizing our vessels in Europe; and she may
institute courts for "legal adjudication," in order to confiscate our vessels
in the West Indies. Great Britain will then chuckle at the scene. No one can
doubt that our embarrassments will gratify, not only the avowed objects, but
the latent resentments, of that nation. Even if she could obliterate the memory
of our revolution, she cannot, with pleasure, behold the successful experiment
of a republican system of government; nor the rapid advances of a commercial
competitor. The moment she has produced a quarrel between America and France,
she may exclaim, "Delenda est Carthago!" America is again a colony! How
different were the interests and dispositions of our tried friend! That our
government should preserve its purity and independence -- that our commerce and
agriculture should attain their zenith -- were views once congenial with the
policy and affections of the French nation: Heart, head, and hand, she would
have joined in promoting them, against the arts and enmities of all the rest of
the world! What a change, then, have we made!

"Look on this picture, and on that:
"The counterfeit presentment of two Allies!
"Who would on this fair mountain leave to feed,
"To batten on that moor!
2. During the war, we, likewise, formed a seasonable and serviceable treaty
with the United Netherlands; and, shortly after the war, treaties were
established with Sweden, Prussia, etc. But in order to avoid even the
appearance of clashing or collision with the French treaty, the powers, thus
early in courting our alliance, were not allowed those privileges of asylum for
themselves, and of excluding their enemies from our ports, which are conceded
in the projected treaty to Great Britain. Have those nations no cause for
jealousy and reproach? What principle of policy or justice can vindicate the
partiality and predilection, that has been thus shown?

3. But the projected treaty (after an affected recognition or pre-existing
public treaties) declares, that while Great Britain and America continue in
amity, no future treaty shall be made, inconsistent with the articles, that
grant the high and dangerous privileges, that have been mentioned. Every nation
of the earth (except France) is thus sacrificed to the pride and interest of
Great Britain. And with what motive, or upon what consideration, is the
sacrifice made? It has been stated in a former, and will be more fully shown in
a future, feature of Mr. Jay's treaty, that the United States do not enjoy any
equivalent for this, nor for any other, concession which is made to Great
Britain: But the mischief does not end with the folly of a lop-sided bargain.
By granting these exclusive privileges to Great Britain, by declaring that no
commercial favor shall be conferred on other nations, without her participating
in them, we have thrown away the surest means of purchasing, on any emergency,
the good will and good offices of any other power: We cannot even improve the
terms of our old treaty with France. For all the advantages of trade that
Spain, Portugal, Holland, etc. might, and probably would, upon a liberal
footing of reciprocity, have given us, -- what have we now left, to offer as
the basis of negotiation and compact?

4. The alteration which the treaty makes in the relative situation of several
nations with America, and the conduct, that is likely to be pursued by those
nations, in order to counteract its effect, merit serious reflection. Will
Spain see, without some solicitude, the partition which we have made with Great
Britain, of our territory on the eastern bank of the Mississipi? How would our
projected treaty work, if France should recover Pondicherry, etc. in the East
Indies; should subdue and retain the West India islands; should stipulate with
Spain for the cession of Louisiana; and should conquer Nova Scotia? The curious
cordon, with which we have allowed Great Britain to circumvent us (and of which
more will be said hereafter) being thus broken, how are we to calculate the
consequences?

5. Considering the Indians as a foreign nation, is not the treaty calculated
to exalt the character of Great Britain, and to depreciate the character of
America, throughout the savage world? What right has Great Britain to negociate
for Indians, within the limits of our jurisdiction? Suppose the existing
western posts surrendered, may not Great Britain establish other posts in a
contiguous or more advantageous station? Is she not left at liberty to pursue
the fur trade in our territory as well as her own? Will not her enterprise in
traffic, superior capital and experience, enable her to monopolize that trade?
And will she not in future have the same motives, and the same means, to foment
Indian hostilities, that have hitherto been indulged and employed, at the
expense of so much American blood and treasure?

VII. The Treaty with Great Britain is impolitic and pernicious, in respect to
the domestic interests and happiness of the United States.
1. If it is true, and incontrovertibly it is true, that the interest and
happiness of America, consist (as our patriotic president, in his letter to
Lord Buchan, declares) in being little heard of in the great world of politics;
in having nothing to do in the political intrigues, or the squabbles of
European nations; but, on the contrary, in exchanging commodities, and living
in peace and amity with all the inhabitants of the earth; and in doing justice
to, and in receiving it from, every power we are connected with; it is likewise
manifest, that all the wisdom and energy of those who administer our
government, should be constantly and sedulously employed to preserve, or to
attain, for the United States, that enviable rank among nations. To refrain
from forming hasty and unequal alliances; to let commerce flow in its own
natural channels; to afford every man, whether alien or citizen, a remedy for
every wrong; and to resist, on the first appearance, every violation of our
national rights and independence, are the means best adapted to the end which
we contemplate. It may be objected, that we are already involved in some
alliances, that have had a tendency rather to destroy our public tranquillity,
than to promote our public interest. But a difference of circumstances will
require and justify a difference of conduct. For instance -- it was necessary
and politic, in the state of our affairs at the commencement of the revolution,
to pay a premium for the friendship and alliance of France: we could not have
insured success without the cooperation of that nation: and as the price that
we paid for it was not greater than the benefit that we derived from it, we
cannot now, with justice, cavil at our bargain. But (...) the inducement to
form an alliance with Great Britain of a nature equally momentous? Is the
advantage flowing from the sacrifices that are made, equally compensatory? Why
should we, at this auspicious season of our affairs, venture to undermine the
fundamental maxim of our domestic happiness, by wilfully obtruding on the great
world of politics; or wantonly involving ourselves in the political intrigues
and the squabbles of European nations? Suppose (as it is often alleged and
sometimes proved) that our treaty with France is productive of inconveniences;
will it happen in the political, any more than in the physical or moral world,
that by multiplying the sources of evil, we shall get rid of the evil itself?
If, according to the quondam opinion of the friends of a British alliance, our
commerce has been restrained in its operations; or if our government has been
menaced in its peace and stability, by a practical developement of the terms of
our treaty with France, shall we better our situation, because we make another
treaty upon the same terms with Great Britain; and furnish two nations, instead
of one, with an opportunity to perplex and distress us in pursuing our natural
and laudable policy -- the policy of exchanging commodities, and living in
peace and amity with all the inhabitants of the earth; doing justice to, and
receiving it from, every power we are connected with!

2. But even if the question was at large, and we were now under a necessity of
deciding, for the first time, whether we would be allied to the monarchy of
Great Britain, or to the republic of France, how would a rational estimate of
the interests and happiness of the United States (the true and only touchstone
for solving, in the mind of an American, such an enquiry) lead us to decide? To
those members of the senate, who could regard the twelfth article of the treaty
as a mark of parental care and wisdom, by which Great Britain was fondly
desirous of restraining the excesses of our commercial ardor; excesses that
might eventually and prematurely debilitate and destroy us! To those members of
the senate, who could, with filial gratitude, declare, that an alliance with
Great Britain was natural; that an alliance with France was artificial; since,
although we were partially indebted to France for our independence, we were
entirely indebted to Great Britain for our being! To all who can cherish such
ideas, or utter such language, these strictures will be ungracious and
unprofitable: but they claim a candid attention from the patriot, who
remembers, that when the parent sought to destroy, the friend interposed to
save; and from the statesman, who possesses too much wisdom to be influenced by
prejudice, and too much fortitude to be controuled by fear.

Are the interests and happiness of the United States involved in the permanent
establishment of a republican government? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to
cultivate the friendship of a republic, actuated by a fellow feeling; than the
alliance of a monarchy impressed with jealousy and apprehension. Are the
interest and happiness of the United States connected with her territorial and
political independence? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to fortify herself by an
alliance with a nation, whose territorial jurisdiction, and physical
characteristics, preclude the possibility of collision; than attach herself to
a nation whose language, manners and habits, facilitate the execution of every
attempt to encroach; and whose territorial possessions are in an irritating and
dangerous contact with our own. Are the interest and happiness of America to be
promoted by an active employment of the vast store of materials of the first
necessity, which nature has bestowed on her; by the extension of her commerce;
and by the freedom of her navigation? Yes: -- Then she ought rather to court
the countenance and protection of a nation, whose occasions of envy are
comparatively few; -- whose temptations are to foster, not to counteract, our
schemes of commercial opulence and enterprise: -- and whose imperial glory and
existance do not depend upon a claim of universal maritime superiority; --
rather than consent to balk beneath the baneful shade of an alliance with a
nation, whose very existence is, probably, the tremendous stake in opposition
to our prosperity: and whose embraces, like the embraces of the tyrant's image,
may be rendered the most effectual instruments of torture and destruction. Are
the interest and happiness of the United States dependant on the cordiality of
their union, and the permanency of their government? And again -- Do that
cordiality and that permanency, depend upon the confidence and mutual good
understanding, which subsist between the people who formed the government, and
the officers whom the people have appointed to administer it? Yes: -- Then it
would be the part of duty, as well as policy, in those officers to follow the
unanimous sentiment of the people, by preferring a liberal and faithful
alliance with France, to a constrained and hypocritical alliance with Great
Britain.

3. The first striking effect of the treaty, to endanger the interests, and
disturb the happiness of the United States, may be detected by a geographical
sketch of the cordon, or line of circumvallation, with which it enables Great
Britain to fetter and enclose us. The proximity of Canada and the western
posts, has heretofore been a cause of great uneasiness; but that is a trifling
source of vexation, compared with what we shall have in future to encounter.
Suppose ten thousand radii were drawn diverging from the center of the United
States; not one of them could escape the conventional circle of British
territory, jurisdiction and occupancy. Has an American occasion to travel to
the east or the north? The barriers of Nova Scotia and Canada present
themselves. Is it his wish to penetrate the great western wilderness? A new set
of British posts will intercept his progress, even if he shall be allowed
peaceably to pass the British colony within the precincts and jurisdiction of
Detroit. Does business require him to cross, or float down, the Mississippi? He
may evade the vigilance of the Spaniard, but he will find the eastern bank of
the river monopolized by British traders, and probably protected by British gun
boats. He is in hopes, however, to avoid all difficulty by a passage on the
ocean? Alas! our Atlantic harbors are crowded with prizes to British
privateers, and our sea coast is lined with British cruisers! Yet, let us for a
moment imagine, that this ill fated traveller has surmounted his domestic
obstacles, whither can he fly, to be emancipated from the foreign jurisdiction
of Great Britain? In the West Indies, his cock boat is measured and steered,
according to the scale and course prescribed by the treaty. In the East Indies
he can hardly exchange a commodity, or make a single acquaintance, without the
British license. In Europe, if, during a British war, he carries goods
belonging to an enemy of Great Britain, they will be seized as prize; if he
takes ship-timber, tar, rozin, etc. they are liable to be confiscated as
contraband; and if his cargo consists of provisions, the British may take it,
by treaty, at their own market price!

One idea more about the boundary of the United States. Before the revolution,
Great Britain had projected that general arrangement and division of her
colonial possessions in America, which she has since, upon a smaller scale,
carried into execution with respect to Canada. The territory then intended to
be allotted to the government of the Canadas, was extended by a line running
along the northern boundaries of the eastern colonies, along the western
boundary of Pennsylvania, and along the courses of the Ohio, into the
Mississippi. Since we are left at a loss for a positive definition of the
precincts and jurisdiction of the western posts, as ceded by the treaty to the
settlers under British titles, may we not conjecture, that Great Britain
contemplates the territorial extent of her original project? Does not major
Campbell's unexpected pretension, and the constant claim of the Indians, at the
instigation of the British, to establish the Ohio as a boundary between them
and the United States, give some countenance to such a conjecture?

4. But should an American, not stimulated by the desire of traveling into
foreign countries, be content to prosecute the objects of his honest industry
within the British territorial circle, bounding and constituting his own home,
will his condition be much better than the condition of his itinerant fellow
citizen? What with the establishment of British colonies and British
warehouses; the naturalization of British land-holders; and, in short, the
unqualified admission of Englishmen, owing allegiance to the British crown,
throughout our lakes, rivers and territory, while we are excluded from their
seaports, company lands, etc. etc. an American will hardly be able to find
elbowroom for himself and his family. Their pecuniary capital being larger;
their means being easier; their experience being greater; they most inevitably,
under such circumstances, become our merchants, manufacturers, farmers, etc.
etc. They will import for us, in their vessels, all the products and fabrics of
Europe, Asia and Africa: They will export for us, in their vessels, every
article that our soil can furnish; our merchants will dwindle into clerks: our
husbandmen will degenerate into the condition of the feudal villienage; and
thus, in a short course of years, America will probably exhibit the astonishing
spectacle of a country possessed, cultivated, and enjoyed by aliens! The
ancient inhabitants of Great Britain, in a similar manner, invited those Saxons
to their island as friends and allies, who soon afterward became their
conquerors and masters.

5. In such a state of things, the interest and happiness of the United States
must languish and expire! At first the American mind will be corroded, by
contrasting the elevation of the guest with the depression of the host. A
struggle will probably ensue; but the influence of wealth, and the patronage of
extensive commercial and manufactural institutions, etc. will even divide the
Americans themselves; and by dividing, capacitate the British settlers to rule
them. Is this an idle phantom -- a visionary suggestion? No!. For. is not a
great part of our trade, at this moment, monopolized by British subjects, under
the mask of American citizenship? Has not the influence of British credits, and
British politics, already formed a considerable party in our government, and
among our merchants? Disguise it as you will -- let pride deny, and shame
suppress the sentiment -- still, it is too evident to every candid and
discerning observer; that the only subsisting difference in the opinions and
conduct of the citizens of America, arises from this fatal cause. Why, at the
moment of reprobating self-created societies for civil purposes, do we gladly
see the formation of self-created societies for military purposes; -- the city
cohorts and Praetorian bands? Why are our merchants, who so anxiously called
forth the voice of their fellow citizens in applauding the proclamation of
neutrality, so circumspect and so torpid in giving their testimony about the
treaty? How comes it, that amidst the acclamations of the fourth of July, the
treaty is toasted in the little circle of English munufacturers, on the banks
of the Passayik; and at the convivial tables of the English emigrants on the
plains of the Genesee? How comes it that every man who prefers France to Great
Britain -- republicanism to monarchy, -- is denominated Antifederalist Jacobin,
Disorganizer, Misorea^t, etc. while men of another humor arrogantly and
exclusively assume the titles of Federalists, Friends to order, etc. etc.? But
let every honest American reflect seriously and seasonably, upon the means of
promoting the interest and happiness of the United States, and he will disdain,
as well as dread, to augment, by the adventitious force of treaties, that
paramount interest, which Great Britain has already insidiously acquired in our
commerce, navigation, manufactures, territory, and government.

6. Besides the injury eventually to be apprehended from these causes, the
treaty is calculated to impair the interest and happiness of the United States,
by producing an immediate and violent concussion in the federal atmosphere. For,

It ransacks the archives of our revolutionary transactions; and rejudges the
solemn judgments of our courts of justice.

It condemns individuals to the payment of debts, from which they had
previously been discharged by law.

It makes the government of the union responsible for the contracts of private
citizens, and the defalcations of bankrupts.

It disregards the freedom of our commerce and navigation; and it restrains the
use of our staple commodities.

It does not exact a just indemnification for the detention of the western
posts.

It does not require the payment, stipulated by the preceding treaty, for the
value of the negroes carried off at the close of the war.

It does not provide for the freedom and safety of our seamen, in their
intercourse with the British dominions.

Let any one of these propositions be separately analyzed, and sufficient cause
will be found to excite and justify popular dissatisfaction; but view them
combined, and the mind is shocked with an apprehension, that the ratification
of the treaty, may be the deathwarrant of the union!

VIII. The British treaty and the constitution of the United States are at war
with each other.
1. Self-preservation is the first law of society, as well as of individuals:
It is the radical principle of all political compacts. Nations (says Vattel)
are bound to guard their own preservation, and to pursue their own perfection.
We have incessant opportunities, indeed, of observing the operation of this
universal rule; in animals of instinct, as well as in animals of reason; in the
world of things, as well as in the world of beings.

2. Self-preservation, however, is a relative idea: it relates to the nature of
the animal; to the constitution of the society. A man may lose his human
character, without destroying his vital existence; and a government may be
changed in its essence, without being subverted in its forms.

3. So, likewise, without open assault or positive violence, the sources of
animal life may be poisoned, by the imperceptible contaminations of a luxurious
habit: so, without the aid of terror or force, the legitimate foundations of
government may be undermined, by the insidious encroachment of the rulers, and
by the sedative acquiescence of the people. Governments, indeed, have too
generally proved to be a kind of political chrysalis, passing, by progressive
transmutations, from the grub of pure democracy, to the butterfly of absolute
monarchy.

4. But it will not yet be denied in America, that as the people have the sole
right to constitute their government, the rule of self-preservation requires,
that the government should be maintained, in practice as well as in theory,
such as they have constituted it. To render it, by any construction of the
written articles of our social compact, other than a republican government,
would be as fatal a subversion, as daring usurpation, or military conquest,
could atchieve. For, what real difference does it make to a nation, whether its
constitution is seized upon by an enterprizing individual, as in the Swedish
revolution of 1770; or overthrown by a triumphant warrior, as in the recent
extinction of the Polish monarchy; or voted out of doors, as in the
disorganizing edicts of the long parliament of England? Thus, likewise, for one
department of the government to assume the authority of another; or, by
constructive amplifications of its own jurisdiction, so to monopolize the
attributes of government, as to render the other departments useless and
inefficient, must ever be deemed an effectual subversion of any constitution.
The mode of distributing and organizing the powers of government, as well as
the consideration of the nature and extent of the powers to be delegated,
essentially belongs to the people; and in the body politic, as well as in the
body natural, whenever any particular member absorbs more than its allotted
portion of the aliment, that is destined to vivify and invigorate the whole,
debility and disease will infallibly easue. After the emperors had usurped the
functions, privileges and powers of the senate, and of the popular magistrates
of Rome, they preserved the formalities of the Commonwealth, but they trampled
on the liberties of the people. Though the parliaments of France had long been
deprived of every deliberative faculty, as the representatives of the people,
they were summoned to the last, as the ministerial officers of the monarch, for
the purpose of registering his edicts.

5. The government of the United States, being then theoretically a republican
government, and with great propriety denominated a government of departments,
let us proceed to examine how far the principles of self-preservation, and the
duty of pursuing the perfection of our political system, are involved in the
ratification of the projected treaty with Great Britain.

The second section of the second article of the constitution says, that "The
president shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate,
to make treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present concur."

To the exercise of this power no immediate qualification, or restriction, is
attached: but must we therefore suppose that the jurisdiction of the president
and senate, like the jurisdiction ascribed to the British parliament, is
omnipotent? To place the authorrity of our president and senate on the same
footing with the prerogative of the king of Great Britain, will not be
commensurate with the objects to which the treaty extends. It must be
remembered, that the treaty of peace, by which the rights of sovereignty and
soil were ceded by the king of Great Britain to the United States, was
negociated and ratified under the positive sanction of an act of parliament:
And it is expressly stated in Vattel, that the king of Great Britain cannot, by
treaty, confer the rights of citizenship on an alien, B. I. c. 19. s. 214. Now,
Mr. Jay's treaty does both these things (as will be hereafter demonstrated)
without the intervention of the legislative authority of the union.

6. The consequence of admitting this unqualified claim to omnipotence, in
transacting the business of the nation, would be so hostile to the principle
and preservation of our government, that it is an indispensable duty ( obsla
principiis) to contravert and resist it. Whenever the president and two-thirds
of the senate shall be desirous to counteract the conduct of the house of
representatives; whenever they may wish to enforce a particular point of
legislation; or whenever they shall be disposed to circumscribe the power of a
succeeding congress; a treaty with a foreign nation, nay, a talk with a savage
tribe, affords the ready and effectual instrument for accomplishing their
views; since the treaty or the talk will constitute the supreme law of the
land. That such things may happen, let the history of Mr. Jay's mission and
negotiation testify.

7. If the extraordinary treaty-making power is paramount to the ordinary
legislative power -- supersedes its exercise -- and embraces all its objects;
let us endeavor to trace whither the proposition will carry us.

The fifth article of the constitution vests a power in two-thirds of both
houses of congress, to propose amendments to the constitution.

Let us suppose that a defect in our judiciary, or in any other department,
operated injuriously to a foreign nation, -- could the senate, and president,
uniting with that foreign nation, and excluding the house of representatives
propose an amendment upon the subject? If they could by these means originate,
might they not by other means effectuate, alterations in the fundamental points
of our government; and make, in fact, a new constitution for us?

By the eighth section of the first article, congress is empowered to borrow
money on the credit of the United States.

Suppose it was deemed expedient to subsidize Portugal, instead of building
frigates, to keep the Algerines within the streights of the Mediterranean: --
Could two-thirds of the senate and the president, either borrow, or guarantee a
loan for that porpose by treaty?

The same section empowers congress to establish uniform laws on the subject of
bankruptcies.

Suppose Great Britain had remarked, that, as her subjects were constantly the
creditors of the citizens of the United States, she was deeply interested in
our system of bankrupt laws: -- Had the president and two-thirds of the senate,
a right to incorporate such a system with the projected treaty?

The same section empowers congress to coin money, to regulate the value
thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standards of weights and measures.

Suppose the Birmingham manufacturers offered, on a cheap plan, to supply us
with coin? Suppose Great Britain were pleased to insist upon our receiving her
guineas at their English value, and upon our promising not to sweat, deface, or
clip them, according to the current practice of the union? Suppose France were
desirous that we should adopt the fanciful project of that republic, respecting
weights and measures? -- Could all, or any, of these propositions be acceded to
and established by treaty?

The ninth section of the same article declares "that the migration or
importation of such persons as the states now existing shall think proper to
admit, shall not be prohibited by the congress prior to the year eighteen
hundred and eight."

Suppose Mr. Wilberforce had negociated on the part of Great Britain, instead
of Lord Grenville, and had made the prohibition of the importation of slaves
into the United States, in the year eighteen hundred and eight, a sine qua non:
-- Could the president and two-thirds of the senate admit and legitimize the
stipulation by treaty?

By the constitution congress has the power to constitute tribunals inferior to
the supreme court.

Suppose Great Britain desired, for the future, as well as for the past, to
establish a tribunal of her own judges in America, for deciding controversies
between British subjects and American citizens: -- Could this be accomplished
through the medium of a treaty?

By the constitution congress is endowed with the power of declaring war.

Suppose Lord Grenville had insisted, and Mr. Jay had approved, that the treaty
should be an offensive and defensive alliance; and that we should forthwith
join Great Britain in her hostilities against France: -- Could the president
and senate thus negociate us into a war?

By the constitution it is declared, "that no person holding any office, etc.
under the United States, shall, without the consent of congress, accept of any
present, emolument, office or title of any kind whatsoever, from any king,
prince, or foreign state."

Suppose our envoy had been offered a present or a title by the British monarch
-- would the consent of the treaty be tantamount to the consent of congress,
for the purpose of approving and justifying his acceptance?

By the constitution it is provided that all bills for raising revenues, shall
originate in the house of representatives; and that no money shall be drawn
from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law.

Suppose Great Britain had stipulated, that as soon as the commissioners have
fixed the sum due to her subjects for old debts, the president should draw a
warrant for the amount, and that the same should be paid out of all public
moneys in the treasury of the United States, prior to the payment of any
antecedent appropriation by law: -- Would this be the proper subject for a
treaty, or for an impeachment?

8. But fatigued and disgusted with displaying, thus hypothetically, the
monstrous consequences, which will inevitably flow from the jurisdiction,
claimed on behalf of the president and senate, to bind the United States by any
treaty, and in all cases whatsoever; let us particularly examine the numerous
and extravagant infractions of the constitution, which the projected treaty
actually commits. Recent as is the establishment of the federal constitution,
it is, indeed, to be lamented, that the possibility of violating it, is not a
matter of floating and fluctuating popular opinion; but a matter susceptible of
fixed and positive proof. For, who does not recollect, that a bill touching the
fundamental principle of the government (its representative quality) after
having passed both houses of congress, was declared by the president to be
unconstitutional; and, therefore, undeserving of his official approbation and
signature? Who can forget that a law touching the essential properties of the
judicial department of our government, after being ratified by every organ of
legislative authority (the president, senate, and house of representatives) was
declared by chief justice Jay, and his associate judges, to be
unconstitutional; and, therefore, incapable of being executed and enforced?
With such authoritative precedento (and there are many others that might be
adduced from the transactions of individual states) of the possibility of
deviating from the rule and meaning of our constitution, are we to be damned
for political heresy, merely because we doubt, or deny the infallibility of Mr.
Jay's negociating talents? And must every man be accursed (to use for a moment
the intolerant language of the late secretary of the treasury, in his character
of the New York Camillus) who thinks that the American envoy and the British
minister were at least as likely to mistake, or misconstrue, the constitutional
boundaries of the American government, as the president, senate, and house of
representatives of the United States? It is certainly, upon the whole, more
candid, and more convincing, to put "the defense" of the treaty upon the true
trading ground, taken by the New York chamber of commerce; -- to wit, -- "that
we have made as good a market at such pedlars had a right to expect on the
royal exchange; and that we cannot afford to fight, though we must submit to be
plundered."

9. Let us proceed, however, in examining the points on which the British
treaty is at war with the American constitution.

(1.) By the constitution of the United States, the JUDICIAL POWER is vested in
one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the congress may from time to
time establish; and its jurisdiction embraces, among other things,
"controversies between a state, or citizens thereof, and foreign states,
citizens, or subjects."

By the treaty a tribunal, other than the supreme court, or any inferior court
established by congress, is erected, with a jurisdiction to ascertain the
amount of any losses or damages sustained " by diverse British merchants and
others, his majesty's subjects, on account of debts, etc. that still remain
owing to them by citizens or inhabitants of the United States:" And it is
agreed, that in all such cases where full compensation for such losses and
damages cannot, for whatever reason, be actually had and received by the said
creditors, in the ordinary course of justice, the United States will make full
and complete compensation, for the same, to the creditors," etc.

Remarks. I. It is the right of every independent nation to establish and
maintain a judicial authority, co-extensive with its territorial possessions.
The principle is indisputable, and it is incidentally recognized by Lord
Mansfield and other great lawyers, in the celebrated controversy between the
king of Prussia and Great Britain, relative to the Silesia loan. 2. The
constitutional tribunals of the United States were adequate to the
administration of complete justice, in the very cases for which the treaty
provides a special tribunal. 3. If it is possible in any case, with any nation,
and at any time, to stipulate, by treaty, for the erection of a tribunal, in
order to ascertain and liquidate debts due from citizens to foreigners, may it
not be done in every case, with every nation, and at every time? 4. Is not the
court of commissioners, in effect, an high court of errors and appeals for the
United States, with power to revise and reverse every judgment, that has been
given since the year 1783, either in a federal or a state court, in every cause
between a British subject and an American citizen? 5. Wherever the recovery of
the principal debt has been protracted by the forms of law -- wherever there
has been as abatement of interest, by the compromise of the parties, or the
verdict of a jury -- wherever the debtor has become insolvent; this high court
of commissioners may sustain an appeal, and can award damages for the detention
or loss of the debt. It is true, the treaty adds, that "this provision is to
extend to such losses only as have been occasioned by lawful impediments," but
the extent of the discretion of the commissioners, in adjudging what
constitutes a lawful impediment, is without limitation or control; and the
nature of the evidence, by which their minds are to be informed, is without
rule or definition; since (in the language of the treaty) it may be "either
according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two countries, or
in such other manner as the said commissioners shall see cause to require or
allow." Thus, not only erecting a court unknown to our constitution, but
admitting a species of proof, not recognized by the legal forms of our country.
6. Let us appeal to Mr. Jay himself, upon the constitutionality of such
proceedings. By an act of congress, the judges of the circuit courts were
required to take, and report to the secretary at war, certain proofs in the
case of invalids and pensioners. The judges refused (as we have already
noticed) to execute the act, declaring it to be unconstitutional, as well on
account of the nature of the duty imposed upon them, as on account of the
revisionary power, which was vested in the secretary at war. By the treaty, the
president and senate will appoint commissioners, in conjunction with the king
of Great Britain, to hold a court of appeals from every court in the union; and
to determine judicial questions, upon private controversies, between British
subjects and American citizens. Now, let us ask, whether it is more
unconstitutional for the legislature to impose new and extraordinary duties
upon a court, existing according to the constitution, than for the executive to
create a new and extraordinary tribunal, incompatible with the constitution;
inasmuch as it can only act upon the alienation of the jurisdiction, previously
and exclusively vested in our domestic courts; -- the jurisdiction of hearing
and deciding judicial questions, upon private controversies, between British
subjects and American citizens? 7. But this is not the only infraction of the
constitution, involved in the arrangement alluded to -- the obligation of
private contracts is transferred from individuals to the public. The framers of
the constitution, in declaring that "all debts contracted and engagements
entered into, before its adoption, shall be as valid against the United States
under tne constitution, as under the confederation," could hardly anticipate,
that they charged the treasury of the union with the payment of all the
outstanding debts of the individual citizens of America! And when congress was
vested with a power "to lay and collect taxes, to pay the debts and provide for
the common defense and general welfare of the United States;" it certainly was
never contemplated, that the government of America became the insurer of every
British merchant, against litigious delays, and fraudulent or accidental
bankruptcies! It cannot be suggested that Great Britain acts in a similar
manner upon our complaints of the spoliations on our trade. For, the injury
that we have sustained, originated in an act of government; -- the injured
individuals are, in the first instance, bound to apply to the British courts of
justice; -- and the public are only responsible in the last resort, for the
individual aggressors,

(2.) By the constitution of the United States, congress is empowered to
establish an uniform rule of naturalization; and that power has accordingly
been exercised in an act that provides, among other things, that "no person
heretofore proscribed by any state, shall be admitted a citizen, except by an
act of the legislature of the state in which such person was proscribed."

By the treaty, all the British settlers and traders, within the precincts or
jurisdiction of the western posts, are allowed an election either to remain
British subjects, or to become citizens of the United States: And it is agreed,
"that British subjects who now hold lands in the territories of the United
States, may hold, grant, sell or devise the same, to whom they please, in like
manner as if they were natives; and that neither they, nor their heirs or
assigns, shall, so for as may respect the said lands, and the legal remedies
incident thereto, be regarded as aliens."

Remarks. Is not the treaty at war with the constitution in this great and
delicate point of naturalization? A British colony is, ipso facto, by the magic
of Mr. Jay's pen, converted into an American settlement! Every British subject,
who now holds lands (and when we recollect the recent speculations for the sale
of lands, how can we calculate the extent of the adoption?) is, without ordeal
or restraint, endowed with all the rights of a native American! If it is
possible by treaty to give the rights of property to aliens, may not the civil
rights of the community be disposed of by the same potent instruament? If it is
possible by treaty to confer citizenship on the British garrison at Detroit,
and its contiguous settlers, why may we not, by treaty, also confer an
instantaneous citizenship on every slight of emigrants, that shall hasten to
our shores from Germany or Ireland? It may not be amiss here to intimate a
doubt of the power of the federal government to regulate the tenure of real
estates: it is no where expressly given, and therefore, cannot be
constitutionally implied; and it seems to be among the necessary and natural
objects of state legislation. But let us presume (what is highly probable) that
there are amongst the settlers within the precincts or jurisdiction of the
western posts, certain proscribed persons; -- can the treaty, in spite of the
law, restore them to the rights of citizenship, without the authoritative
assent of the state that proscribed them? Again: -- Is every man whose estate
was liable to confiscation as a traitor, or as an alien, in consequence of the
revolution, entitled now to bold lands as a native? The Fairfax claim in
Virginia; the claim of the Penns in Pennsylvania; and the claims of Galloway,
Allen, etc. etc. may hence derive a dangerous principle of resuscitation. Look
to it well.

(3.) By the constitution, congress is empowered to regulate commerce with
foreign nations.

By the treaty, the commerce of the United States, not only directly with Great
Britain, but incidentally with every foreign nation, is regulated.

Remarks. There is not a source of legislative jurisdiction, upon the subject
of commerce, which is not absorbed by this executive compact. The power of
regulating commerce with foreign nations, is expressly and specifically given to
congress: Can a power so given to one department, be divested by implication,
in order to amplify and invigorate another power, given in general terms to
another department? But more of that hereafter.

(4.) By the constitution, congress is empowered to regulate commerce with the
Indian tribes.

By the treaty, it is agreed that "it shall at all times be free to British
subjects, etc. and also to the Indians dwelling an either side of the boundary
line of the United States, freely to pass and repass by land or inland
navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the two parties on
the continent of America, etc. and freely to carry on trade and commerce with
each other." The treaty, likewise, provides, that " no duty of entry shall ever
be levied by either party on peltries brought by land, or inland navigation
into the said territories respectively; nor shall the Indians passing or
repassing with their own proper goods and effects, of whatever nature, pay for
the same any impost or duty whatever."

Remarks. It is easy to perceive that the stipulations, in favor of the
Indians, were introduced at the instance of Great Britain; and her motives are
not even attempted to be disguised. Her traders will boast of the favor and
security, which she has compelled America to grant to the Indians; and so
engage their confidence and attachment; while the privilege of free passage and
the exemption from duties, will inevitably throw the whole fur trade into the
hands of the British. The surrender of the western posts, under such
circumstances, can produce no loss to Great Britain, and will certainly be of
no advantage to America: It will not add a shilling to the profits of our
Indian traffic; nor insure us a moment's suspension of Indian hostilities! But
to prosecute our constitutional enquiry -- what right is these by treaty to
regulate our commerce with the Indian tribes? Whenever a treaty of peace and
amity has heretofore been concluded with the Indians, it has been the
constitutional practice of the president, to call on congress to regulate the
commerce with them. Such calls were totally unnecessary, if the same thing
might as well and as lawfully be done by treaty; and if it could not be done by
treaty in the case of the Indians, neither could it be done by treaty in the
case of a foreign nation: For, both are expressed in the same terms, and
included in the same member of the section. "Congress shall have power (says
the constitution) to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the
several states, and with the Indian tribes." What right is there by treaty to
declare, that no duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on
peltries, etc. (and a similar promise is made in cases that more immediately
affect Great Britain) since congress has the sole power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, etc. to pay the debts, and provide for the common defense, and
general welfare of the United States? If we may, negatively say, by treaty,
that certain duties shall not be laid, may we not, affirmatively, say, by
treaty, that certain other duties shall be laid? And then what becomes of that
part of our constitution, which declares, "that all (...) for raising revenue
shall originate in the house of representatives?" But let as imagine for a
moment, that it is in the power of the president and senate to regulate our
commerce with the Indian tribes; ought (...) the regulation to be made with the
Indians themselves? Why suffer Great Britain to negociate and stipulate for
Indians actually residing within the territory of the United States? Is such a
concession consistent with the dignity and independence of our government --
with the peace and interest of the nation? Let Mr. Randolph's letter to Mr.
Hammond, on the conduct of General Simcoe and Major Campbell be referred to, as
an answer to this question. It is not, at present, within reach to be quoted;
but its contents were too important to have already escaped the memory of any
reflecting American.

(5.) By the constitution congress is empowered to define and punish piracies
and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law of
nations.

By the treaty the definition and punishment of certain offenses, not known by
any law of the union, is declared and permitted; to wit -- Is It, For accepting
commissions or instructions from any foreign prince or state, to act against
Great Britain. 2d, For accepting any foreign commission or letter of marque for
arming any privateer; etc. Great Britain may punish an American citizen as a
pirate. 3d, For not treating British officers with that respect which is due to
the commissions they bear, and for offering any insult to such officers, the
offenders shall be punished, as disturbers of the peace and amity between
America and Great Britain. 5th, For making a prize upon the subjects of Great
Britain, the people of every other belligerent nation (except France) shall be
punished by a denial of shelter or refuge, in our ports.

Remarks. To define crimes, and apportion punishments, is the peculiar province
of the legislative authority of every free government: but it is obvious from
the foregoing recapitulation, that the executive authority has likewise
encroached upon that province, by the instrumentality of its treaty-making
power. Can a citizen be surrendered by treaty to all the pains and penalties of
piracy? Then by treaty, he might be subjected to all the pains and penalties of
treason. It is true, that the constitution reserves to itself the exclusive
right of declaring what shall constitute treason; but it is equally true, that
it bestows on congress the exclusive right to define and punish piracy: and the
invasion of the right to define in one case, is as unconstitutitonal as the
invasion of an actual definition in the other. But what legitimate authority
can a treaty suggest, in order to justify the restraint upon that right of
expatriation, which congress itself has not ventured to restrain, while
legislating on subjects of a similar class? It is not intended to convey the
slightest doubt of the power and propriety of controuling our citizens in their
conduct toward foreign nations, while they are within the reach of domestic
coercion: but to prohibit an American freeman from going whither he pleases, in
quest of fortune and happiness -- to restrict him from exercising, in a foreign
country, and in a foreign service, his genius, talents and industry; to
denounce him for seeking honor, emolument or instruction, by enlisting within
the territory and under the banners of another nation; -- to do such things, is
to condemn the principle of our own policy, by which we invite all the world to
fill up the population of our country: To do such things is, in fact, to
prostrate the boasted rights of man. It it hardly worth a pause to ask, what
proportion of respect is due to the commission of a British officer? and what
degree of punishment the refusal or neglect to pay it, may deserve?

(6.) By the constitution it is declared, that "no tax or duty shall be laid on
articles exported from any state."

By the treaty "it is expressly agreed and declared that the United States will
prohibit and restrain the carrying any melasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa, or
cotton, in American vessels, either from his majesty's islands, or from the
United States, to any part of the world."

Remarks. This is an extract, it is true, from the twelfth article of the
treaty; but it equally serves to show the probability of attempts to violate
the constitution. Besides, the advocates for the treaty are hasty and
premature, when they desire to throw the twelfth article entirely out of
consideration: for, by that proposition, though they should save the treaty,
they effectually destroy its author. They are hasty and premature for another
reason: the twelfth article is to be suspended for the declared purpose of
negociating something as a substitute; and, therefore we must confider its
principle, in order to ascertain, how far any modification of it could be
rendered palatable. But, on constitutional ground, when it is declared, that no
duty shall by law be laid on articles exported from any state, is it not
absurd, or wicked to suppose, that by treaty the exportation of the articles
themselves can be prohibited? The obvious intention of the constitution is to
encourage our export trade; -- the immediate effect of the treaty is to
obstruct and annihilate it.

(7.) There are many other points in which a collision occurs between the
constitution and the treaty, but to which the scope and nature of these
strictures will not admit a full attention. It may be cursorily remarked,
however, that a cession of territory, which will, probably, be the consequence
of settling (...) the boundaries of the United States, and even the actual
cession of the precincts of the western posts, though in favor of individuals,
are, subjects for serious reflection. If a part of the United States may be
ceded -- if a whole state may be ceded, what becomes of the guarantee of a
republican form of government to every state? The propriety of presenting this
consideration to the public mind, will be allowed by those who know, that, in
the course of (...) senatorial debate, the RIGHT of CEDING BY TREATY a WHOLE
state, nay, ANY NUMBER of the states, short of a majority, was BOLDLY ASSERTED,
and STRENUOUSLY ARGUED!!!

(8.) It may not be amiss, likewise, to add, that our government has no more
right to alienate powers that are given, that it has to usurp powers that are
not given. For instance, an act of congress could not (and can a treaty?)
surrender the right of sequestering the property of a hostile nation -- the
right of giving commercial preferences to a friendly nation -- and the right of
suspending a ruinous intercourse with any nation? Great clamor; have been
raised against the exercise of these rights; and, undoubtedly, they should only
be used in the last resort; but they are rights recognized by the law of
nations; and they are rights often essential to the duties of
self-preservation, and sometimes necessary to the accomplishment of reciprocal
justice.

10. Having taken this review of the actual warfare between the constitution
and Mr. Jay's diplomatic work, and of the destructive consequences of the claim
of the executive, to bind the United States, in all cases whatsoever, by
treaty; let us recur to the position with which the present feature was
introduced, namely, the duty of preserving the constitution, such as it was
made and intended by the people, and we shall find, by a faithful comparison of
theory with practice, that the government of the United States may (...)
^^nsformed through the (...) of the treaty-making power, from a republic to an
oligarchy -- from a free government of several departments, legislative,
judicial and executive -- to the simple aristocratical government of a
president and senate.

11. This fatal effect, however, of converting our government from the system
which the people love, to a system which they abhor, -- from what it was made
in theory, to what it was never intended to be made by practice -- can only
proceed from error or corruption. It would ill become the writer of these
strictures, who so freely, but it is hoped, so fairly, expresses an opinion, to
impute to any man or set of men, a sinister and traitorous design against the
constitution of our common country. The denunciations fulminated by the New
York Camillus, and his small circle of coadjutors, harmlessly expend themselves
in the violence of their explosion: like the denunciations of the Tiara, they
spring from an arrogant claim of infallibility; and like them too, will only
excite the derision or the disgust of an enlightened nation. Is it credible,
that every citizen of the United States, from Georgia to New Hampshire, who
reprobates Mr. Jay's treaty, must either be an enemy to our government, or a
rancorous incendiary? Is it to be presumed that no man can utter a sentence of
disapprobation respecting the principles of the treaty, without feeling a
sentiment of animosity, respecting the person of the negociator? Are we really
such slaves to faction; -- so trammelled with party; -- so insensible to
virtue, truth, and patriotism; -- that every thought which we conceive, every
expression which we use, on this momentous occasion, must be connected with the
possible (but it is ardently hoped the distant) event, of electing a successor
to the present chief magistrate of the union? Yet, such are the base and fordid
motives, passionately and wantonly ascribed by Camillus and the scanty troop of
advocates, who follow him in supporting the treaty, to the great host of the
American people, rising (as it were) in mass to condemn it.

If it could be thought a convenient, a reputable, or a necessary task, how
successfully might the argument of recrimination be employed! Who, it could be
asked, are the persons that support the treaty? What are the motives that
actuate them? Is it surprising that the men who advised the treaty, or that THE
MAN who composed it, should endeavor, by the force of ingenuity, art, or
defamation, to rescue it from general malediction and impending ruin? Was it
not to be expected, that a faction, uniformly eager to establish an alliance
with Great Britain, at the expense of France, would strenuously attempt to
procure the ratification of any instrument, calculated to accomplish that
object? Does not consistency require from him, who openly projected in the
Federal convention, and from those, who secretly desire in the execution of
public offices, the establishment of an aristocracy, under the insidious title
of an energetic scheme of government, that they should approve and countenance
every practical application of any medium, by which the barriers that separate
our constitutional departments, may be overthrown, and the occasions for
interposing the popular sanction of the legislature, may be superseded or
avoided? Is it not natural, that British merchants and British agents -- is it
not necessary, that British debtors and British factors, -- should clamorously
unite, or tacitly acquiesce, in the applause bestowed upon a compact, which,
however detrimental to America, is beneficial to Great Britain -- the nation of
chief importance to the allegiance and affections of some of those characters,
and to the opulence and subsistence of all? Or, if the paltry idea of an
electioneering plan must be forced upon our consideration, is it not, at least,
as likely, that the party, which aims at making a president of Mr. Jay, will,
on that ground alone, exert itself in "The Defense" of the treaty, as that the
party, which is desirous of conferring the same elevated office on Mr.
Jefferson, will, for no other reason, attempt to blast the fruits of his
competitor's negotiation? Considering, indeed, that Camilius himself, by
confining his "Defense" to the treaty as advised to be ratified by the senate,
virtually abandons the treaty as negociated and concluded by Mr. Jay: -- and
also, considering that a part of Camillus's defense of the present treaty
arises from the ambiguity that Mr. Jay had left in the former treaty with Great
Britain (upon which, however, his character as a negociator was founded) we
might be led to suppose, that Mr. Jay's pretensions to the wisdom of a
statesman, and to the station of a president, were not deemed, even by his own
party, to be any longer tenable; but that Camillus still condescends, on the
obvious presumption of a subsisting rivalship, to impeach the ministerial
character, and to depreciate the official performances, of Mr. Jefferson.

But why should we arbitrarily abuse, instead of endeavoring rationally to
convince each other? We all have the same right, from natural and from social
law, to think and to speak: it is true, that we do not all possess the same
powers of reason, nor the same charms of eloquence; but when men are on an
equality in the possession, as well as in the right of exercising, those
endowments, there can be no amicable way of adjusting a difference of opinion,
but that which is adopted for adjusting all the other differences of a free
people -- an appeal to the voice of the majority! Now, let it be allowed (and
so far ought to be allowed, but no farther) that Mr. Jay, who negociated the
treaty; the twenty members of the senate, who assented to a conditional
ratification; and Mr. Hamilton, and the New York chamber of commerce, who have
appeared in support of it (an enumeration that comprises, it is believed, all
that have hitherto avowed a perfect approbation) are in the possession of as
great a portion of information, integrity and talents, as a like number of
citizens, selected for their approved wisdom, virtue and patriotism, from the
aggregate of those who have publicly condemned the treaty; and then let it be
heartily answered, which scale in the balance must, of right, preponderate?
After such a selection, there will still remain the great body of the community
in opposition to a ratification; and, as members of that community, thousands
of individuals who honorably served during the late war, in the field and the
cabinet, and many of whom at this moment serve with zeal, fidelity and wisdom
in the various departments of government. Is it not then the symptom of an
arrogant vanity; -- of a tyrannical disposition; -- to stigmatize such an
opposition to a projected measure, with the name of "Faction?" The violence
offered to Mr. Hamilton's person in New York, and to Mr. Bingham's house in
Philadelphia, have justly excited the indignation of every sincere republican:
but even that reprehensible and odious conduct is not to be compared to the
enormous guilt of endeavoring to force the opinion of a few individuals upon
the people, as the ultimate test of political truth; and to cast an odium upon
the late, conventions, in which (according to the language of the constitution)
"the people were peaceably assembled, to petition the government for the
redress (or rather the prevention) of a grievance."

But let the pardon of the reader be granted for this digression; and we will
return to a delineation of the feature that lies before us.

12. Declining, then, either to create, or to follow, a bad example, let us
ascribe the deviation from the principles of our constitution to an erroneous
construction, rather than to a wilful perversion; and let us exert our skill in
averting the evil that threatens, rather than indulge our resentment in
convicting those who labor to produce it.

Our government, therefore, being a government of departments, it is (as we
have already observed) inconsistent with the duty of self-preservation; or, in
other words, it must proceed from an error in construction; that one department
shall assume and exercise all, or any, of the powers, of all, or any, of the
other departments. "The departments of government (to adopt the elegant figure
used by an excellent judge in a late admirable charge to a Philadelphia jury)
are planets that revolve, each in its appropriate orbit, round the
constitution, as the fun of our political system." Thus, if the legislative,
executive, or judicial departments shall encroach, one upon the orbit of the
other, the destruction of the order, use, and beauty of the political system,
must as inevitably ensue, as the destruction of the order, use and beauty of
the planetary system would follow, from a subversion of the essential
principles of attraction, repulsion and gravity.

13. It was necessary, however, that the power of making treaties with foreign
nations, should be vested in one of the departments of the government: but the
power of making treaties is not, in its nature, paramount to every other power;
not does the exercise of that power naturally demand an exclusive jurisdiction.
A nation may carry on its external commerce without the aid of the
treaty-making power; but it cannot manage its domestic concerns without the aid
of the legislative power: the legislative power is, consequently, of superior
importance and rank to the treaty-making power. Again: -- The legislative
power, exercised conformably to the constitution, must be direct, universal,
and conclusive in its operation and force upon the people; but the
treaty-making power is scarcely in any instance independent of legislative aid
to effectuate its efforts, and to render its compacts obligatory on the nation.
A memorable occurrence in the English history will serve to illustrate both of
these positions: It is the fate of the commercial part of the famous treaty of
Utrecht, concluded between France and England in the year 1712. "The peace
(says Russel in his "history of modern Europe," vol. 4. P. 457) was generally
disliked by the people, and all impartial men reprobated the treaty of commerce
with France, as soon as the terms were (...). Exception was particularly taken
against the 8th and 9th articles, importing "That Great Britain and France
should mutually enjoy all the privileges its trading with each other, which
either granted to the most favored nation; that all prohibitions should be
removed, and no higher duties imposed on the French commodities than on those
of any other people." The ruinous tendency of those articles was perceived by
the whole trading part of the kingdom. It was accordingly urged, when a bill
was brought into the house of commons for confirming them, that the trade with
Portugal, the most beneficial of any, would be lost, should the duties on
French and Portuguese wines be made equal, etc. etc. These and similar
arguments induced the more moderate tories to join the whigs, AND THE BILL WAS
REJECTED BY A MaJORITY OF NINE VOTES." In relating the same transaction,
Smollet's history of England (vol. 2. p. 242, 246) contains some passages too
remarkable to be omitted on the present occation. "Against the 8th and 9th
articles (says the historian) the Portuguese minister presented a memorial,
declaring, that should the duties on French wines be lowered to the same level
with those that were laid on the wines of Portugal, his master would renew the
prohibition of the woolen manufactures, and other products of Great Britain.
Indeed, all the trading part of the nation exclaimed against the treaty of
commerce, which seems to have been concluded in a hurry, before the ministers
fully understood the nature of the subject. This precipitation was owing to the
fears that their endeavors after peace would miscarry, from the intrigues of
the whig faction, and the obstinate opposition of the confederates." "Another
bill (continues the same writer, in a subsequent page) being brought into the
house of commons, for rendering the treaty of commerce effectual, such a number
of petitions were delivered against it, and so many solid arguments advanced by
the merchants, who were examined on the subject, that even a great number of
tory members were convinced of the bad consequence it would produce to trade,
and voted against the minister on this occasion."

Perhaps there cannot, in the annals of all the nations of the earth, be found
two cases more parallel than the one which is thus recorded in the English
history, and the one which at present agitates the American ^ation. -- 1. All
impartial men reprobated both treaties as soon as the terms were known. 2. The
admission of the opposite contracting party to an unqualified participation in
trade, with the most favored nation, is, in both cases, a principal source of
complaint. 3. The removal of all prohibitions, and the surrender of the right
to impose higher duties on the commodities of the opposite contracting party,
than on those of any other people, are, in both cases, condemned. 4. The good
and the intelligent of all parties have united their influence, in both cases,
to prevent a confirmation of articles of so ruinous a tendency. 5. The whole
nation, in both cases, have exclaimed against the treaty. 6. Both treaties were
concluded in a hurry, before the ministers fully understood the nature of the
subject. 7. Innumerable petitions (and who will NOW deny the propriety of
exercising the American right to petition?) were delivered against both
treaties. 8. And the Portuguese minister declared in effect, of the treaty of
Utrecht ( mutatis mutandis) what the minister of France will, probably, declare
of the treaty of London (but what America surrenders the right of saying at any
time to Great Britain) "If you ratify your alliance with the British, you must
surrender your alliance with France." If such a wonderful similarily of
circumstances concur in the negotiation, terms, and reception of these
memorable instruments, let us hope that the guardian angel of American liberty
and prosperity, has, also, doomed them finally to experience a merited
similarity of fate!

14. But having thus shown, that even in Great Britain the treaty-making
prerogative is neither paramount nor exclusive (though the generality of judge
Blackstone's expressions on the subject would, perhaps, lead to that
preposterous conclusion) we might be satisfied to presume, on general
principles, that so high a claim of jurisdiction could not be maintained, at
least, on the part of our president and senate. Yet, let us endeavor, by the
infallible test of the constitution, to put the matter, if possible, beyond
doubt and controversy; and having established that each department of the
government should be confined to its proper orbit, let us endearour to
ascertain, what that orbit is, in relation to the treaty-making power.

(1.) The power of the president and senate to make treaties, is given (as we
have already stated) in general and unrestricted terms.

But the powers given to congress (except in an instance to be hereafter
noticed) are definite in their terms, and appropriated in their objects.

Let us ask, then, by what rule of construction a power primarily and
specifically given to one body, can be assumed and exercised by another, to
which, in a subsequent clause, a mere general authority is given?

Upon the common law principles of construction, the specific powers would
clearly, in such a case, be deemed a reservation and exception out of the
general grant. But even according to a rule furnished by the constitution
itself, the same result will be produced. Thus, the twelfth ratified amendment
declares, "that the powers not delegated to the United States by the
constitution, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people." Now,
if the general power granted for the purpose of making treaties, can set at
naught the jurisdiction specifically given to congress for the purpose of
making laws, may it not, with equal propriety and effect, overleap the boundary
thus interposed between popular rights and constituted powers? In the one case,
the reservation is expressly declared -- in the other, it is necessarily
implied.

(2.) But if the delegation of a general power does, ipso facto, convey a right
to embrace, in the exercise of that power, every authority not incompatible
with its objects, the consequence will be that congress may enter into treaties
as well as the president and senate.

For, congress is vested with a jurisdiction "to make all laws, which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into execution their own powers:" and what
laws are, in that respect, necessary and proper, they must, from the nature of
the thing, be the judge.

Suppose, therefore, that congress was desirous of forming an alliance,
offensive and defensive, with France, but could not obtain the constitutional
number of two-thirds of the senate for accomplishing the measure by treaty, --
an act of congress in order to regulate commerce with that nation, would afford
as effectual a mode (according to the new doctrine) since the act, on the
pretext of an equivalent for commercial advantages, might legislate us into the
coveted alliance. The temptation and facility of proceeding in this way is
obvious; -- the passing of a law requiring but a majority of the senate;
whereas the ratification of a treaty requires the concurrence of two-thirds of
the members of that body.

(3.) It is not, however, necessary to mingle and confuse the departments of
our government, contrary to the first principles of a free republic; not to
make a part of our political system equal to the whole, contrary to the
soundest axioms of demonstrative philosophy, in order to give a just, efficient
and salutary effect to the treaty-making power of the president and senate. For
although,

In the first place, the treaty-making power cannot bind the nation by a
decision upon any of the subjects, which the constitution expressly devolves
upon the legislative power:

Yet, in the second place, the treaty-making power may negociate conditionally,
respecting the subjects that constitutionally belong to the decision of the
legislative power:

And, in the third place, every other subject, proper for the national compact
of a republic, may be negociated and absolutely concluded by the treaty-making
power.

(4.) That such a distinction was intended by the framers of our present
excellent constitution, the reasons that have been glanced at, must, it is
thought, sufficiently prove to every ingenuous mind: But let one argument more
be adduced.

By the ninth article of the old confederation it was declared, "That the
United States, in congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive right
and power of determining on peace and war."

By the existing constitution of the United States, it is provided, "That
congress shall have power to declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal,
etc.

Now, it it evident, that by omitting to deposit with congress the power of
making peace, in addition to the power of declaring war, the framers of our
present government, had in full view the division of its departments, and the
corresponding distribution of its powers.

Congress, under the confederation, was a single body, and therefore,
necessarily possessed of all the little legislative, executive, and judicial
authority, which the states had been pleased to delegate to the union.

The government of the United States, on the contrary, is a compound system, of
which the congress is only the legislative department: and, therefore, the
executive and judicial functions are elsewhere to be sought for and exercised.

Hence it is, that although the power of declaring war is (as it ought to be)
left with congress, the power of making peace is (as it ought to be)
transferred to the executive; being a natural appendage of the general power of
making treaties.

This deduction serves likewise to demonstrate, that the framers of the
constitution, did not intend to leave the powers that are specifically given to
congress, at the mercy of the power that is generally given to the president
and senate. By expressing a positive jurisdiction in favor of the former, it
excludes a claim of jurisdiction in favor of the latter.

(5.) Nor is it in the power of making treaties only, that the constitution has
abridged the executive department of its customary attributes, in order to
augment the sources of legislative jurisdiction.

In Great Britain (for instance) the executive possesses the power of making
peace; of granting letters of marque and reprisal; of regulating weights and
measures; of coining money, regulating the value thereof, and of foreign coins;
of erecting courts of judicature; of conferring the rights of deni^enship on
aliens, etc. etc

In the United States the power for all those purposes is absolutely vested in
the legislature.

15. On reviewing the various positions that have been taken in the course of
these strictures, a desire is felt to exhibit the corroborative opinions of men
who have been justly valued by the public: It will be useful to the reader, as
well as pleasing to the writer, to indulge the disposition in a few instances,
and in a brief manner.

(1.) It has been said, that the power of regulating commerce belonged to
congress.

The report of Mr. Mason (a member of the federal co^ven^^^) on that subject,
was delivered in the convention of Virginia as follows: With respect to
commerce and navigation, I will give you, to the best of my information, the
history of that affair. This business was discussed [in the convention] at
Philadelphia for four months; during which time the subject of commerce and
navigation was often under consideration; and, I assert, that eight out of
twelve, for more than three months, voted for requiring two-thirds of the
members present in each house to pass commercial and navigation laws. True it
is, that afterward it was carried by a majority as it stands. If I am right,
there was a great majority for two-thirds of the states in this business, till
a compromise took place between the northern and southern states; the northern
states agreeing to the temporary importation of slaves; and the fouthern states
conceding, in return, that navigation and commercial laws should be on the
sooting on which they now stand.

(2.) It has been said, that the treaty-making power could not cede a part of
the union, nor surrender a citizen to be punished as a pirate.

The opinion of Mr. Randolph (a member of the federal convention, and now
secretary of state) delivered in the same convention, contains the following
passage: I conceive, that neither the life, nor the property of any citizen,
nor the particular right of any state, can be affected by a treaty.

Mr. Madison, also, justifying and recommending the adoption of the
constitution to his fellow citizens, says, with respect to the treaty-making
power -- I am persuaded that when this power comes to be thoroughly and
heartily viewed, it will be found right and proper. Does it follow, because
this power is given to congress, that it is absolute and unlimited? -- I do not
conceive that power is given to the president and senate to dismember the
empire, or to alienate any great, essential right. I do not think the whole
legislative authority have this power. The exercise of the power must be
consistent with the object of the delegation.

(3.) It has been said, the right of suspending a commercial intercourse with
any foreign nation; and the right of sequestering an enemy's property, etc.
were rights essential to an independent government, and recognized by the law
of nations.

Vattel contains the following, among many other passages on those subjects: --

Every state has a right to prohibit the entrance of foreign merchandise, and
the people who are interested have no right to complain of it, as if they had
been refused an office of humanity. B. 1. c. 8. s.90.

It depends on the will of any nation to carry on commerce with another, or to
let it alone. Ibid. s. 92.

The goods even of the individuals in their totality ought to be considered as
the goods of the nation, in regard to other states. From an immediate
consequence of this principle, if one nation has a right to any part of the
goods of another, it has a right indifferently to the goods of the citizens of
that part, till the discharge of the obligation. Ibid. s.81, 82.

It is not always necessary to have ^^ourse to arms, in order to punish a
nation: the offended may take from it, by way of punishment, the privileges it
enjoys in his dominions; seize, if he has an opportunity, on some of the things
that belong to it, and detain them till it has given him a just satisfaction.
B. 2. c. 18. s. 340.

When a sovereign is not satisfied with the manner in which his subjects are
treated by the laws and customs of another nation, he (...) liberty to declare,
that he will treat the subjects of that nation in the same manner that his are
^^eated. Ibid. s. 341.

(4.) It has been said that the constitution ought to be preserved such as the
people have made it; that, of course, the departments of government ought to be
kept separate and distinct, each revolving in its proper orbit; and that to
other judicial tribunal could be erected by a law of the legislative power,
much less by a treaty of the executive power, than what the constitution
prescribes, or expressly permits.

On this interesting subject we fortunately possess the opinions of the judges
of the supreme court and of the judges of some of the district courts in the
case of the act of congress (already more than once alluded to) which they
unanimously adjudged to be unconstitutional and void.

Extract from the opinion of judges IREDELL and SITGREAVES.

First: That the legislative, executive and judicial departments are each
formed in a separate and independent manner; and that the ultimate basis of
each is the constitution only; within the limits of which each department can
alone justify any act of authority.

Secondly: That the legislature, among other important powers, unquestionably
possess that of establishing courts, in such a manner as to their wisdom shall
appear best, limited by the terms of the constitution only; and to whatever
extent that power may be exercised, or however severe the duty they may think
proper to require, the judges, when appointed in virtue of any such
establishment, owe implicit and unreserved obedience to it.

Thirdly: That at the same time such courts cannot be warranted, as we
conceive, by virtue of that part of the constitution delegating judicial power,
for the exercise of which any act of the legislature is provided, in exercising
(even under the authority of another act) any power not in its nature judicial,
or if judicial, NOT PROVIDED FOR UPON THE TERMS THE CONSTITUTION REQUIRES.

Fourthly: That whatever doubts may be suggested, whether the power in question
is properly of a judicial nature, yet inasmuch as the decision of the court is
not made final, but may be, at least, suspended in its operation by the
secretary at war, if he shall have cause to suspect imposition or mistake, this
subjects the decision of the court to a mode of revision, which we consider to
be unwarranted by the constitution: For, though congress may certainly
establish in instances, not yet provided for, courts of appellate jurisdiction;
yet, such courts must consist of judges appointed in the manner the
constitution requires, and holding their offices by no other tenure than that
of their good behavior; by which tenure the office of secretary at war is not
held. And, we beg leave to add, with all due deference, that no decision of any
court of the United States can, under any circumstances, in our opinion,
agreeably to the constitution, be liable to a reversion, or even suspension, by
the legislature itself, in whom no judicial power of any kind appears to be
vested, but the important one relative to impeachments.

Extract from the opinion of judges WILSON, BLAIR, and PETER'S.

The people of the United States have vested in congress all legislative
powers, granted in the constitution.

They have vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the
congress shall establish, the judicial power of the United States.

It is worthy of remark, that, in congress, the whole legislative power of the
United States is not vested: an important part of that power was exercised by
the people themselves, when they ordained and established the constitution.

This constitution is the supreme law of the land: This supreme law, all
judicial officers of the United States are bound, by oath or affirmation, to
support.

It is a principle important to freedom, that in government, the judicial
should be distinct from, and independent of, the legislative department. To
this important principle the people of the United States, in forming their
constitution, have manifested the highest regard.

They have placed their judicial power, not in congress, but in "courts." They
have ordained, that "the judges" of those courts shall hold their offices
"during good behavior;" and that, during their continuance in office, their
salaries shall not be diminished.

Congress have lately passed an act "to regulate (among other things) the
claims to invalid pensions.

Upon due consideration, we have been unanimously of opinion, that under this
act, the circuit court, held for the Pennsylvania district, could not proceed:

First, Because the business directed by this act is not of a judicial nature.
It forms no part of the power wesied by the constitution in the courts of the
United States; the circuit court must, consequently, have proceeded without
constitutional authority.

Secondly, Because, if, upon that business, the court had proceeded; ITS
JUDGMENTS (for its opinions are its judgments) MIGHT, UNDER THE SAME ACT, HAVE
BEEN REVISED AND CONTROULED BY THE LEGISLATURE, AND BY AN OFFICER IN THE
EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT. Such revision and control we deemed radically
inconsistent with the independence of that judicial power, which is vested in
the courts; and, consequently, with that important principle, which is so
strictly observed by the constitution of the United States.

Extract from the opinion of chief justice JAY, and judges CUSHING and DUANE.

"The court were unanimously of opinion,

First, That by the constitution of the United States, the government thereof
is divided into three distinct and independent branches; and THAT IT IS THE
DUTY OF EACH TO ABSTAIN FROM, AND OPPOSE ENCROACHMENTS ON, EITHER.

Secondly, That neither the legislative nor the executive branches, can
constitutionally assign to the judicial any duties, but such as are properly
judicial, and to be performed in a judicial manner.

Thirdly, That the duties assigned to the circuit court by the act in question,
are not of that description; and that the act itself does not appear to
contemplate them as such; in as much as it subjects the decisions of these
courts, made pursuant to those duties, first to the consideration and
suspension of the secretary at war, and then to the revision of the
legislature; WHEREAS BY THE CONSTITUTION, NEITHER THE SECRETARY AT WAR, NOR ANY
OTHER EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NOR EVEN THE LET GISLATURE, ARE AUTHORIZED TO SIT AS A
COURT OF ERRORS ON THE JUDICIAL ACTS OR OPINIONS OF THIS COURT.

Such, upon the whole, are "THE FEATURES OF MR. JAY's TREATY." It was not
intended to protract this sketch of them to so great a length; and yet more
circumstances are recollected, that might have been inserted, than could, upon
a fair reconsideration, be retrenched. If it shall, in any degree, serve the
purposes of truth, by leading, through the medium of a candid investigation, to
a fair, honorable, and patriotic decision, the design with which it was
written will be completely accomplished, whether RATIFICATION or REJECTION, is
the result.

But, before the subject is closed, let the citizens of the union be warned
from too credulous an indulgence of their prejudices and their fears. The
discordant cry of party is loud; and the phantoms of war assail the
imagination: yet, let us not be deluded by stratagem, nor vanquished by terror.
The question is not a question between party and party, but between nation and
nation: -- it is not a question of war or peace between military powers; but a
question of policy and interest between commercial rivals. The subject is too
momentous to be treated as the football of contending factions; -- it appeals
from the passions to the judgment; from the selfishness to the patriotism of
every citizen!

That the British treaty, or a British war, is a necessary alternative, will be
more fully controverted, the writer's present intention of delineating "THE
FEATURES OF THE DEFENSE," shall be carried into effect. But, in the mean time,
let a few self-evident propositions contribute to relieve the public mind, from
the weight of that apprehension.

1. The disposition of Great Britain, manifested by the order of the 6th of
November 1793, by the speech of Lord Dorchester to the Indians, and by the
repeated invasions made, under General Simcoe's authority, upon our territory,
is naturally hostile to the United States.

2. Even if the United States could by any means soothe and convert that
disposition into amity and peace, the projected treaty is too high a price to
pay for such a change.

3. The refusal to enter into the projected treaty with Great Britain, is not a
just cause of war; and and if a pretense, only, is wanting, it may be found in
the toasts at our festivals, as well as in the acts of our government.

4. But the ratification of the treaty will assuredly give umbrage to another
nation -- to an ancient ally.

5. If war is inevitable either with great Britain, or with France, it would be
more politic for the state, more congenial to the sentiments of the people, to
engage the former, than the latter, power.

6. In case of a war with Great Britain, we have assurance, that France will
aid us with all the energy of her triumphant arms.

7. In case of a war with France, we ought not to count upon the affections,
and we cannot rely upon the power, of Great Britain, to befriend us.

FROM THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE. View of the Commerce of the United States, As
it stands at present; and as it is fixed by Mr. Jay's Treaty.
1. Actual State.
AMERICAN ships from Europe enjoy a protecting duty of 10 per cent. on the
amount of duties on goods, wares, and merchandises, imported into the United
States in foreign bottoms from Europe, and of 30 to 50 per cent. on teas
imported in foreign bottoms from Asia or Europe, paid by foreign bottoms, more
than is paid on such goods imported in our own vessels. Foreign bottoms pay
also 44 cents a ton on every voyage, more than is paid by American shipping;
all which had been allowed by the Federal government, to encourage American
ship-builders, mariners, mechanics, merchants, and farmers.

1 State by Treaty.
By treaty, America cedes to Great Britain, the right of laying duties on our
ships in Europe, the West Indies, and Asia, to countervail these, and engages
not to increase her duties on tonnage on this side, so as to check the exercise
of this right: in consequence British ships may be put, at the discretion of
the British government, on exactly the same footing, as American ships in the
carrying trade of Europe and Asia.

2. Actual State.
American ships, of any size, now go freely to all the British West Indies,
sell their cargoes, and bring returns as it suits them.

2. State by Treaty.
By treaty American ships are to be reduced to seventy tons, in order to be
admitted in the British West Indies.

3. Actual State.
American ships may now freely load melasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa, or cotton,
to any part of the world from the United States.

3. State by Treaty.
By treaty American ships are to be totally prohibited this commerce, which is
to be carried on under any flag but theirs.

4. Actual State.
American citizens can now go supercargoes to India, settle and reside, and do
their business there.

4. State by Treaty.
By treaty no American citizen can settle or reside in these ports, or go into
the interior country, without special license from the local government, who
may, under color of this, impose what obstacles they please to the commerce.

5. Actual State.
America now enjoys the right of regulating commerce, so as to encourage one
nation and discourage another, in proportion to benefits received, or injuries
felt respectively.

5. State by Treaty.
All this abandoned by the treaty so far as respects Great Britain; no duties
can be laid on British goods but what must apply to all other nations from whom
we import goods -- no embargoes on exports to British ports but what must apply
to all nations alike.

6. Actual State.
American ships now freely navigate to the British dominions in India, and from
thence proceed with cargoes to any part of the world.

6. State by Treaty.
By treaty American ships are admitted as usual into the British ports of
India, but prohibited carrying any return cargoes except to the United States;
prohibited also from the coasting trade in the British ports of India, from
which they were not, that I knew of, before excluded.

7. Actual State.
Timber for ship-building, tar, or rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp,
cordage, and generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels,
not contraband by former treaties of the United States.

7. State by Treaty.
All these articles made contraband by this treaty.

8. Actual State.
American ships carrying provisions, by America claimed as having a free right
of passage to the ports of their destination.

8. State by Treaty.
This claim now apparently waved; such American ships, when taken, to be
allowed indemnity of freight, demurrage, and a reasonable mercantile profit,
the amount whereof not ascertained.

9. Actual State.
American ports open to prizes made on Britain by France; and America possessed
of the liberty to grant similar douceurs to other nations, as she sees fit in
future compacts with them.

9. State by Treaty.
American ports now opened to prizes taken by Britain from any nation except
France, but shut to prizes taken from Britain by Spain, or any other power not
favored in this way, by treaties already made; of course discouraging to our
future negociations with all powers, France and Britain excepted.

10. Actual State.
American ships allowed at present freely to enter British ports in Europe, the
West Indies and Asia, but shut out from the sea ports of Nova Scotia and Canada.

10. State by Treaty.
American ships allowed to go into these ports, but under new restrictions of
(...) the West Indies, and of latitude of trade in the East Indies; the ports
of Halifax, Quebec, etc. still shut to America.

11. Actual State.
American ships thus partially allowed entrance into British ports.

11. State by Treaty.
British ships allowed universal entrance into all our ports.

12. Actual State.
American ships now sail, though not under naval protection, under guarantee of
all the British effects possessed here, which might be made answerable for our
floating property, if unjustly seized on by Great Britain in case of a war, so
much apprehended by the chamber of commerce of New York.

12. State by Treaty.
By treaty, American ships deprived of this guarantee; sequestrations or
confiscations being declared impolitic and unjust, when applied to stocks or
banks, or debts; though nothing said about them when applied to ships or
cargoes.

13. Actual State.
British debts now recoverable in the federal courts of the United States, but
reposing on the solvency of the debtors only.

13. State by Treaty.
By treaty a new court of commissioners opened on this subject, with immense
power and guarantee of the United States, who must meet, indeed, at
Philadelphia, but may adjourn where they please. Nothing said of debts due to
Americans in England, if by legal impediments prevented from recovery there.

14. Actual State.
America sends Mr. Jay to recover redress for spoliations on our commerce
actually sustained.

14. State by Treaty.
By treaty a court of commissioners opened, who are to sit in London without
power of adjournment, as in the case of the commission for debts. Americans
must, therefore, transport themselves and claims to London, and employ counsel
there, to recover what the commissioners shall think sit to allow them:
admirable compensation indeed!

15. Actual State.
American ships much plagued by British privateers.

15. State by Treaty.
By treaty the privateersmen are to give 1500 l. to 3000 l. sterling security
for their good behavior.

16. Actual State.
American citizens may now expatriate and serve in foreign countries.

16. State by Treaty.
By treaty they are declared pirates, if serving against Great Britain; but no
provision made to guard American seamen from being forced to serve in British
ships.

17. Actual State.
America possesses claims to a large amount on account of negroes carried off,
and the Western Posts detained, in violation of the treaty of 1783.

17. State by Treaty.
These claims all waved by the treaty, without reference to the merits of these
pretensions.

The casting up of the above, is submitted to the Chamber of Commerce of
New York. Errors, outstandings, and omissions excepted. Philadelphia, July 27,
1795.
RESOLUTIONS Of the Citizens of Boston, at a Meeting legally convened by the
selectmen, on the 13th of July, 1795, respecting the Treaty lately concluded
between Lord Grenville and Mr. Jay.
RESOLVED, as the sense of the inhabitants of this town -- That the aforesaid
instrument, if ratified, will be highly injurious to the commercial interests
of the United States, derogatory to their national honor and independence, and
may be dangerous to the peace and happiness of their citizens.

The reasons which have induced this opinion are as follow, viz.

1. Because this compact prosesses to have no reference to the merits of the
complaints and pretensious of the contracting parties: but in reality the
complaints and pretensions of Great Britain are fully provided for, while a
part only of those of the United States have been brought into consideration.

2. Because, in the stipulation which surrenders our posts on the western
frontier, no provision is made to indemnify the United States for the
commercial and other losses they have sustained, and the heavy expenses to
which they have been subjected in consequence of being kept out of possession,
for twelve years, in direct violation of the treaty of peace.

3. Because no indemnification is to be made to the citizens of the United
States, for property taken from them at the close of the war, the restitution
of which is provided for in the same treaty.

4. Because the capture of vessels and property of the citizens of the United
States, made under the authority of the government of Great Britain, is a
national concern, and claims arising from such captures ought not to have been
submitted to the decision of their admiralty courts, as the United States are
thereby precluded from having a voice in the t^^al determination of such cases.

And because the indemnification proposed to be made, is to be sought by a
process, tedious and expensive, in which justice may be delayed to an
unreasonable time; and eventually lost to many of the sufferers, from their
inability to pursue it; and because this mode of indemnification bears no
proportion to the summary method adopted for the satisfaction of British claims.

5. Because this compact admits British subjects to an equal participation with
our own citizens, of the interior traffic of the United States with the
neighboring Indians, through our whole territorial dominions; while the
advantages ostensibly reciprocated to our citizens, are limited both in their
nature and extent.

6. Because the alien duty upon merchandise imported into the United States by
British subjects, in their own bottoms, is, if not wholly suspended, at least
contracted not to be increased.

7. Because the commerce we have hitherto enjoyed in India, in common with
other nations, is so restricted, that in future it will be of little or no
substantial benefit to our citizens.

8. Because in every stipulation respecting our intercourse with the colonial
possessions of Great Britain, the whole commerce of the United States, in such
intercourse, is colonized in return.

9. Because the clause by which the British government reserves to itself the
right of imposing on American vessels, entering British ports in Europe, a duty
which shall countervail the difference of the duty payable on the importation
of European and Asiatic goods into the United States in British or American
bottoms, places it in the power of that government to enable British subjects
to become the importers of Asiatic and European goods into the United States,
to the exclusion of our own citizens.

10. Because although the terms of said treaty purport to be reciprocal in many
instances, yet from the local situation, and existing circumstances of the
United States, and the pacific system of policy they have adopted, that
reciprocity is merely nominal and delusive.

11. Because it prevents the United States from imposing any further
restrictions on the British trade alone.

And, because it is stipulated that neither the debts due from individuals of
one nation to individuals of the other, nor shares nor moneys which they may
have in the public funds, or in any public or private banks, shall ever in any
event of war or national differences, be sequestered or confiscated. -- It is
far from being impossible that the exercise of this right may in the opinion of
the national legislature contribute to preserve the peace of our country, and
protect the rights and property of the citizens from violation, we therefore
esteem it highly impolitic that the public faith should be pledged that it
shall never be exercised under any circumstances whatever.

12. Because it concedes a right to the British government to search and detain
our vessels in time of war, under frivolous and vexatious pretexts.

13. Because it agrees, that ship-timber, tar, hemp, sails and copper, shall be
considered contraband of war, which articles are expressly stipulated to be
free by the treaties already subsisting between the United States and all other
nations, with whom they are in compact.

14. Because it surrenders all or most of the benefits of a commercial nature,
which we had a right to expect from our neutrality in the present war.

15. Because it precludes the hope of receiving any advantage from the modern
law of nations, referred to in the president's proclamation of neutrality;
adopted by most of the nations of Europe, in the last war, and which we then
acceded to and have secuted in our treaties with all other nations.

16. Because it not only surrenders the right of carrying the property of any
nation at war with Great Britain, in our vessels, freely; but abandons all
pretensions even to the freight.

17. Because it permits the British nation to convert provisions, destined to
other nations at war with them, to their own use, on payment of what they may
deem reasonable profit -- a measure, not only injurious to the interest of the
American merchant, but which will prevent our citizens from carrying those
supplies to other countries, which, by the laws of nature and nations, they
have a right to do, without molestation.

18. Because it limits the power of congress, delegated to them by the
constitution, "to regulate our commerce with foreign nations," by prescribing
conditions, and creating impediments to the exercise of that "power."

19. Because it exposes the United States and their commerce to similar
embarrassments from other commercial nations, all of whom will probably
regulate our trade by this partial standard.

And lastly --

Because, in the opinion of the inhabitants of this town, the nature and extent
of the exports of the United States are such, that in all their stipulations
with foreign nations they have it in their power to secure a perfect
reciprocity of intercourse, not only with the home dominions of such nations,
but with all their colonial dependencies.

It is further resolved -- That a copy of the foregoing proceedings, attested
by the town clerk, be immediately transmitted to the president of the United
States, that they may be respectfully submitted to his consideration. And we
earnestly hope, and confidently rely, that his prudence, fortitude and wisdom,
which have more than once been eminently instrumental in the salvation of his
country, will be equally conspicuous on the present occasion; and that the
reasons we have assigned will have their influence to induce him to withhold
his signature from the ratification of this alarming instrument.

On motion of Mr. Austin, a vote of thanks was passed to Stephens Thompson
Mason, one of the senators for Virginia, for his patriotism, in publishing the
treaty, which had afforded the town an opportunity of using their exertions in
endeavoring to prevent the ratification of an instrument so evidently
pernicious to the interests of our nation at large.

ADDRESS Of the Citizens of Portsmouth (New Hampshire) agreed upon at a Meeting
held the 17th of July, 1795. TO GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United
States of America.
SIR,
CONVINCED of your inviolable attachment to the interest and happiness of the
states over which you preside, and your readiness on all occasions to attend to
the just complaints of the people -- We, the citizens of Portsmouth,
constitutionally assembled in public town meeting, to signify our opinions
relative to the treaty between Great Britain and the United States of America,
consented to by a majority of the senate, and recommended for your
ratification, having taken the same into our most serious consideration, beg
leave to express our most hearty disapprobation thereof -- for the following
general reasons, viz.

1. Because that part of the treaty of 1783, securing the payment of debts due
to British subjects, is rigorously enforced; while an important article in the
same treaty, requiring compensation for negroes and other property unjustly
removed, is placed wholly out of view.

2. Because the 9th article confers a privilege on British subjects, which,
though expressed in terms reciprocal, yet from the different circumstances of
the two nations, not only wants an equivalent, but is a direct invasion of the
rights of individual states.

3. Because the bonds required of commanders of privateers, are wholly
inadequate to the purposes for which such provision was made.

4. Because the regulations of trade, commerce and navigation, between the two
parties, contained in the 3d, 13th, 15th and 17th articles, hold out the most
decided advantages to British subjects, and must in their operation prove
destructive to American commerce and navigation.

5. Because by the 18th article, many articles of export are admitted as
contraband of war, which, by our treaties with France, Holland and Sweden, are
declared free; by which means a disposition to aid the British in the
destruction of the natives of those nations is fairly implied.

6. Because all the essential advantages resulting to the United States from a
ratification of the treaty are such as they have a right to demand either by
virtue of the treaty of 1783, or from the principles of common justice, while
many important privileges are allowed the British, without a counter part.

Thus, sir, we have stated a few of the many objections that might be opposed
to the treaty; we forbear entering into a more particular detail, as it would
probably be a repetition of those, which we presume must flow in to you from
every quarter, as the guardian and protector of our rights and liberties, and
who alone in the present instance can avert the many evils that threaten our
ruin.

We therefore most fervently request, that the treaty between Great Britain and
the United States, may not receive your ratification until it undergo such
alterations as shall render it conducive to the interest, honor and lasting
peace of our country.

RESOLUTIONS Of the Citizens of New York, agreed upon at a Meeting held on
Monday the 20th of July, 1795.
RESOLVED, as the sense of this meeting, That the treaty lately negociated
between this country and Great Britain, in the particulars herein after
mentioned, is injurious to the agriculture, manufactures, and commerce of the
United States, derogatory from their national honor, and dangerous to their
welfare, peace, and prosperity.

1. In terminating the differences between the two countries, without reference
to the merits of their respective complaints and pretensions, the vague and
ill-founded claims of Great Britain are placed upon the same footing as the
numerous, important, and just demands of the United States: and while the
former, unsupported as they were, are amply provided for, many of the latter
are either entirely overlooked, or placed upon a footing, from which no
adequate redress or compensation can reasonably be expected.

2. As his Britannic majesty is bound by the treaty of peace to withdraw his
garrisons from the United States with all convenient speed, it was unjust,
after twelve years delay, to allow above eighteen months longer to complete an
evacuation which might be carried into effect in a few weeks.

3. As no enumeration is made of the posts and places from which the British
troops are to be withdrawn, but generally from the boundary lines assigned by
the treaty of peace; and as it appears by the same instrument that these
boundary lines are, in part, at least, to be adjusted hereafter, it is highly
probable if such adjustment does not take place by June, 1796, that it will be
made an excuse for detaining the posts yet longer. Besides, by placing at so
great a distance the contemplated evacuation, it is also much to be feared,
that an immediate peace in Europe will induce Great Britain to disregard this
stipulation altogether.

4. All settlers and traders within the precincts or jurisdictions of these
posts, may remain there, or remove with their effects; they cannot, however, be
compelled to become citizens of, or to take the oath of allegiance to the
United States; but they may do so if they think proper, and they shall make and
declare their election within one year after the evacuation. And all persons
who continue there after the expiration of a year without having declared their
intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic majesty, shall be considered
as having elected to become citizens of the United States. Hence it appears,
that all the settlers, if they arrive but the day before the evacuation, will
be entitled to become American citizens, contrary to the act now in force
respecting naturalization, and contrary to the constitution of the United
States, under which that act was passed; or if they prefer to continue under
their present allegiance, we may have a British colony in the heart of our
country.

5. Although his Britannic majesty agrees to surrender the posts within our
boundary lines, no provision is made for the heavy losses and expenses which
have been incurred by the United States in consequence of their past detention.
Among the former, may be included a long deprivation of an extensive and
valuable territory, and of a lucrative branch of trade. Among the latter, the
burdens which have been imposed upon our citizens to support a ruinous and
expensive Indian war -- to say nothing of the lives which this detention has
cost the United States of America.

6. By the treaty of peace, Great Britain was to cause no destruction, nor to
carry away any negroes, or other American property. In direct violation of this
promise, several thousand negroes were carried off long after the treaty was
known. Many of those negroes were registered with a view to future
compensation. The claim, on this account, which amounted to at least two
millions of dollars, although hitherto a matter of extreme solicitude with
America, has not only been abandoned and consigned to oblivion, but Great
Britain is thereby justified for her inexecution of the treaty of peace, and an
indelible stain is fixed upon our national faith; nor is any provision made for
leaving in those garrisons, the American artillery, agreeable to the treaty of
peace.

7. Many of our seamen have, during the present war, been impressed into the
English service, and compelled to engage on board of ships of war or
privateers, against a nation connected with us by a treaty of alliance.
Although this grievance was universally known and reprobated, the aggression is
passed over in silence, nor is even care taken to guard against the repetition
of so atrocious an outrage.

8. While the subjects of Great Britain are admitted into, and have the use of
all the rivers, ports, and places within the United States, our citizens are
excluded from a reciprocal use of those within the British territories in North
America, by reason of which inequality, it is probable, the whole of the for
trade will continue in the hands of British traders.

9. No duty is ever to be laid by either party on peltries brought by land or
inland navigation. From this article Great Britain alone will derive an
advantage; for, as the clause which regulates the interior traffic and inland
navigation of this country is constructed, and taking into consideration the
nature and extent of the limitations on the side of America, it may be expected
that considerable quantities of this article will be carried by British traders
through the United States, while little, if any, will be carried by our
citizens through the British territory.

10. As it appears from the correspondence between Mr. Jefferson and Mr.
Hammond, that no lawful impediments exist in any state, to the recovery of
British debts contracted before the peace; it was not only improper, but a
reflection on our public faith, to make any provision, contrary to the ordinary
way of judicial proceeding, for ascertaining the compensation due to this
description of creditors. Moreover, if this clause is carried into effect, the
burden of paying these debts will be shared very unequally by the United
States. Those of them, whose citizens have paid their British creditors, will
be bound to contribute to the payment equally with those whose citizens are
delinquent, if any such there be; whereas, by pursuing the common legal remedy,
the debtor alone would be subject to the burden. Nor is the executive conceived
to be competent to pledge the United States to pay the sum awarded by the
commissioners who are to liquidate those claims; -- the constitution having
expressly declared, that no money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in
consequence of appropriations made by law, by which it is presumed must be
intended an act of the legislature, not a treaty of commerce.

11. The claims of American citizens for losses sustained by reason of illegal
captures, are to be taken into consideration at too great a distance of time,
and are placed upon a footing too precarious to expect any compensation. It
appears evidently to have been the policy of Great Britain to procrastinate the
settlement of all her differences with America, until she was at peace with
France; and it has excited general regret, that she has been so successful in
this part of her negotiation. It was expected, that the American envoy was
charged to demand satisfaction from the British government, among other things,
particularly for their wanton and unjust depredations on our commerce. These
spoliations being made in virtue of orders issued by the king in council, and
being manifestly illegal and unjust, restitution became a national concern. It
was well known, that, by the ordinary course of proceeding in the admiralty,
compensation could not be obtained for national injuries -- Yet, instead of
insisting upon a summary compensation from the British government, in the same
mode which had been adopted for satisfying the British creditors, the American
claimant must first undergo a tedious and expensive process, in order to
ascertain a thing already known, that the ordinary course of justice is
incompetent to afford him redress.

12. The treaty pledges the United States to the payment of losses sustained by
reason of certain captures within the limits and jurisdiction of the United
States, and brought into the ports of the same, or made by vessels originally
armed in our ports.

The sum which may be claimed by Great Britain on this account, cannot fail to
be very considerable: But it may well be doubted, whether the United States are
not hereby pledged beyond the obligation which the laws of nations impose upon
a neutral country.

13. By permitting British subjects to hold lands which they have already
purchased within the United States, a right is assumed by the executive, of
depriving the several states of the forfeitures which may have already accrued
to them by the alienism of such purchasers; and even of divesting American
citizens of the land which they may have purchased, in consequence of such
forfeitures. The policy, also, of permitting aliens to hold real property, may
be doubted -- Nor is there any real reciprocity in this permission, none, or
very few American citizens having bought lands on so precarious a tenure in
England.

14. The same want of reciprocity may be discovered in that clause of the
treaty which interdicts the confiscation or sequestering of debts due to
individuals, or moneys held in the public funds, and in banks: However
impolitic or unjust it may be, in ordinary cases, to exercise this power, yet,
as it is strictly permitted by the laws of nations, and may sometimes be
exerted for the prevention of a war, by deterring a nation from further
aggression, or to bring an enemy to reasonable terms of accommodation, and has
been actually exercised by Great Britain in her present contest, it is
impolitic, in the extreme, to pledge the public faith never to exercise it upon
any occasion, or under any circumstance whatsoever, especially to a nation who
can give us no equivalent for consenting to this restriction, and which, of all
others, might be the most sensibly affected by the use of it.

15. Our commerce to India is much circumscribed by the treaty. We are excluded
altogether from the coasting trade, and laid under other unusual and new
restrictions. It is true, that this commerce has hitherto been carried on only
by permission -- But it is presumed, that the advantage which Great Britain has
experienced during twelve years, will induce her to permit its continuance
without our unnecessarily consenting to these restraints. And if we are
excluded altogether from the British settlements in India, other ports, equally
advantageous, are open to us.

16. By the constitution, congress are to regulate our commerce with foreign
nations. This treaty, if ratified, will not only infringe this power, but very
greatly shackle our government, in their future regulations of trade.

It must always have been a matter of much solicitude with Great Britain, to
prevent us from passing such discriminating acts as circumstances might render
proper -- And America, situated as she is, should not lightly part with such an
invaluable prerogative.

17. As a neutral and commercial people, and likely, with common prudence, to
continue at peace with all the world, the United States should never
voluntarily consent to any article prohibiting free vessels from making free
goods. This is the case with the present treaty -- by this concession we not
only depart from a principle adopted by several maritime powers, and which
congress, under this consideration, frequently recognized and always pursued,
in their intercourse with other nations; but we put it out of our power to
receive any advantage from the modern law of nations referred to in the
president's proclamation of neutrality, and are even precluded from the
benefits of the contrary stipulations which have been carefully inserted in our
treaties with other nations.

18. In ascertaining what articles shall be deemed contraband, several are
comprehended which were never so deemed, and are expressly declared not to be
so, in our treaties with other nations, particularly shiptimber, tar, hemp,
sails, and copper. Indeed it is difficult to say what will not be deemed
contraband, as, after a very long enumeration, it is added, that generally
whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels, unwrought iron and
fir-planks only excepted, shall be considered in that light. It may be observed
here, that Great Britain, in her treaty with France, has declared these very
articles NOT to be contraband.

19. Vessels, laden with provisions, may be seized under the frivolous pretext
of the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which they may be
regarded as contraband. It is true that a reasonable mercantile profit is to be
allowed; but independent of the difficulty of ascertaining what such a profit
is, of which the British must judge, all the profits contemplated on the
return-cargo, will be lost; and our citizens, to the great injury of
agriculture, will be discouraged from the exportation of grain and other
provision, which, in time of war, must be an object of the first magnitude.

20. Great Britain being actually at war, derives an immediate benefit from all
those articles which refer to that condition, while it is problematical,
whether the United States, even when at war, can at all be benefited by these
stipulations. Some equivalent might, therefore, reasonably have been expected
for the constant advantages which result to Great Britain from those parts of
the treaty, which contemplate a war between either party and some other power.

21. The treaty is principally calculated to promote the interests of Great
Britain, pending her present conflict with France, to increase her resources,
and enable her to prosecute the war with greater vigor and success. The
citizens of America are thus exposed to the imputation of the basest
ingratitude, if not breach of says, toward a generous and gallantally, to
whom they are largely indebted for their freedom and independence, and to whose
victories is to be ascribed the peace which they now enjoy.

22. The whole treaty may be regarded as peculiarly hostile to the French
republic, and unless those who are at the head of her affairs, conduct
themselves with uncommon moderation, a war with France can hardly fail to be
one of the consequences of a ratification.

23. The restraint upon our citizens not to accept commissions in the army or
navy of foreign powers is impolitic, as it deprives them of a mean of acquiring
military knowledge, and that in a way which has never been esteemed illegal or
disreputable. It is also unprecedented; for nothing is more common than for the
citizens of one country to serve in the army or navy of another, for the sake
of honor, instruction or reward. The United States, in particular, should
encourage such of their youth as are ambitious of military glory, to a service
of this kind. In time of war it is not easy to calculate the advantages which
might be derived from it.

24. However proper it may be to discourage neutral citizens from engaging on
board of the privateers, it may certainly be questioned, whether the right of
defining and punishing piracy does not belong exclusively to the legislature of
the United States. Although a similar provision is found in our treaties with
other nations, it will be recollected, that in congress at that time, and not
in the executive, was vested the right of making treaties.

25. This treaty would be dangerous as a precedent: for other nations, with
whom we may wish to make commercial compacts, will expect us to submit to
similar embarrassments, and to have our trade regulated by this partial
standard.

26. There is good reason to believe, that the treaty is disagreeable to a very
great majority of the people of the United States; and that even those who do
not publicly remonstrate against its ratification, from an opinion that it is
the proper province of the executive to determine on it, sincerely wish it may
not take place.

27. The disadvantages already enumerated are the more striking, because, from
the nature and extent of their exports, the United States have it in their
power, in all their commercial arrangements with foreign nations, to secure a
perfect reciprocity, not only with their European, but also with their foreign,
possessions, as has indeed been offered to them on the part of the French
republic.

28. Besides the objections already stated, it must be remarked that the whole
treaty abounds with sentences whose meaning is equivocal, and that too much
room is left for doubt, construction and future discussions; whereas every
ambiguity in an instrument of this kind, with so powerful a nation, ought to
have been studiously avoided.

Resolved further, that a copy of the preceding resolutions be signed by the
chairman, and transmitted by express to the president of the United States, who
is hereby informed, that the citizens of New York, assembled upon this
occasion, respectfully hope, that he will please to take the same into his most
serious consideration -- they assure him that they rely with great confidence
on his known patriotism, wisdom, and independence, in the exercise of the
prerogative vested in him, and that nothing but the importance of the occasion
should have induced them to obtrude their sentiments on him. Influenced by no
other motive than a zeal for their country's good, they ardently hope that the
reasons herein assigned, with those which may be offered by their fellow
citizens of other states, added to such as his own good sense will not fail to
suggest, will prevail upon him to withhold his assent from an instrument which
has spread a general alarm throughout the United States, as invading the
constitution and legislative authority of the country; as abandoning their
important and well-founded claims against the Brtish government; as imposing
unjust and impolitic restraints on their commerce; as injurious to agriculture;
as conceding, without an equivalent important advantages, to Great Britain; as
hostile and ungrateful to France; as committing our peace with that great
republic; as unequal in every respect to America; as hazarding her internal
peace and prosperity, and as derogatory from her sovereignty and independence.

By Order of the Meeting. W. S. SMITH, Chairman.

MEMORIAL Of the Citizens of Philadelphia, the Northern Liberties, and the
District of Southwark, agreed upon at a numerous Meeting, held in the
State-house Yard, on Saturday, the 25th of July, 1795. To GEORGE WASHINGTON,
President of the United States. The Memorial of the Citizens of Philadelphia,
the Northern Liberties, and the District of Southwark, in the State of
Pennsylvania,
Respectfully sh^^^ --
THAT your memorialists, sincerely and affectionately attached to you, from a
sense of the important services which you have rendered to the United States,
and a conviction of the purity of the motives that will for ever regulate your
public administration; do, on an occasion in which they feel themselves deeply
interested, address you as a Friend and Patriot: as a Friend, who will never
take offense at what is well intended; and as a Patriot, who will never reject
what may be converted to the good of your country.

That your memorialists entertain a proper respect for your constitutional
authority; and, whatever may be the issue of the present momentous question,
they will faithfully acquiesce in the regular exercise of the delegated powers
of the government; but they trust, that in the formation of a compact, which is
to operate upon them, and upon their posterity, in their most important
internal, as well as external relations, which, in effect, admits another
government to cont^oul the legislative functions of the union; and which, if
found upon experience, to be detrimental, can only be repealed by soliciting
the assent, or provoking the hostilities of a foreign power; you will not deem
it improper or officious in them, thus anxiously, but respectfully, to present
a solemn testimonial of their public opinion, feelings and interest.

That, under these preliminary acknowledgments of the duty and of the design of
your memorialists, the following objections to a ratification of the treaty
lately concluded between Lord Grenville and Mr. Jay, are submitted with
implicit confidence, to your consideration.

The treaty is objected to,

1. Because it does not provide for a fair and effectual settlement of the
differences that previously subsisted between the United States and Great
Britain -- inasmuch as it postpones the surrender, and affords no compensation
for the detention, of the western posts -- inasmuch as it cedes, without any
equivalent, an indefinite extent of territory to the settlers under British
titles, within the precincts and jurisdiction of those posts -- inasmuch as it
waves a just claim for the value of the negroes who were carried off at the
close of the war, in violation of a positive compact -- and inasmuch as it
refers all the hopes of indemnity, for the recent spoliations committed on the
commerce of the United States, to an equivocal, expensive, tedious, and
uncertain process.

2. Because by the treaty, the federal government accedes to restraints upon
the American commerce and navigation, internal as well as external, that
embrace no principle of real reciprocity, and are inconsistent with the rights,
and destructive to the interests, of a^ independent nation -- inasmuch as it
unreasonably fetters the intercourse with the West Indies, with India, and with
the American lakes, by means of the navigable rivers belonging to the British
-- inasmuch as, in many instances, it circumscribes the navigation of the
United States to a particular voyage -- and, inasmuch as some of our staple
commodities (exempted by the treaties with France, Holland, Prussia, and
Sweden) it makes liable to confiscation, as contraband; and others (exempted by
the law of nations) it makes liable to seizure, upon payment of an arbitrary
price, as articles useful to the enemies of Great Britain.

3. Bccause the treaty is destructive to the domestic independence and
prosperity of the United States -- inasmuch as it admits aliens, professing a
foreign allegiance, to the permanent and transmissible rights of property,
peculiarly belonging to a citizen -- and inasmuch as it enables Great Britain
to draw an invidious and dangerous line of circumvallation round the territory
of the union, by her fleets on the Atlantic, and by her settlements from Nova
Scotia to the mouth of the Mississippi.

4. Because the treaty surrenders certain inherent powers of an independent
government, which are essential, in the circumstances of the United States, to
their safety and defense; and which might, on great emergencies, be
successfully employed to enforce the neglected claims of justice, without
making the last, dreadful appeal to arms; -- inasmuch as the right of
sequestration; the right of regulating commerce, in favor of a friendly, and
against a rival, power; and the right of suspending a commercial intercourse,
with an inimical nation, are voluntarily abandoned.

5. Because the treaty is an infraction of the rights of friendship, gratitude,
and alliance, which the republic of France may justly claim from the United
States; and deprives the United States of the most powerful means to secure the
good will and good offices of other nations; -- inasmuch as it alters, during a
war, the relative situation of the different nations, advantageously to Great
Britain, and prejudicially to the French republic; -- inasmuch as it is in
manifest collision with several articles of the American treaty with France; --
and inasmuch as it grants to Great Britain certain high, dangerous, and
exclusive privileges.

And your memorialists, having this, upon general ground, concisely, but
explicitly, avowed their wishes and opinions; and forbearing a minute
specification of the many other objections that occur; -- conclude with an
assurance, that by refusing to ratify the projected treaty, you will, according
to their best information and judgment, at once evince an exalted attachment to
the principles of the constitution of the United States, and an undiminished
zeal to advance the prosperity and happiness of your constituents.

Signed by order of the General Meeting at Philadelphia, the 25th July, 1795.

W. SHIPPEN, junr. Chairman.
COMMITTEE.
Thomas McKean, Charles Pettit, Thomas Lee Shippen, Stephen Girard, A. J.
Dallas, John Swanwick, Moses Levy, Blair McClenachan, Abraham Coats, F. A.
Mublenburg, John Hunn, John Barker, William Coats.




Charleston, July 19, 1795.
REPORT Of the Committee chosen by Ballot of the Citizens of Charleston (South
Carolina) in Pursuance of a Resolution of a General Meeting of the Citizens in
St. Michael's Church, on Thursday, the 16th of July, 1795.
THE committee to whom was referred, by their fellow citizens, the
consideration of the impending treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation,
between his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, report --

That they have attentively considered the said treaty, and are of opinion,
that it has not that re^iprocity which ought to be the basis of all contracts
-- that it contains no provisions in favor of the United States, in any manner
proportionate to the various concessions made to Great Britain; and restricts
congress in the exercise of its constitutional power of regulating trade, and
making such discriminations in favor of other foreign nations, as may be most
beneficial.

From many well-founded objections, your committee beg leave to select and
submit the following:

The first article, though usual in treaties, would be particularly mischievous
in this, inasmuch as it permits the unconditional return, to our country, of
all persons who were proscribed during the late war, though their return is
repugnant to our laws, and to the feelings of our injured fellow citizens, and
though the state legislatures have already proceeded as far in re-admitting
such persons, as they judged consistent with good faith, or sound policy.

The second article sanctions the continuance of an injury, which, in violation
of the treaty of peace, has already existed eleven years: it either establishes
a British colony within our limits, with peculiar privileges, or, in case the
inhabitants of such colony choose to become citizens of the United States, it
gives the privileges of citizens of these states to a number of men, who have
been their most bitter and irreconcilable enemies; who, in conjunction with
the savages, have lately waged war against us, and who, from their local
situation in the vicinity of the Indian tribes, conveniently may, and from
their disposition (as far as we can judge from their past conduct) would be
inclined to join with them, in acting against us on any favorable emergency.

The third article gives to the British, what to them, with their capital, will
be nearly equivalent to a monopoly of the trade with the Indians, and with our
western territories, and opens a door for smuggling on an extensive scale, to
the great injury of our revenue.

By the sixth article, the United States undertake to make good such losses on
debts, to British creditors, as have been occasioned by legal impediments, to
their recovery, created by any of the states, in violation (as is alleged) of
the treaty of peace; although the first infraction of that treaty, was made on
the part of Great Britain, by carrying away from these states many thousands of
negroes, and a considerable quantity of valuable property, whereby individuals
were deprived of the means of discharging their debts; although the United
States have incurred an immense expense in maintaining an army for the defense
of their northern and western territory; an expense actually occasioned in
consequence of the detention of the western posts; and although no compensation
is stipulated to be made to the citizens, whose negroes, and other property,
have been illegally carried off; their right of recovery being passed over in
silence. Thus the United States are compelled to make ample reparation, for the
only infringement of the treaty, which is charged on any of their citizens;
whilst neither the union, nor its citizens, have even a promise of
compensation, for the many injuries sustained by violations of the said treaty,
on the part of Great Britain.

This article, moreover, erects a tribunal new and unknown to our constitution,
inasmuch as it transfers the right of deciding on the claims of British
creditors, from the courts and juries of America, to commissioners; a majority
of whom may be British subjects, and by their decisions, tax the revenue of
these states at pleasure.

The seventh article makes restitution for the extensive spoliations lately
committed on our commerce, remote, expensive and uncertain; though justice, and
the circumstances of our injured citizens demanded that it should have been
immediate and complete; while, on the other hand, full compensation, on certain
fixed principles, is stipulated to be made by the United States, for all
property which has been taken by privateers, equipped in our ports, or which
has been captured within our limits.

The twelfth article gives us no other privilege than that of carrying in
American vessels (not exceeding seventy tons burden) such articles of the
growth, manufacture, or production of these states, as are not, and shall not
be prohibited by Great Britain, from being carried to her West India Islands,
and of bringing from thence, in such American vessels, such produce of those
islands, as may be carried from thence to the United States in British vesels:
-- In return for this privilege (which, restricted as it is, is of no value) we
are made to surrender the right of exporting in our own vessels, to any part of
the world, melasses, sugar, coffee and cocoa, whether the productions of the
British islands, or of any other place, whilst the British, and all other
foreign powers, have a right to send those very articles, in their vessels,
from our ports. -- We are precluded from exporting in our own vessels, not only
foreign cotton, but the cotton of our own growth, although the privilege of
exporting that article, from hence, in their own vessels, is given to the
British. It precludes us from supplying our allies, the French, with several
articles, which they consider as of prime necessity, and which, in the existing
state of things, they cannot (without great risk and difficulty) obtain from
their West India islands, but through the medium of neutral powers, more
particularly the United States. In fact, it has placed the commodities, above
mentioned, on a footing far worse for us than if they were contraband of war;
inasmuch as contraband articles are only prohibited from being carried to
powers at war: but these articles cannot, under the restrictions of the treaty,
be carried by vessels of the United States, to any nation, either in time of
war, or of peace.

Although it is recommended, that a suspension of this article should precede
the ratification of the treaty; yet it having been also recommended to the
president to proceed, without delay, to further negociations with his Britannic
majesty, on the subject of trade to his West India islands, and on the terms
and conditions mentioned in this article, your committee have, therefore,
thought proper to submit these observations on it.

The seventeenth article, makes a formal recognition of the right of
Great Britain to search American vessels, for property on board such vessels,
suspected to belong to any power, with which she is at war: it authorizes her
to carry into her ports, every American vessel, which the officers of her men
of war, and privateers, may suspect to have such property on board: and engages
to deliver up all such property, though of our friends and allies, which shall
be on board: whereas France, and every nation, with which we have a treaty,
have expressly declared, that free ships shall make free goods, and protect
property on board of them, to whomsoever it may belong.

By authorizing such searches, a general search warrant is given to British
privateers. This article establishes principles as the law of nations, which
justify many of the late spoliations committed by British vessels of war, on
the commerce of these states; and of course authorize the repetition of such
spolia^^on, which would be extremely detrimental to (...) commerce. The capture
and detention of American, by British vessels, under the authority of this
article, will put American seamen wholly in the power of the British; yet no
provision is made to protect and secure them from being impressed into the
British service, though daily experience evinces the necessity of requiring a
clear and unequivocal stipulation for the protection and security of that
valuable class of men.

By the first section of the eighteenth article, all timber, for ship building,
tar, rosin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp, cordage, and in general whatever may
serve directly for the equipment of vessels (unwrought iron and fir planks only
excepted) are declared to be contraband, and just objects of confiscation --
whereas those articles, in all our other treaties, are expressly acknowledged
not to be contraband, but free. Thus America concedes to Great Britain. what
she has never conceded to any other power.

With respect to the second section of the eighteenth article, an attempt is
made to bring even provisions under the head of contraband. This, if effected,
in conjunction with the preceding clause, will comprehend as contraband, almost
all the important staples of these states. Such an extension of contraband must
prove ruinous to our commerce, especially as Great Britain affects to hold
whole countries in a state of blockade.

The twenty-third, twenty-fourth, and twenty-fifth articles, have a tendency to
embroil us with the French republic, and in the existing state of things, to
make our sea port towns scenes of riot and bloodshed. These articles also tend
to make a common cause between the United States and Great Britain, to oppress
and distress our allies.

Upon the whole, your committee apprehend that great evils would result to
these states from this treaty, if ratified, they therefore, recommend that an
address be prepared, and presented to the president of the United States,
praying that he will not ratify the said treaty.

The above report was agreed to, and transmitted to the president.

RESOLUTIONS Adopted at a Meeting of the Justices of the County, and Aldermen
of the Borough, of Norfolk, on Saturday the 11th of July, 1795.
RESOLVED, That Stephens Thompson Mason is entitled to the thanks of this
meeting, and of every good citizen and real friend to the constitution of the
United States, for his patriotic and independent conduct in rending the veil of
senatorial secrecy, and thereby disclosing to the world the treaty lately
concluded on by John Jay, and the ministers of the king of Great Britain,
touching the dearest rights and most essential interests of a free people.

Resolved, That it be recommended to THE PEOPLE of the towns of Norfolk and
Portsmouth, and of the county of Norfolk, to assemble at the courthouse of
said county, on the first Wednesday in August next, to take into-consideration
the treaty aforesaid, and the propriety of addressing the president of the
United States on that subject.

Resolved, That the above Resolutions be published.

CHARLES CONNER, Chairman.

RESOLUTIONS Of the Citizens of Baltimore, adopted at a ^^merous Meeting, held
at the Courthouse, on the 27th of July, 1795.
RESOLVED, unanimously, That the citizens now assembled, do disapprove of the
treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, lately negociated with Great
Britain, and assented to by the senate of the United States.

Resolved, unanimously, as the sense of this meeting, That an address be
presented to the president of the United States, expressive of their
disapprobation of said treaty, and requesting that it may not be ratified.

Resolved, unanimously, That the thanks of this meeting be presented to the
virtuous minority in the senate, for their opposition to the proposed treaty,
and to Stephens Thompson Mason, for the patriotic service rendered his country,
by a disclosure of its contents.

NEW JERSEY PETITION. To GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States of
America. The Petition and Remonstrance of the Subscribers, Citizens of the
State of New Jersey,
Respectfully show --
THAT your petitioners, sincerely attached to the interests of their country,
have read, with attention, the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation,
between his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, entered into at
London, on the 19th day of November last, which, it appears, has been in part
assented to by two-thirds of the senate -- and, upon due consideration (without
troubling you with a detail of particular objections) would beg leave most
respectfully to suggest, as our opinion, That the said treaty does not afford
to the citizens of these states, such terms as they ought to accept: and that,
if finally ratified, it will be a source of many disadvantages to the commerce,
agriculture, and national prosperity of the union, and of great discontent and
uneasiness in the minds of the citizens thereof. -- In addition to this opinion
(which your petitioners believe to be the prevailing sentiment of the citizens
of New Jersey, and, as far as information has reached us, of the United States
at large) a sincere respect and esteem for you, flowing from a recollection of
numerous and eminent services, which gratitude has indelibly engraven on our
hearts, renders it a duty incumbent on us to represent the same for your
information, lest our silence on the occasion, might be construed into an
approbation of the said treaty.

We therefore pray, That, so far as the same may be consistent with that
discretion which we conceive is entirely vested in you by the constitution,
your sanction may be withheld, until more equitable terms are acce^^^ to on the
part of Great Britain.

RESOLUTIONS Adopted at a general Meeting of the Citizens of Trenton, and its
Vicinity, convened at the State-house, on Wednesday the 29th of July, 1795,
pursuant to public Notice given, for the Purpose of taking into Consideration,
Measures proper to be pursued upon the Subject of the pending Treaty between
Great Britain and the United States.
1. RESOLVED (without a dissenting voice) That we entirely and religiously
concur with our brethren of Philadelphia, that it is the constitutional right
and patriotic duty of the citizens of the United States, to express, on every
important occasion, the public sense of public measures,

2. Resolved (without a dissenting voice) That it is at this time, in a
peculiar manner, the bounden duty of every friend to his country to express the
public opinion upon an instrument so extraordinary and so momentous in its
nature as the treaty of amity, navigation and commerce, lately projected
between Lord Grenville on the part of Great Britain, and John Jay, envoy
extraordinary on the part of the United States; degrading to the national
honor, dangerous to the public interest, and destructive of the agricultural
and commercial views of the United States.

3. Resolved (without a dissenting voice) That the citizens of Trenton and its
vicinity, having heard a full discussion upon the subject of the treaty, do,
upon the most cool and dispassionate consideration, disapprove of the said
treaty, and hope, by this public expression of their sentiments, to prevent, as
far as possible, its ratification by our supreme executive.

4. And whereas the great bulk of the citizens of this state reside in small
towns and villages, or on farms, at a distance from each other, and cannot
therefore, without much inconvenience, assemble in town meetings or otherwise,
in any considerable numbers, to express their sentiments on the important
subject now under consideration, it was deemed highly proper and necessary that
the said citizens should adopt the mode they have, of doing it by way of
petition and remonstrance to the president -- Resolved (with only three
dissenting voices) That the petition and remonstrance See page 182.
originated in this city on the eighth day of July instant, and since
circulated through the state, was and is eligible, respectful, decent and
proper, expressive of our sentiments and entitled to our entire approbation,
set on foot, no doubt, with purest intentions and calculated to produce the
most happy consequences: And in order that they may be more generally dispersed
than has yet been practicable -- It is further Resolved (the first impression
of the said petitions being run out) That two hundred copies more be
immediately printed and distributed under the direction of the chairman of this
meeting.

5. Resolved (without a dissenting voice) That the ten senators, who voted
against the ratification of the said treaty, thereby gave a proof of their
independence, patriotism and integrity, and are entitled to the future
confidence of the citizens of the United States, and in a particular manner to
the thanks of this meeting.

6. Resolved (without a dissenting voice) That Stephens Thompson Mason, one of
the senators for the state of Virginia, is entitled to the highest veneration,
respect and esteem of his countrymen, for the opportunity he has afforded them
of seeing the projected treaty, and of exercising their constitutional right of
expressing their opinion thereon, and of using their every possible endeavor
and influence to prevent its ratification, -- a thing but too much to be
feared, if the unjustifiable secrecy intended by a majority of the senate had
been strictly adhered to.

7. Resolved, That James Mott, George Anderson, Joseph Milnor, Joseph Brumly,
Richard Throckmorton, Major P. Hunt, Gershom Craft, Randle Riekey, Captain
William Smith (of Hopewell) Colonel Joseph Brearly, William S. Moore, David
Snowden, Jeremiah Woolsey, John Potts, and Hill Runyan, be a committee, for the
purpose of drawing up and reporting resolutions containing the reasons which
influence this meeting to disapprove and condemn the said treaty.

The whole business of the meeting was conducted and concluded with the most
perfect harmony, good order and decorum.

Signed at the Request of the Meeting.

M. FURMAN, Chairman. Attest, JNO. W. VANCLEYE, Secretary.


The Citizens of Flemington (New Jersey) and its Vicinity, having seen the form
of a Petition See page 182.
to the President of the United States, praying that his Sanction might be
withheld from the Treaty agreed to by John Jay, Esquire on behalf of the United
States, with his Britannic Majesty, met on Tuesday Evening last, and, after
appointing Mr. Joseph Atkinson, Chairman,
RESOLVED,

1. THAT they have a high opinion of the ability and integrity of John Jay, Esquire
and are convinced that his attachment to his country induced him to contend for
the most equitable and advantageous terms that could be obtained.

2. That they entirely approve of the conduct of the two thirds of the senate
with respect to the treaty, having full reliance on their wisdom and patriotism.

3. That the ability, tried virtue and magnanimity of our first magistrate,
does not require petitioning to do what is just, wise, and political.

4. That the promotion of such petitions, has a tendency to stir up the minds
of the people to anarchy, disorder, and confusion.

5. That the said form of petition be consigned to the element most sigurative
of the disposition of self-created society patriots -- which was done, with
general huzzas for the executive of the United States.

By Order of the Chairman,

LUCIUS W. STOCKTON, Secretary
Flemington, July 23d, 1795.
TO THE CITIZENS OF NEW YORK.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
WE perceive, with pain and regret, that you are urged, with much intemperance
and heat, to meet tomorrow, not to consider and discuss the treaty lately
negociated with Great Britain, and to express the conviction which shall arise
from a fair examination of its merits, but to condemn and oppose it as a thing
prejudged.

You are told that it is ignominious and disgraceful; that it surrenders rights
and privileges ruinous to our commerce -- that it yields advantages which we
ought never to part with but with our lives; that it makes sacrifices for which
we have no equivalent; in short, that it settles principles dangerous to the
liberties and happiness of the people, and destructive of our freedom and
independence.

These are strong charges indeed against the treaty -- If they can be made out,
it certainly deserves the reprobation of every good citizen; and no man,
faithful to the interests of his country, ought to withhold the expression of
his abhorrence of it.

But ought we hastily to believe that such charges can be well founded? Can we
easily be persuaded, that the citizen who negociated the treaty, and who on all
former occasions has given decided proof of fidelity and patriotism, could of a
sudden become so base a betrayer of the rights and interests of his country?
Can we imagine that two-thirds of the representatives of the United States, in
their senate, would have sanctioned so foul a treason? Can we think our
interposition necessary to prevent the ratification of such a treaty by that
wise and virtuous man, that long and well-tried servant of his country, in whom
the executive authority of the United States is deposited?

No, Fellow citizens! it is impossible that the frightful picture given of the
treaty can be a just one. -- Such charges are better proofs of the intemperance
of those who make them, than of the defects of the treaty.

You cannot but be sensible that the treaty, if such as it is represented, must
affect deeply the interests of the mercantile class. You cannot doubt that the
merchants are attentive to their interests, and you can hardly suppose that
they are ignorant of them.

For our part, we prosess to you frankly, that we have not yet been able to
discover in the treaty, those hideous features which are alleged to exist; yet
we are disposed to meet the rest of our fellow citizens and to promote with
them a fair and rational discussion of the subject. We trust, however, that
they respect themselves too much not to make this a necessary preliminary to
their pronouncing an opinion -- and that they will unite with us in rejecting
any propositions which shall be attempted to be imposed upon them without due
investigation.

Meeting them on this basis, our ears will be open to truth, and we shall be
ready, according to the best of our understandings, to concur in any measures
which can be shown to be consistent with the true interests of our country. We
doubt not, you will all bring with you the same dispositions, and we earnestly
recommend a general attendance upon the occasion, in order that the true sense
of the city may appear.

By Order of a Meeting of a Number of Merchants, at the Tontine Coffee-House,
July 17th, 1795. JAMES WATSON, Chairman.

At a special Meeting of the Corporation of the New York Chamber of Commerce,
held at the Tontine Coffee-House, on Tuesday the 21st of July, 1795, -- The
late Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation having been previously read, the
following Resolutions, with the Preamble thereto, were proposed, and adopted,
viz.
WHEREAS, the treaty between the United States and Great Britain, lately
sanctioned by the senate, has been made the subject of public discussion, in
the warmth of which, misconstructions and misrepresentations have contributed
to excite and irritate the public mind.

And, Whereas a disposition has appeared, in certain instances, to influence
the executive against the ratification of the said treaty, whereby the
tranquillity and prosperity of our country may be endangered: -- therefore,

Resolved, as the opinion of the corporation, That the said treaty,
collectively considered, contains as many features of reciprocity, as, upon
contemplating the relative interests of the respective countries, could
reasonably have been expected. And that the precarious privileges of the
American trade to Great Britain and her colonies, are, by this treaty, changed
into permanent rights.

Resolved, That the provisions in the said treaty, for a quiet surrender of the
western posts, and an amicable adjustment of the British debts, a fair
compensation for the spoliations upon our commerce, and for the prevention of
future depredations, are wisely arranged for the great purposes of national
justice, and to preserve the blessings of peace.

Resolved, That if the treaty should fail to be ratified, we should apprehend a
state of things which might lead to hostilities; in which event, our navigation
(now dispersed in all quarters of the globe) may be intercepted, our
under-writers injured, our commerce abridged, our produce reduced to little
value, our artizans, mechanics and laborers deprived of employment, our
revenue diminished, and the lives of our fellow citizens sacrificed.

Resolved, That although the ratification of this treaty, for the foregoing
reasons, appears to us, under all circumstances, expedient; yet we cheerfully
rest it where it is placed by the constitution: in full confidence, that the
wisdom and firmness under which our independence has been achieved, and our
progress to wealth, power, and respectability promoted beyond a parallel, will,
in this instance, determine for the best interests of this country.

Resolved, That the president of this chamber cause a copy of these resolutions
to be certified by the secretary and transmitted without delay to the president
of the United States.

By Order of the Corporation of the New York Chamber of Commerce.

C. SANDS, President. A true Extract from the Minutes. Attest, WM. LAIGHT,
Secretary.


FROM THE PHILADELPHIA GAZETTE.
Sunbury, July 20, 1795. MR. BROWN,
I OBSERVE in the newspapers, that it seems to be universally taken for
granted, that the president has a negative on the proceedings of the senate,
respecting the treaty with Great Britain. We are informed, that petitions are
framing, to be presented to him, to withhold his assent to the treaty; and that
wagers, to a considerable amount, have been actually laid, that he will accede
to it, or reject (...) according as the wishes or principles of persons have
preponderated on the subject. I confess, sir, I have been a little surprised at
all this; because I by no means think the position an obvious and undeniable
one, that the president has a controuling power, in the present stage of the
business, on what the senate have done.

The words of the constitution are, "he (the president) shall have power, by
and with the advice and consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided
two-thirds of the senators present, concur; and he shall nominate, and by and
with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other
public ministers, and consuls, judges of the supreme court, and all other
officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise
provided for, and which shall be established by law."

From these expressions it is clear, the president can make no treaty, nor
appoint an ambassador, without the consent and advice of the senate. It is,
therefore, of great importance to ascertain the time when this consent and
advice of the senate is to be given, and the force and meaning of the
expressions. In the usual and ordinary method of appointing officers, the
moment the senate consent to the nomination made by the president, and advise
him to make the appointment, it is allowed, on all hands, he is
constitutionally obliged to appoint such officer. The senate indeed make use of
the words, " consent and advise," in reply to the president's nomination of
persons to fill offices. But these words are the technical and constitutional
language prescribed to them; and while they deprive him of all option as to the
appointment, do clearly imply an obligation to appoint on the part of the
president. In the case of a treaty being laid before the senate, and their
giving their consent, and advising the president to ratify it, I can see no
reason why a similar construction should not be adopted. The words are the same
in both cases, except that in the appointment of officers, the word "nominate,"
is necessarily introduced. The treaty, in the first instance, is made by the
president -- and he may therefore be considered as having constitutionally used
that power of making treaties, with the consent and advice of the senate, which
the constitution has given him. His laying it afterward before the senate for
their advice and consent, is not merely with a view to consult them or take
their opinion. If this were the case, the senate of the United States would be
a collection of mere ciphers. If the president can, in this manner, put his
veto on their "advice and consent" (words which I apprehend are equivalent to
an order or command) it is evident, that instead of the senate having any real
power in the making of treaties, they will not have even the shadow of it. The
president will be the sole maker of all treaties: and should it happen, which
is very possible, that the senate unanimously consent to a treaty and advise
the ratification of it, still the president may refuse to follow their advice
and overruled the opinion of the whole senate. However clearly and unanimously
they may concur in the idea, that the treaty is highly beneficial to their
country, yet the opinion of a single man is sufficient to outweigh the united
judgment of the whole senate on this most interesting question. This doctrine
does not look very republican; and seems to clash with the general principles
of the constitution, which has guarded, with extreme caution, against trusting
power in the hands of one, in opposition to the wishes and opinions of many.

Let it be supposed, the president receives a treaty from a foreign minister,
and that he cordially disapproves of it. The senate, however, on his laying it
before them, think quite differently, and unanimously give their consert to it,
and advise him to ratify it.

In this case, pray, Mr. Brown, whose opinion is to decide the question? Is the
president, by refusing to ratify the treaty, to defeat the wishes of the United
States, as expressed by the united voice of the whole national body? I confess,
sir, I extremely doubt whether this be the genuine construction of the federal
constitution -- it would rather seem, the power he has of making treaties, with
the advice and consent of two-thirds of the senators, should be deemed to
extend no further than his making them, in the first instance, through the
medium or channel of the foreign minster, and that, when laid before senate,
their opinion is final thereon.

This construction will satisfy the words of the constitution, without making a
cipher of the president on the one hand, or of the whole senatorial body on the
other. The president, according to this idea, will possess the power of making
treaties, but not to the exclusion of the senate. And the senate, by their
"consent and advice," will possess the ultimatum on the subject of foreign
treaties, which the constitution has vested in them.

What are the forms of making treaties by the executive of the United States, I
am not certainly informed; but have understood, he sends abroad the minister,
without previously communicating to the senate the instructions given to him. A
treaty, therefore, made under such circumstances, may, with great propriety, be
viewed as one made by the president within the words of the constitution. And
it would be strange to say, that he should not only have the first concoction
of the treaty, but the ultimate power of rejecting it, in opposition to the
senate; making them a parcel of non-entities. And on the other hand, even if
the instructions for the use of the ambassador, down up by the president, are
laid before the senate, and approved of by them, I do not see how, this could
alter the case; because the president, by such act, has exercised his power in
making the treaty, and therefore can never afterward control the vote of the
senate, approving or rejecting such treaty.

In short, Mr. Brown, the construction that will be most agreeable to the
scope, spirit, and genius of the constitution, and at all times hereafter safe
for the United States (for too much power cannot be trusted to the present
illustrious character who fills the office of the executive) will be, to
consider the president's laying a treaty before the senate, in the same light
as his nominating a gentleman to an office. In this latter case, their consent
and advice is equivalent to a command, and carries with it a constitutional
obligation to appoint the person nominated. In like manner, their consent to a
treaty made by the president, and their advice to him to ratify it, are final,
conclusive, and obligatory upon him. In both cases, he is contemplated by the
constitution as the agent, the instrument, or prime mover in the business. But
it is the senate, strictly speaking, who make the treaty, and appoint the
officer, through the means and by the assistance of the president; who
possesses the power indeed of bringing the objects into the view and
contemplation of that body -- and that is all.

A FEDERALIST.

FROM THE (NEW YORK) MINERVA. Vindication of the Treaty Of Amity, Commerce, and
Navigation, with Great Britain.
No. 1
THE treaty between Great Britain and America has been a matter of great public
expectation, and it has been rendered more interesting by the time and manner
in which the negotiation originated.

Before the revolution in America, the people of the then colonies were under
the government of Great Britain; they considered themselves as children of the
same family; their trade was almost limited to the British dominions; the
Americans had estates in Great Britain, and moneys in (...) funds; an extensive
commerce had created innumerable debts and connections between the two
countries, which could not be at once discharged and dissolved.

A long, expensive, and bloody war, to resist the unjust claims of the British
parliament, attended with many instances of atrocious cruelty and perfidy on
the part of the British governors and commanders, alienated the affections of
the great body of Americans from the mother country. On the restoration of
peace, however, and the acquisition of independence, the enmity of the
Americans gradually subsided; and the usefulness of the commerce of England to
these states, being every where experienced, soon revived the habits of
friendly intercourse between America and Great Britain, which had been
interrupted by the war -- an intercourse which was not much affected by the
controversies between the two governments on account of the inexecution of the
treaty of peace. Almost as soon as the acceptance and organization of a
constitution for the United States had given them a national capacity, it was
the wish and desire of America to form a commercial treaty with Great Britain;
and Mr. Jefferson, in a letter to Mr. Hammond, dated Nov. 29, 1791, requested
to know, whether he was authorized to enter into a negotiation for that purpose.

The circumstances which operated to defeat the attempts of our executive, and
the controversies between the governments of the two countries, relative to the
non-fulfilment of the treaty on one side and the other, are in every man's
recollection; -- it is needless to mention them here. It is sufficient for my
purpose, that the president was authorized by the public wishes, to negociate a
commercial treaty with Great Britain; and he is vested with full powers for
this purpose by the constitution.

The uinform desire of congress on this subject, is a complete answer to all
cavils about the exertion of the president's constitutional powers. It was the
nation, the United States, that requested and urged for a negotiation.

This also is an answer to the men who say, the people of America supposed the
appointment of Mr. Jay as envoy extraordinary, was intended only to demand and
procure a redress of wrongs, and indemnification for spoliations on our trade;
and not for the negociatian of a commercial treaty. -- Whatever opinion people
formed of the embassy, the instructions given to the envoy were in pursuance of
constitutional powers; and if the people are surprised with a treaty of amity
and commerce, before they expected it, this forms no objection to the treaty
itself.

The time selected for this negotiation, and the exercise of the president's
powers, at the critical moment, when the public mind in America was in a
violent flame, on account of the seizure of our vessels by British privateers,
and when hostilities were expected between the two countries, however offensive
to a party in America, are among the most fortunate circumstances of this whole
business.

The sequestration bill, then before congress, involved in it the events of
peace or war. The bill, had it passed, would have been considered by Great
Britain equivalent to issuing letters of marque and reprisal, and tantamount to
a declaration of hostilities; and probably that act, had it been sanctioned by
the several branches of the legislature, would have plunged us into the present
most calamitous war.

Such a consequence was considered by the president as little less than
inevitable. As a constituent branch of the legislature, and chief magistrate of
the nation, he had a right to exert the powers he possessed -- and if he
thought the house of representatives were rash in their measures, it was his
duty, as the chief guardian of the public safety, to exert any of his
constitutional powers for the purposes of arresting those measures. It was as
much his right and his duty to interpose negotiation as a means of checking any
measures that he deemed inconsistent with our national interest, if he judged
that the best means, as it is to give his negative to a bill that has passed
the other branches of the legislature, when he judges the bill unconstitutional
or inexpedient.

The right of the president to interpose negotiation, at the time he did,
cannot be disputed. The expediency of the measure will perhaps never be
admitted by its opposers; but every subsequent event has served to convince the
friends of our present administration, that the measure was highly expedient
and the time well chosen.

That the president was right in resorting to a peaceable demand of
indemnification for spoliations on our commerce, is capable of the highest
proof. The law of nations makes it a duty, on the part of a nation thus
injured, to make a peaceable requisition of damages or restoration of property,
from the aggressing nation, before the commencement of hostilities.

Vattel, book 3, chap. 3, lays it down in the most unequivocal language, that
an injured nation has no right to resort to force for satisfaction, until other
means of obtaining it have proved fruitless.

In conformity with this principle of the law of nations, it is often
stipulated by treaty, that letters of marque and reprisal shall not be granted
by an injured nation, until means of redress have been sought in the ordinary
course of justice. Of this tenor is the third article of the treaty of
navigation and commerce between Great Britain and Spain, dated 1713.

It was in pur^^^^ce of this most salutary principle, that the president
appointed an envoy extraordinary at the time he did; and it was undoubtedly, in
other respects, highly expedient; as no moment could be more eligible for a
negotiation with England, than when she was engaged in an expensive and
unsuccessful war: a war that entrenches deeply on her resources, and demands a
minute attention to her commercial interests.

But my opposers will say, "We admit the propriety, of negotiation, before the
commencement of hostilities; but we contend that our envoy should have been
restricted to a demand of the western posts, and indemnification for losses by
illegal captures, and condemnation of our vessels and property. It was never
understood, that Mr. Jay had instructions to make a commercial treaty."

This objection amounts to nothing, and deserves no answer. The president had
as good a right to authorize Mr. Jay to conclude a treaty of amity and commerce
as any other man; and he had the same right to choose one time as another.

Having made these preliminary remarks on the origin of this negotiation and
treaty, I will proceed to answer such objections to the treaty as have come to
my knowledge.

The daily invectives of newspaper paragraphists will be passed without notice.
This is treating them as they deserve to be treated, and as they are in fact
treated by the public.

A writer in a morning paper under the signature of Decius, appears to have
assailed the treaty with more ingenuity than any other writer whose arguments I
have read; and it is probable that his writings comprise the amount and force
of all the objections that are made to it. I shall therefore take his
objections in the order they are published, and endeavor to prove them of
little weight, or wholly unfounded.

The first remarks of this writer are aimed at the candor and integrity of the
twenty members of the senate, who, he insinuates, ratified the treaty from
motives of party spirit. He does not indeed exempt the minorty from the same
censure of their conduct. But what refutes the insinuation is, the rejection of
the twelfth article by the men thus criminated. Certainly the spirit of party
was not the governing motive; for party-spirit is unconceding and goes all
lengths to carry its points. The rejection of that article, because it
entrenches too much on our carrying trade, in the opinion of those gentlemen,
is a proof that the interest of commerce and the public good were the motives
of their conduct in assenting to every other part of the treaty.

His next remark is levelled at the secrecy of the senate, in conducting the
debates on the treaty. "Is not this secrecy alone, says Decius, "a proof that
the senate conceived it disgraceful and prejudicial to the United States?"

Let me ask that writer a candid question: Has not every treaty which we have
made with other nations been concluded and ratified in secret? And is there one
of those treaties disgraceful or prejudicial to our nation? No objection was
formerly made to these secret ratifications. Why should reasons now exist for
opening the discussion of treaties to the people, which did not exist in 1783
and 1785? The reason is obvious: Americans were formerly under no influence but
that of propriety; they acted themselves -- Now a party of them have deserted
the principles which formerly guided our councils, and appear to be ambitious
only of finding opportunities to rail at all steady wisdom, and to commit our
interests to passion and party.

The secrecy of negociations with foreign powers, through every stage of the
business, is dictated by sound policy. By making treaties public before they
are ratified, advantages would often be lost, and by destroying confidence and
freedom of communication, the business would be often impeded or wholly
defeated. Nothing marks the sense of mankind on this subject, better than the
practice of individuals, who generally use secrecy in all important contracts
of their own. This common practice is a proof of its utility. Much more
necessary is it in treaties, which are national contracts or conventions.

Another remark of Decius, worthy of notice, is, that the "first impressions
made by the treaty were unfavorable -- all men and all ranks [what ranks? this
writer has certainly forgotten one article of democracy -- equality] united in
condemning it."

This remark has some foundation, and the fact is easily accounted for. The
first impressions on the minds of the public were made by an abstract of the
treaty, which was published incorrectly, and there are strong suspicions that
it was done with the insidious view of exciting improper impressions. The
abstract was said to have been made from memory. This cannot be true. It is not
in the power of man, after the most careful perusal, to make out so large an
abstract, without the help of notes, of twenty eight articles of a treaty,
without intermixing the articles in the sketch. The business must have been
done with design; and it was inexcusable in any man to offer to the public a
sketch, much more an incorrect one, of so important an instrument.

These unfavorable impressions, however, answered the views of men who
perfectly well understood the importance of prepossessing the public mind They
excited a temporary clamor, and have perhaps made a few weak friends to an
expiring cause.

But the clamer of the moment subsided on reading a correct copy ot he treaty
-- men all agreed it was not so bad as they expected. Still many well meaning
people do not understand it; and every possible effort is used to distort and
misconstrue some passages of the treaty which affect the commerce of the country

The violent censure of the treaty which prevailed on its first publication, in
skeleton, and the moderation of the clamor on further perusal of it, instead of
being a proof that the treaty is in itself bad, is a sutstantial argument in
its favor -- it is a proof that it bears examination -- and it is a proof,
further, of what we should all regret, that the passions of men outstrip their
judgment.

Should the final result of the business prove to be, what I am confident it
will be, a general conviction that the treaty is, on the whole, a favorable one
for the United States, and the most favorable of any treaty we have yet formed;
the public will view with indignation, the insidious attempts that have been
made to excite a ferment, and opposition to its ratification, as well as to
load with unmerited censure the able minister who conducted the negotiation.

No. II.
THE preamble of the treaty, says Decius, is not free from objections. It
states that the differences; between the countries are to be terminated
"without reference to the merits of their complaints." Decius says, the merits
of the controversy should never be lost sight of. But when this expression is
explained, I believe every candid man will justify it in the present instance.
The merits of the complaints, in this instance, refer solely to the question,
"which party first violated the treaty of peace." On the first opening of the
negciation between the ministers of the, two countries, this became an
important point of discussion. The American envoy alleged the first breach of
the treaty to be on the part of Great Britain, and mentioned the carrying away
of the negroes.

The English minister maintained that this was a violation of the treaty. As
this subject has occasioned as much altercation as any point between the two
countries, and as the silence of the present treaty on that subject, is the
ground of violent clamor, I will anticipate a consideration of this point,
which would more properly fall under a subsequent; article.

Whenever our ministers have urged the claim of restitution or compensation for
the negroes, the British ministry have, invariably, answered them with the
following remarks:

"The negroes carried from America by the British armies, were taken by the
troops an their marches through the country, or came in, by proclamation and
put themselves under our protection.

"The clause of the treaty on which you ground your claim is in these words --
"his Britannic majesty shall, with all conveinient speed, and without causing
any ^ estruction, or carrying away any negroes or other proper ^ of the
American inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, etc."

"By the laws of the American states negroes are considered as property as much
as cattle; you claim them as property for the men who were their proprietors.
By the laws of war, universally admitted, every species of moveable property
found and taken in an enemy's country, becomes the property of the captors. By
the seizure and possession of the negroes, the British armies became the
rightful owners; the negroes were booty, as much as the horses and cattle taken
by the same troops.

"Suppose an American boat loaded with goods, to be taken, on one of your
rivers in the time of war, would not that boat and goods bt a fair prize?
Suppose a horse to stray into the British lines and be taken, would not that
horse belong to the captors? Could a claim be reasonably interposed for
restitution or compensation in these cases? Whether they were seduced or forced
from the plantations, if they were property, that property, on their coming
into possession of the British army, was changed, according to all ihe laws of
war.

"The clause of the treaty contemplates negroes which were American property at
the date of the stipulation. "Negroes or other property" are the words. But the
negroes which our troops had taken in their marches, or which had put
themselves under their protection, were not, at that time, the property of
Americans.

"On this construction, which we hold to be the only rational one, that clause
of the treaty will not maintain your claim. The treaty may include slaves which
were within the British lines, in possession of their American masters; but
there is no pretense that such were carried away by the British troops.

"Besides, we cannot surrender negroes which came into our lines on the faith
of proclamations, without a violation of that faith; which cannot be done. We
promised them freedom and protection -- we gave them that freedom, and we must
protect them."

Such is the substance of the ministry's reply, to the claims of our envoy,
which were repeatedly urged without success. -- And the British ministry have
invariably put the same construction on that clause of the treaty of peace.
Indeed it seems difficult to answer this reasoning.

Either the negroes were slaves and property, or they were not. If they were
slaves and property, as considered by the laws of most of the American states,
the British had the same right to seize and carry them away as booty, as they
had to seize and carry away horses and cattle; a right of war that was never
disputed. In this case, the property was changed the moment they came into the
possession of the British armies, and at the date of the treaty, they were not
American property, and consequently not included in the stipulation of the
treaty.

If, on the other hand, the negroes were freemen, they had a right to put
themselves under British protection, and we have no shadow of claim to
restitution or compensation.

I am one who believe that no property can be obtained in human slesh, and any
law authorizing the purchase and detention of a human being, as property, is,
ipso facto, void. -- Should this position be well founded, we have not a shadow
of pretension to the negroes carried away by the British troops.

But the laws of many of the states do consider them as property: whether
rightfully or wrongfully, is not now the question. If we consider them as
property, they are to be ranked among personal estates, for they certainy are
not real estate.

Now Mr. Jefferson, a man of eminent talents, and the oracle of my antagonists,
admits, in the fullest extent, the doctrine, that all personal estate is
rightfully seizable by enemies in war. The following are his words: --

"It cannot be denied, that the state of war stictly admits a nation to seize
the property of its enemies, found within its own limits, or taken in war, and
in whatever form it exists -- whether in action or possession."

In confirmation of this, he quotes Bynkershoek, l. 1. c. 7. who is clear and
explicit on the subject. See papers relative to Great Britain, published by
order of congress, p. 29. This doctrine is the universal law of nations.

"As the towns and lands taken from the enemy, are called conquests, all
moveable things constitute the booty. The booty belongs to the sovereign."
Vattel, b. 3. c. 9.

In the interpretation of treaties where there are two constructions, the one
favorable, the other odious, that which is odious is always to be rejected: and
what can be more odious than to construe this article of the treaty, so as to
violate faith toward the wretched blacks, and render them back to the whips
and scourges of slavery?

At any rate, this point of the business the British ministry will not yield,
as the first infraction of the treaty.

Then came the detention of the western posts, which our minister alleged to be
a breach of the treaty, anterior to any violation on the part of the United
States. -- Here was introduced the correspondence between Mr. Jefferson and Mr.
Hammond, and Mr. Jefferson's reasoning on the subject.

To this the British minister answered, by referring to dates of transactions.

The provisional articles between Great Britain and America, were signed,
November 30th, 1782, at Paris; and notice of this was officially received by
Sir Guy Carleton, April 5th, 1783. But the definitive, treaty was not signed
till September 3d, 1783, and the ratifications were not finally exchanged, till
some time in 1784, though I do not know the day and month.

A treaty is binding on a nation from the moment of signature; but its ultimate
validity depends on its passing through all the usual forms. According to the
modern practice, the exchange of ratifications puts the seal to the validity of
a treaty, and gives it an effect from the time of signature.

The British ministry state that, ex gratia, or as a matter of convenience to
the nation, orders were given to Sir Guy Carleton to evacuate New York,
immediately on signing the provisional articles in 1782. But they allege they
were not bound to do this, until they had been notified of the ratification of
those articles by congress, which could not have been till the middle of the
year 1784.

The demand made by the Baron Steuben, by order of General Washington, of the
surrender of the western posts, and the first demand made, was by his letter to
General Haldimand, dated August 2, 1783. At this time the British minister
could scarcely have heard whether congress had agreed to the treaty or not;
much less could any orders have been sent from them to Canada, for withdrawing
the troops from the garrison.

Admitting this fact, that the British ministry were not bound by treaty to
give orders for the troops to withdraw, until the treaty had gone through its
usual forms, then the detention of the posts, till long after they had been
demanded by Baron Steuben, and perhaps as late as the demand of Colonel Hull,
in July, 1784, was justifiable and authorized by the practice of nations.

But long before this, congress had declared the carrying away of the negroes,
an infraction of the treaty; and in May 1793 had sent orders to our foreign
ministers to remonstrate against this measure and demand reparation.

The state of New York, so early as March 17, 1783, passed an act authorizing
any citizen to bring actions of trespass against any person who had occupied,
or injured his estate, real or personal, within the power of the enemy. This
was an express violation of the 6th article of the treaty, which declares that
no person shall suffer any loss or damage, or any prosecution, on account of
the part he had taken during the war. And Virginia, in December, 1783, passed
an act, suspending executions on certain judgments, which materially affected
British creditors. South Carolina in March 1784 followed, and passed an act
suspending all actions, both British and American, for nine months.

These legal impediments to the recovery of old British debts, determined the
ministry not to surrender the posts, but to hold them as a security for these
debts. And whatever clamor we may raise about this business, we may be assured,
that the western posts will never be delivered peaceably, until the payment of
those debts has been amply secured.

I have been thus full in explaining what is meant by the merits of complaints,
in tne preamble of the treaty, to show, that our minister was justifiable
passing over the discussion of a point of extreme difficulty -- a point which
would have wasted time and embarrassed, perhaps defeated, the negotiation. The
question of the first infraction of the treaty of peace had been ably discussed
before; and at the close of the controversy, the parties were as remote from
the probability of agreement as when they began.

Neither party would yield the point to his antagonist. The British ministry,
it is evidently known, are determined never to admit the carrying away the
negroes to be an infraction of the treaty, and they are equally determined not
to surrender the western posts without a guarantee for the payment of old debts.

In this situation, was it not prudent and wise to pass over the first subjects
of crimination, and proceed to an amicable adjustment of all differences, if it
could be done, without attempting to decide who first infringed the treaty? I
am persuaded that every candid man who reads this explanation of the business,
will be fully satisfied with the conduct of our envoy.

[Note. I generally use the word envoy or minister, in the singular, as
referring to Mr. Jay, the principal in the negotiation. But it is proper to
observe once for all, that Mr. Jay, by order, communicated his instructions to
Mr. Pinckney, consulted him on every point, and that the treaty end every
article of it had the approbation of that gentleman.]

No. III.
THE first article of the treaty contains words of course, which deserve no
notice.

Article 2.
The first objection made to this article is the inexplicitness of it. It is
said that the article should have defined from what places his majesty was to
withdraw his troops.

The answer to this objection is, that there is not any dispute about the
boundary line of the United States, except at the north east extremity, on St.
Croix river. The posts which we claim are acknowledged to be in the United
States. It is possible, that British officers at some of those places, as a
pretext for some purposes of their own, may have pretended they were on their
own ground; but I never heard it suggested that the ministry dispute the
boundary line, at or near any of the garrisoned places.

The time assigned for the evacuation, is said to be too distant. But if we
calculate, we shall find no ground for this objection. There was required time
to exchange ratifications, and then for orders to be dispatched from England,
to the farthest post westward. If we allow a reasonable time for these
transactions, it will require the whole period assigned by the treaty.

The jurisdiction of a military post will doubtless be considered, the reach of
a cannon shot, or a league.

"Lastly," says Decius, "as the treaty of peace gave us these posts, what great
benefit is obtained by this article? Who would regard the second promise of a
man, who had already; without an excuse, violated the first?"

But Decius will please to remember, that there are two sides to a question --
The legal impediments to a collection of old debts were an excuse for the
detention of the posts which they deemed sufficient. If we comply with the
sixth article, Great Britain will consequently comply with the second.

Article 3.
Even this article of the treaty, which breaks down the barriers which have
hitherto obstructed our trade to Canada, and opens a general intercourse upon
most liberal principles, has not escaped criticism and censure. Decius says,
the advantages in this article are on the side of Great Britain; and the reason
assigned is, that the extent of the United States, is greater than that of the
British territories. Now this is the very reason why the advantages of this
article are in savor of the United States.

What is the present state of trade between Canada and the United States? and
what will its situation be under the treaty? This is a fair way of determining
the goodness of the treaty.

In the present state of things, almost all trade is prohibited on the part of
Canada. -- Not a skin in the fur trade can be brought into the United States
except by stealth. This prohibition makes the little trade in peltry, now
actually carried on, very harardous, and raises the article to a very high
price. The peltry, it must be admitted, is almost all collected within the
British territories; the British have command of it by right; and the removal
of those garrisons to the other side of the lakes, without a removal of the
prohibition on the peltry trade, would not have been of much advantage to the
United States.

We have then every thing to gain by a free intercourse -- the British, every
thing to lose, so far as regards that trade.

Decius says, "the fur trade will probably fall altogether in the hands of
British traders." This is a most extraordinary supposition.

The truth is, the peltry trade now is all IN their hands -- What we want is to
get that OUT of their hands. That is, we want to obtain a share of that trade
on equal terms with British subjects. This we have obtained by the article
under consideration.

What right, what pretense have we to a monopoly of that trade? Do we expect
that Great Britain would permit us, as Decius says, "to secure to ourselves the
whole fur trade?" To demand such a privilege on our part would be extravagant
and ridiculous.

The trade by the third article of the treaty, is placed on a fair and liberal
footing. -- Both parties are free to use all the rivers and lakes for the
purpose of inland navigation, subject only to the common tolls and ferriages.
The exception of the limits of the Hudson's Bay company is of no importance at
present to the United States; and the exception was a necessary consequence of
the exclusive rights of the company.

Decius supposes there is a manifest (...) i^ permitting British traders to use
all our ports (...) ^^vers, and in restricting the Americans from the same use
of the ports of the British territories, and the rivers between the mouths
thereof and the highest ports of entry. But Decius will please to recollect,
that this privilege enjoyed by British subjects, and the restriction of
American subjects, are not created by the present treaty. In this respect the
parties are as they were before. American vessels have never been permitted to
carry on the coasting trade of the British possessions in America; and
therefore we suffer no new abridgment of business by this article. On the other
hand, British vessels are now admitted into all our harbors, and to the
highest port of entry for foreign vessels, so that this article gives no new
privilege to such vessels. But we have obtained by the treaty a fret inland
trade with Canada. We can navigate all the rivers and lakes -- we can go down
the St. Lawrence to Quebec. Articles are to be carried from the United States
to Canada, and vice versa, subject to the lowest duties ever paid on these
articles; -- and peltry pays no duty at all.

This free intercourse will be highly advantageous to our citizens on the
frontiers. They will be deeply concerned in the fur trade, and we shall obtain
furs much lower than formerly. At the same time the inhabitants on our
frontiers will find a market at Montreal or Quebec, and bring back in return
such heavy articles as will come cheaper, through the St. Lawrence and the
lakes, than through the Atlantic ports.

This trade is extremely wanted by our frontier settlements, which are every
day increasing. Their distance from the Atlantic lays them under heavy
disadvantages, which the treaty before us alleviates, as much as possible, by
taking off all restrictions on inland trade. And just in proportion to the
numbar of people in the United States, who are to carry on and partake of that
free trade, will be the benefits of this article of the treaty.

It should be considered further, that the citizens of the United States are
taking up large tracts of land in Canada, and emigrating to that province. --
This business is encouraged by the British government. But while the people who
settle in Canada, for the purposes of trade or agriculture, become subjects of
Great Britain, they retain their attachment to the United States; and from this
circumstance important and beneficial consequences may hereafter be expected.

Articles 4 and 5.
These articles have not been the subjects of much censure; perhaps the mode
prescribed for ascertaining doubtful points, relative to the boundary line of
the United States, is as eligible as we could wish.

Article 6.
This is a most important article. It involves in it the primary and principal
causes of all the differences now existing between the two countries.

Before the war, most of the trade of Virginia, and a great portion of that of
the states to the south^ard, was carried on by foreigners. I am well assured
that it was esteemed in Virginia, disreputable for planters and their sons to
engage in trade. This prejudice, which was, like a thousand follies adopted by
Americans, introduced from Europe, and a remnant of the aristocracy of the
feudal system, operated powerfully to keep trade in the hands of foreigners.

The British merchants availed themselves of the prejudice. They were the
agents or factors for the pianters, and gave extensive credit. The confidence
created by this friendly intercourse, together with the prodigal habits of many
planters, extended this credit to a very large amount.

The war necessarily suspended the payment of these debts. The treaty of peace
provided that no lawful impediments should be interposed to prevent the
recovery of those debts. The carrying away of the negroes by the British, when
they left New York, exasperated the southern states: they considered it as an
infraction of the treaty, and, as such, an excuse for violating it on their
part. They passed laws which ware impediments to the recovery of old debts. The
British ministry, on their part, detained the western posts, as security for
those debts, and damages (...) the British merchants, in consequence of those
legal impediments. Here the parties are at issue here are differences between
the two nations which can be settled only by the sword or amicable adjustment.

This is precisely the situation of the parties. -- Neither party will yield
the point of first infraction; and paper, correspondence, to prove the point,
has been exhausted, without giving any satisfaction to either.

The issue then is, the alternative of war or accommodation. But if we enter
into a war, will this settle the points in dispute? Not at all. A ten years
war, and a waste of half the blood and treasure of the United States, would
leave the cont^^^ersy just where it now is -- to be settled by negotiation.

It is no answer to these remarks, to make outcries about British injustice.
Admitting this in the fullest extent, that injustice is to be restrained only
by the sword, or amicable agreement -- we have our choice.

Is it not prudent and wise to make an effort to adjust all differences by a
reference to equitable principles? What better mode could be devised to settle
differences so numerous, so complicated, as those which exist between the two
countries, than by commissioners fairly and impartially appointed? This is the
mode which has been practiced for centuries, in like cases. In looking into
collections of treaties, I find the same mode prescribed in all cases of
difficult disputes between nations; and the universal practice of resorting to
this mode, is a proof that none better has yet been devised.

But it is said, "this mode of adjusting (...) due to British creditors, is
unjust toward those states which have interposed no lawful impediments in the
way of recovering such debts; as they must bear a part of the burden, and thus
suffer for the delinquency of others."

This objection is susceptible of a very satisfactory answer.

Our capacity, as a nation, arises from the union of the states under the
constitution.

All our intercourse with foreign nations is conducted by the United States, in
that national capacity. Foreign nations cannot negociate with any of our
individual states; and the states are expressly prohibited, by our
constitution, from entering into any treaty, compact, or agreement, with any
foreign power.

The moment our union took place, the United States became, to a certain
degree, responsible for acts done by states or individuals toward foreign
nations. This responsibility results from the national capacity derived from
the union.

Whatever hardships this may impose on particular states, it is a necessary
consequence of the character we have assumed among the powers of the earth; and
indeed it is much more than counterbalanced by the protection and security
derived from the same national capacity.

No. IV.
Article 7.
THIS article is said to be wholly exceptionable, because it places at too
great a distance, compensation to which our citizens are entitled, for the most
atrocious acts of piracy.

I will admit what my antagonists please to allege against the injurious
treatment of our vessels at sea by British privateers. I know that the right
which the law of nations gives to powers at war, of stopping and examining
neutral vessels, and seizing them when they have contraband goods on boards,
has been abused, and that great injuries and insolence have been suffered by
our seamen; and great losses have been incurred by our merchants by illegal
detention and condemnation. My own feelings are keenly alive to such abuses,
and I wish we had the means of vindicating our rights in a more ample manner.

But let me observe, that these injuries do not excite greater resentment in
the breasts of Americans, than laws of our states, suspending the recovery of
old debts, or making lands, goods and depreciated paper currency, a legal
tender for these debts, awakened in the breasts of the British nation. As to
every thing of this nature, anger, resentment and disgust are reciprocal: and
ill usage alleged on one part, is retorted with ill usage in some other
particular on the other part. There is no common tribunal, to decide this
question, Who has been guilty of the greatest outrage on faith and honesty? We
are satisfied that the charge belongs to Great Britain -- they are as confident
the blame is on our side. It is idle to waste time in criminating each other --
Our interest and happiness, and those of Great Britain, demand an amicable
accommodation, and to that point all our efforts should be directed.

The time which will be required to examine the claims of American merchants
for losses, is certainly to be regretted. But how cau this delay be prevented?

If we admit the right of powers at war to stop neutral vessels and examine
them, a right which has never been disputed, do we not admit the right of
ascertaining whether such vessels have contraband property on board or not? How
shall this point be settled, where suspicion occurs? The papers of neutral
vessels are not always to be relied on. We all know that subjects of nations at
war, procure neutral vessel se^ and neutral names to cover property of their
own -- This happens every day. We all know that contraband goods are often
concealed in bales or casks of goods not contraband. We all know that masters,
supercargoes and seamen, will evade direct answers, equivocate, and sometimes
men are abandoned enough to perjure themselves in a court, to save property of
their own or their friends.

What says the law of nations on this subject? Va^tel, b. 3. chapter 7. lays it
down with great precision. "Without searching neutral ships at sea, the
commerce of contraband goods cannot be prevented. There is then a right of
searching. At present a neutral ship refusing to be searched, would from that
proceeding alone be condemned as lawful prize. But to avoid inconveniences,
violence, and every other irregularity, the manner of the search is settled in
the treaties of navigation and commerce. According to the present custom,
credit is to be given to certificates and bills of lading, produced by the
master of the ship, unless any fraud appear in them, or there be very good
reason to suspect their validity."

The mode of searching neutral vessels is regulated by our treaties, with the
States General, with Sweden and France, in which it is stipulated that credit
shall be given to the ships' papers. But we have had no such treaty with Great
Britain, and the treatment of our vessels depends on the law of nations, or the
licentious will of the masters of privateers. -- Wherever there is suspicion of
fraud in the papers, the vessels may, by the law of nations, be carried into
port for examination and trial; and it is probable, this license has been
carried to a most unwarrantable length, during the present war. The general
expression, cause of suspicion, gives an almost unbounded latitude to those
unprincipled men, who are usually engaged in the detestable business of
privateering. Such is the situation of our trade, in the present unhappy war.
But making every allowance for ill usage, it must be admitted that great
numbers of American vessels have, according to the laws of nations, been justly
seized, and carried into port for trial. -- When this is the case, what mode of
process must be had to determine what property is liable to confiscation, and
what is not?

Our existing treaties with other nations admit the right of trial in the
admiralty courts of the nation capturing the neutral vessels; and in these
treaties, there are stipulations that bulk shall not be broke, until the cargo
has been landed in presence of proper officers, and no part of the cargo sold,
till legal process shall have been had, and sentence pronounced against the
goods liable to condemnation.

Must not the same process be had in the British courts, though we have had no
treaty with the nation? Where is the ground for maintaining a different
doctrine?

We must then admit the principle, that American vessels seized and carried
into port, with prohibited goods on board, or on suspicion of fraudulent
papers, are subject to the usual legal process of British courts of admiralty.
However hard this may appear, the effect flows directly from the state of war
and the law of nations.

If we admit this principle, we admit all its consequences. If our vessels are
liable to legal process, it is necessary that all the documents relative to the
question of legal capture or not, should be produced and examined. And when we
consider the distance from which many of these documents are to be procured,
and the numerous cases that have arisen, who can say that final decisions can
be had on the American claims in a moment? And in cases which involve equitable
considerations, not proper for the decision of courts of law, what mode could
be devised, more eligible for the claimants, than that of commissioners? Is the
t^^m of eighteen months too long for receiving claims? It appears to me the
time is not unreasonably long; and even the length of the (...) is favorable
for the claimants.

It is said that the British government ought to advance a sum on account, to
be distributed among the sufferers. This suggestion seems to be grounded on an
idea that has prevailed, that such a sum has been advanced by Great Britain to
Denmark and Sweden -- an opinion which, I have authority to say, is not well
founded.

But to this measure there are insurmountable objections. The impracticability
of doing even partial justice, before it is ascertained who are the objects of
it, is merely chimerical.

Many of my countrymen are great sufferers, and I trust their just claims will
be supported, and their just damages paid. But a summary trial might do great
injustice -- the innocent might suffer, and the guilty obtain reparation.

On the whole, the time and mode appear as eligible, as justice and the nature
of the cases will admit.

With respect to the stipulation in the last clause of the 7th article, that
engages payment for certain vessels taken by privateers within our jurisdiction
or by vessels armed in our ports, I trust no man, who has a regard for honesty
or national character, will ever object to it. I am one of those American
citizens, that hold it as a duty for us to preserve a strict neutrality in the
present war, and honorable in our government to make indemnification for every
illegal proceeding of the nation and of individuals, toward foreign nations.
Let him who demands justice, do justice himself. The amount of the sums to be
paid, does not vary the principle, nor should it vary our conduct as a nation.
I hope and trust the character of the United States, will never be stained with
a violation of faith and justice, even toward the consairs of Barbary.
Self-defence, only, will authorize any nation in arresting or withholding the
property of individuals even of an enemy nation. To withhold or to authorize
the withholding of private property, contrary to law, is to degrade our nation
to the rank of Algerines.

POSTSCRIPT TO NO. IV.
To convince the public more fully of the little ground for objection, on
account of delays in admiralty courts, adjusting differences between nations, I
will make several extracts from the correspondence between our minister at
Paris, and the French minister for foreign affairs. This correspondence was
published in January 1794, by order of congress. It relates to the captures of
our vessels by French privateers, under the decrees of the convention of May
9th and July 27th, 1793, in express violation of our treaty with France.

[Letter from Mr. MORRIS, Oct. 12, 1793.] TRANSLATION.
Paris the 12th Oct. 1793. The Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States of
America to the Republic of France, to M. Deforgues, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
SIR,
I HAVE the honor to send you herein enclosed, the copy of a letter, which has
been addressed to me by Citizen Postic, a lawyer residing at Morlai^. It
appears, that in the proceedings of which he has given an account, there are
extraordinary irregularities; and I think it my duty to inform you of them, as
on the justice of tribunals often depends the salvation, and always the
prosperity of a state.

I request of you at the same time, Sir, to permit me to make two general
observations on the whole of this business; one of which applies to the
organization, and the other to the proceedings, of the commercial tribunals.
The referring of questions on sea prizes, to these tribunals, appears to me
dangerous since they involve the interpretation of the Treaties, and the
application of the law of nations: consequently of peace and of war. Now we may
be permitted to entertain some doubt as to the knowledge of the judges, and we
ought besides to fear, lest they may be interested, as owners of privateers, in
the questions which are submitted to them.

But whatever may be the organization of the tribunals, it appears to me
essential, Sir, that in their proceedings they should receive all the claims
which may be made to them; that they should even invite without waiting for the
authority of the persons interested, who are often at the distance of one
thousand leagues. The jurisdiction of the tribunals within whose cognizance are
the questions of prize, is in rem. They take possession of the things, and by
that means render themselves responsible for it. Now as the tribunal, which is
the depository of the thing, ought not to dispossess themselves of it, without
a formal authoritative act of the true proprietor, it is their duty, not only
to admit, but also to seek proofs, which may establish to whom the property
truly belongs. This is a double duty toward the neutral proprietor, and
toward their own nation: for every government which permits its citizens to
fit out privateers, arms with the destructive sword of war, hands which are
interested to extend its ravages, and renders itself responsible for the abuses
which result from so dangerous a delegation of sovereignty. For the purpose of
repossessing them, the admiralty tribunals have been established throughout the
different nations of Europe. In these tribunals, the government furnishes the
means of information, by the facility with which it admits therein every
species of claim. It preserves, by appeals, the right of deciding, in the last
resort, on the contests which shall therein arise: and it gives the necessary
time to enlighten its conscience on thorny questions, before the pronouncing of
a sentence, which might extend or prolong the horrors of war.

These, Sir, are the questions which experience has dictated to me. They daily
make on me a more lively impression on account of the claims addressed to me by
my countrymen, of which I have communicated to you a very small part. I always
send to the tribunals the injured persons, by giving them the most positive
assurances that they will there obtain complete and prompt justice.

I have the honor to be, etc. GOUV. MORRIS.


Extract from the French Minister's answer to Mr. Morris, dated Paris, Oct. 14,
1793.
"THESE observations, Sir, which you are too just not to appreciate, apply to
the greater part of the claims, which you have addressed to me for some time. I
have done with respect to several of them, all that depended on me, in order to
obtain in savor of your countrymen, an exception of the general measures,
adopted with regard to neutral nations. I have used among others, all the means
with which your letters furnished me, to have restored the ship Laurens; but I
have met with insurmountable obstacles, in the established laws, and in the
opinion of the commercial tribunal at Havre. The tribunal has neglected nothing
to render justice to the owners of this vessel. It has consented among other
things, to have translated 361 letters, merely to prove in the most authentic
manner, the property of the cargo. The interested have, besides, avowed
themselves, that they had neglected an essential formality required by our laws.

"We hope that the government of the United States, will attribute to their
true cause, the abuses of which you complain, as well as other violations of
which our cruisers may render themselves guilty, in the course of the present
war. It must perceive how difficult it is, to contain within just limits, the
indignation of our marines, and in general of all the French patriots, against
a people who speak the same language, and have the same habits, as the free
Americans. The difficulty of distinguishing our allies from our enemies, has
often been the cause of offenses, committed on board your vessels; all that the
administration could do, is to order indemnification to those who have
suffered, and to punish the guilty."


Let any candid man view the whole of the transactions of England and France,
and say, whether in proportion to the ^nmber of vessels captured, the delays
and difficulties have been greater in England than in France.

N. B. Mr. Jefferson's letter on the right of nations at war, to seize enemy's
property in neutral bottoms, will fall more properly under the 8th number of
this discussion.

No. V.
Article 8.
THIS article solely regards the mode of defraying the expenses of the
commissioners, and supplying vacancies. No objection appears against it.

Article 9.
This article gives the present holders of lands in the two countries the right
of disposing of them, etc. without being considered as aliens.

In the first abstract of the treaty which was published, this article was
erroneously stated, as extending to give the rights of citizens to any and all
British subjects purchasing lands hereafter in the United States. The truth is,
the article extends only to persons holding lands at the time the treaty was
signed, and some provision of this kind was necessary.

To understand this article, it must be remembered, that the United States were
settled from the British dominions, and till lately remained a part of the
nation. Some persons in the United States now hold lands in England, which they
inherit from branches of their families which are extinct in that country.
Great numbers in the British dominions hold lands which they formerly enjoyed
as inhabitants of the colonies, and which were not confiscated. Others have
been compelled to take lands in payment of debts.

The circumstances of these two countries differ from those of all other
countries. They were formerly one country, and linked together by a variety of
individual interests.

These private interests have been mostly created under one common government.
They originated, when the two countries were one in empire, and without any
fault on the part of the persons interested. Was it not reasonable and just,
that interests thus created should be secured by the provisions of a treaty
which was to adjust all old differences? Most certainly it was.

It has been said that this article infringes the rights of the states. As I
have never seen any argument to prove this assertion, it will be sufficient to
answer it by another assertion, and say it does not.

It is said also that this article impairs the obligation of private contracts.
As this is asserted without explanation or proof, it wili be passed without
notice.

The danger of aliens holding real estate in any country, is an idea that was
propagated ever Europein feudal times, and modern writers on law have continued
to transcribe the reasoning on that subject, from one generation to another, as
they have on us^^y, intolerance, natural allegiance, and many other ancient
errors, without allowing for the ameliorated state of society and civil policy.
The danger, however, is now a mere bug bear, and deserves notice. Men may hold
real estates, without the other privileges of citizens; and it tends to promote
commerce to admit foreigners to this privilege, under suitable restrictions.

The only danger that now exists in an unlimited privilege of this kind is,
that persons might possess themselves of large estates, and spend the income
abroad, as is the case with the planters in the West Indies and the Irish
nobility. Should this ever become an evil of extent, it will require
legislative remedies.

But it is an important idea which the United States should cherish, that men
are never enemies to a free country. Men may scramble for offices, and oppose
the administration of a government from selfish views -- but if foreigners find
peace, liberty, and safety in our country, they will hardly give themselves the
trouble of subjecting us to other governments. A liberality in our measures
toward foreigners, strict justice and impartiality in our laws, will make all
parties our friends, and this is one great object of the present treaty.

Decius attempts to make an invidious comparison between this article of the
treaty, and the eleventh article of our treaty with France, which, he says, is
all in savor of the Americans, because it abolishes the droit d'aub^ine in
their favor, and gives the French nothing which the law of nations did not
secure them before. To prove this he goes into a common law explanation of the
terms used in the French treaty -- goods ^oveable and immovable. -- The words
of the eleventh article of the treaty with France are, "The subjects and
inhabitants of the United States shall not be reputed aubains, in France, --
they may dispose of their goods, moveable and immovable, by testament, (...),
etc." -- Immovable goods, Decius says, mean chattels real, but not estates in
see, and quotes Sir Edward Coke and Blackstone.

If Decius is a lawyer of great ingenuity, as he doubtless is, he ought to be
very cautious to conceal his subtilties. His far-fetched arguments to make the
French treaty a mere act of benevolence on the part of Louis XVI. and the
present treaty a mere sacrifice on our part, will not, ultimately, succeed.

The explanation given by Decius to the terms immovable goods is unequivocally
wrong. Does not Decius know, that a treaty with France is not to be interpreted
by the common law of England? Does not he know that the terms bona immobilia,
immovable goods, are borrowed from the civil law, that the civil law is the
basis of almost every municipal constitution in Europe? Does he not recollect
that the municipal laws of France were derived from that source, and that terms
used in that country are to be explained by the civil law? Is not a treaty with
France to be interpreted according to the legal import of the words in that
country?

Let Decius then be apprized, that bona immobilia is a technical phrase as old
as the civil law, and that it comprehended formerly and still comprehends, in
most countries of Europe, real estate, that is, a freehold estate, and lands in
fee, as well as chattels, real. When used by writers on the law of nations, the
phrase has that sense.

"Every state has the liberty of granting or refusing foreigners the power of
possessing lands or other immovable goods, within its territory." -- Vattel,
b. 2. chapter 8. In the same page are these expressions: "If the sovereign does not
permit aliens to possess immoveables, no one has a right to complain of it, as
the sovereign may refuse strangers the power of possessing immoveables." So
also in b. 3. chapter 5. sec, 76.

The foregoing paragraph relates to moveable goods, but the rule is different
with regard to immoveables, to states in lands, as they all in some measure
belong to the nation, are part of its domain, etc. and the proprietor being
always a subject of the country as possessor of a parcel of land, and goods of
this nature do not cease to be the enemy's goods, though possessed by a neutral
stranger. "Nevertheless, war being now carried on with so much moderation and
indulgence, safe-guards are allowed to houses and lands possessed by foreigners
in an enemy's country. For the same reason, he who declares war does not
confiscate the immovable goods possessed in his country by his enemy's
subjects. In permitting them to purchase and possess those goods, he has, in
this respect, admitted them into the number of his subjects. But the income may
be sequestrated, for hindering the remittance of it to the enemy's country."

Bynkershoek, Quest. Jur. Pub. 1. c. 7. uses the word immobilia in the same
sense, and lays down the doctrine above quoted from Vattel.

But the most direct authority in point, is from Domat's Civil Law, Preliminary
Book, title 3. sect. 1. -- the following passage is express: "Immoveables are
all the parts of the surface of the earth, in what manner soever they are
distinguished, whether into places for buildings, or into woods, meadow, arable
lands, vineyards, orchards, or otherwise, and to whomsoever they belong."

In sect. 2. of the same title, Domat expressly enumerates lands, whether
allodial or charged with quit rents, among immoveables. It deserves remark,
that the French word biens, goods, comprehends estate in land. This sense is
borrowed from the civil
As this writer was a French civilian, he doubtless used the word in its
technical sense, as understood in France, and by this sense must our treaty
with France be interpreted. Indeed, whatever may be the opinion of lawyers
here, I have no doubt that, by the 11th article of that treaty, French citizens
are fully entitled to hold real estate law. in the United States, and American
citizens, in France.

In all our other treaties, the article in question restricts the subjects of
the two countries, to the enjoyment of personal estate or effects, in the
jurisdiction each of the other. Most nations retain the old feudal jealousy
respecting foreigners possessing lands in their countries. But the liberality
of France, in her treaty with America, ought to be an example to all nations;
and the United States, of all countries on earth, ought to reject all such
remains of feudal prejudice. I trust the explanation before given of the terms
immovable goods, will be satisfactory; and will evince the truth of what was
advanced by the writer of "Candid Remarks on the Treaty," that the 11th article
of our treaty with France amounts to a total abolition of ali^ism, between the
two countries.

Unless Decius succeeds better hereafter in "detecting fallacies," he may as
well let his pen rest, or employ it more to his own reputation. His writings on
the subject, so far as they have hitherto appeared, are little more than a
series of misrepresentation.

No. VI.
THE 10th article of the treaty provides that "neither the debts due from
individuals of the one nation to individuals of the other, nor shares nor
moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the public banks, shall
ever in any event of war or national differences be sequestered or
confiscated," The faithful observance of the restriction contained in this
article is so much for our interest as well as honor, that we should naturally
have concluded, the most determined enemies to any good understanding with
Great Britain, would at least have passed it by in silence. But so strong are
the prejudices of a certain party amongst us, or so virulent their passions,
that they have given to almost every paragraph in the treaty an equal
condemnation. Decius has complained of this article as being, like many others,
exclusively advantageous to England, and as arresting from our government a
lawful and powerful weapon of war. I am greatly mistaken, however, if it is not
completely defensible against every part of this accusation.

It is true that by the law of nations, as existing a century ago, the debts
owing from one nation to another were legal objects of sequestration in war.
"But ar present (to use the language of Vattel, b. 3. chapter 5. sec. 77.) in
regard to the advantage and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe
have departed from this rigor. -- And as this custom has been generally
received, he who should act contrary to it would injure the public faith; for
strangers trusted his subjects only from a firm persuasion that the general
custom would be observed. The state does not so much as touch the sums which it
owes to the enemy. Every where, in case of a war, funds credited to the public,
are exempt from confiscation and seizure." This clear explanation of the modern
law of nations, as far as it relates to the public funds, is also to be found
in a report of the English judges in the year 1753, in answer to the Prussian
memorial; a report of much authority, which Vattel does not scruple to call an
excellent piece on the law of nations. "It will not be easy, say the judges, to
find an instance where a prince has thought fit to make reprisals upon a debt
due from himself to private men. There is a confidence that this will not be
done. A private man sends (...) to a prince upon the faith of an engagement of
honor, because a prince cannot be compelled, like other men, in an adverse way,
by a court of justice, So scrupulously did England, France and Spain adhere to
this public faith, that, even during the war, they suffered no enquiry to be
made whether any part of the public debts was due to subjects of the enemy,
though it is certain many English had money in the French funds and many French
had money in ours."

But these principles have received sanction from a source, which the
adversaries of the article will be disposed to admit as of still greater
authority and respectability, I mean from the proceedings and decision of the
French convention. It appears from Paris papers which in April last were
translated and republished in the Aurora, that in the sitting of the
convention, Dec. 29, 1794, after the house had passed to the order of the day,
"Johannot read the following articles of the projected decree, which were as
follow -- (here follow five articles.)

Art. VI.
"The decree concerning the sequestration of the property of the subjects of
the powers at war with the Republic is annulled. Such sums as have been paid by
French citizens into the treasury in consequence of those decrees, will be
reimbursed." This article occasioned some debate. Gaston was against it. Cambon
observed, that the law of sequestration was extorted from the convention by the
faction of Fabre d'Eglantine and Danton, but ought you to return the property
of the Spanish to the despot of Madrid? Thiriot agreed with Cambon. Colombel
desired the assembly to annul only the sequestration of the sums due for
commercial relations. Ramel showed that the law of sequestration had been urged
by the foreigners themselves and stockjobbers, that it had prepared the ruin of
commerce, and broken off, against the right of nations, the obligations of
merchants in different states; though the powers at (...) the Republic should
not repeal the sequestrat^^^ of French property, it is our duty to set the
example. The sixth article was maintained as reported.

I have thought it not useless to give a brief sketch of this very interesting
proceeding in the French convention, because it not only establishes what I
contend to be the law of nations, but exposes the injury and injustice of
departing from this part of it even in the midst of the most violent war. And
it ought to be remarked to the honor of our country, that during the course of
our revolution, notwithstanding the warm resentments it called forth, we never
attempted to annul the British debts, but finally agreed to the 4th article of
the treaty of peace, "That creditors on either side should meet with ^ lawful
impediment to the recovery of all bona fide debts heretofo^ contracted." So
also in the Amsterdam and Antw^p^ loans, we expressly stipulated, that they
should not be impaired on the event of a future war between the two countries.

I think it will be evident from the authorities which I have adduced, that the
sequestration and confiscation of debts and public stock, are not now the
customary and admissible weapons of war. The ancient maxims on this head are
justly and generally exploded by civilized nations, and the interests of
commerce in this, as in many other instances, have happily set bounds to the
intemperance of Gothic rage. In stipulating to a formal renunciation of this
mode of warfare, we have done no more than what we were bound to do by the
acknowledged dictates of good faith. We have renounced a weapon which our own
sense of right and policy had before forbidden us to use. If however it should
be supposed that occasions may sometimes arise in which it would be expedient
for the purpose of more effectually wounding our enemies, to attack public or
private contracts, then let me ask, what difficulty has the treaty thrown in
the way? The same fierceness of character which would lead us to violate the
received maxims of war and national duty, would readily set aside the moral
obligation of this article. Its only effect arises from laying down in the
rational season of peace, the rule of conduct in war, and by superadding an
express, to the implied, sanction of good faith.

But it is alleged that this article has no actual reciprocity, because all the
debts are due from us either as a nation or as individuals, and that our
citizens hold no British stock, and have few or no demands upon their subjects.
If, however, this species of confiscation be really repugnant to the present
usage of nations, and is unjust and impolitic, the renunciation was equally fit
and proper, whether it was mutual or not, and in proportion to the means we had
of using this mode of warfare, does the sacrifice redound to our credit and
character. But the truth is, that the beneficial operation of this article is
principally on our side. It is much more satisfactory and necessary to us, than
it is to Great Britain, because it tends directly to foster and strengthen the
credit of the United States, both public and private, a circumstance of the
utmost moment to our prosperity as an infant nation.

It is by force of public credit, that our government has attained to its
present stability, and has so many competent means of acting with efficacy
whenever the public exigencies require it. Credit, as a good judge of our
interest has observed, is the invigorating principle of this country. Any
addition to it, however sma^l, will give much greater power of self-defence,
than the little persidious and exploded resource of confiscating debts or
violating the pledged negociability, and sacredness of public stock. Nor is
private credit of much less utility in a country which has so little capital,
in proportion to the extent and variety of the demands for it. We have immense
territories of waste land to clear and settle; and abundance of raw materials
for nourishing the manufacturing and mechanic arts: but to answer these ends,
requires an unceasing supply of capital, or credit, which in most cases is its
eligible substitute. In short there are no people upon earth who have so many
inducements as the United States, to declare unequivocally to the world, that
the claims of their creditors shall always be deemed sacred in peace and in war.

After taking such a full view of the subject, we cannot withhold our
astonishment that Mr. Burr, and Mr. Tazewell, should each of them, in the
senate, by formal propositions of amendment, single out this article, among
others, as a proper object of censure and repeal.

There is one more objection to this article, which merits some attention for
its singularity; and because it places in a strong light, the extreme jealousy
or predetermination to condemn, with which every part of the treaty has been
read. It is apprehended or rather pretended to be, that the king of Great
Britain will engross all the shares of our several American banks, and thereby
obtain the entire control of them and fill them with British directors. It is
just as rational to suppose that he will buy up all our goods and chattels, and
thereby put a total stop to agriculture and manufactures. If the king of Great
Britain is disposed to expend his money for the disturbance of our government,
there are much more effective methods of doing it than by the indirect means of
our banks. Such an apprehension is ridiculous in the extreme, and cannot surely
impose on the most credulous mind, especially when it is known that the several
bank charters expressly provide that all the directors shall be American
citizens, and that no stockholder shall be entitled to vote for a director
unless he either attends in person or resides within the Untied States.

We have now finished an examination of the first ten articles of the treaty,
and which form the permanent part; for the commercial articles which follow
being of more difficult adjustment, and their effect not being so easily
ascertained by theory as experience, were wisely limited to a short period. It
has often been asked, and with an air of conscious triumph, what single
equivalent have we got for so many and great concessions on our part? Let us
review for a moment the ground we have gone over, and see if an answer cannot
be given which will satisfy all the real friends to the interest of our country.

We have gained all the western posts without bloodshed -- we have obtained a
promise of complete indemnity for all unlawful spoliations on our trade, as
soon as an impartial tribunal shall have ascertained the amount of our losses
-- We have obtained a liberal and permanent commerce between our frontiers and
the whole frontier of the British provinces in America, and we have by these
means removed the principal sources of national complaint against
Great Britain, and secured to our country the continuance of the blessings of
peace. And what have we conceded on our part? We have promised to pay such
losses only as British creditors have suffered in their debts, by occasion of
legal impediments in this country, as soon as an impartial tribunal shall have
ascertained the amount of such losses, and to pay for such British vessels only
as we have suffered, without using the means in our power to prevent it, to be
captured within our territory, contrary to the law of nations. And we have also
allowed a liberal and permanent commerce between Canada and our interior
possessions. These are the material parts of the permanent treaty, and it
appears that both nations have conceded, in those instances, what in justice
and equity they ought to have done, and to have manifested a mutual disposition
to forget past animosity, and to live upon friendly terms hereafter.

No. VII
IN examining the commercial part of the treaty, we are not to enquire, as we
have heretofore done, into matter of strict right. Arrangements of commerce
must depend upon the good will and pleasure of the contracting parties. They
are things of imperfect obligation only, and cannot be peremptorily demanded.
Every nation will accommodate so far, and so far only, as suits her interests
or policy, and it will always be a question to be determined in sound
discretion by other powers, how far their interest or policy will admit of a
connection, on such terms as can be obtained. Commercial propositions may be
granted, acceded to, or rejected by either party, without affording to the
other any just cause of war. It is therefore a matter for consideration, how
far the remaining articles of the treaty are admissible or not, upon the
principles of public expediency.

Although the 12th article may now very properly be left out of discussion, yet
since it is the fashion to reprobate it in the most unqualified terms, and to
use it as an instrument for inflaming the public passions, as well as to carry
disgrace to the other parts of the work, it may not be amiss to give it some
examination.

It is well known that every European nation has endeavored, more or less, to
monopolize to itself, the commerce of its colonies, and upon that account
prohibited the ships of foreign nations from trading to them, and has
prohibited them from importing European goods from any foreign nation. -- This
has been the case with Denmark, Holland, France, Spain, Portugal, and Great
Britain, although the manner in which this monopoly has been exercised in those
different nations, has been very different. Great Britain has been as much
distinguished as any of her neighbors, during a century past, for a
pertinacious adherence to the monopoly system, and it has become one of the
rivetted maxims of her policy, to regard the exclusive enjoyment of her colony
trade, as an essential nursery of seamen, and a constant support of her naval
power. So late as the year 1783, Lord Sheffield gave his sanction to this
ancient doctrine, and said, that it would be impolitic in Great Britain to
admit American vessels into the British West India islands, and we see with
what great allowance we ought to compare the privileges conceded in this
article, with the theory of an unlimited commerce.

The French convention, during their present revolution, have recognized and
adopted the English policy This appears from the eloquent report of Barrere,
upon their navigation act, which is intended for perpetuity, and is declared to
be the basis of their policy and commerce. The act ordains, that no commodities
shall be imported into France, but in French vessels, or in those of the
country which produced the commodity; and that foreign vessels shall not
transport from one French port to another, any commodities of the growth or
manufactures of France or her colonies. -- And, notwithstanding the necessities
of the war may have induced the French to a temporary departure from this act,
we may be assured, the principles advanced in the report, are too generally and
powerfully felt, not to induce them to adhere to it on the return of peace, as
the sure basis of their maritime strength. "The prohibitions of a navigation
act," says Barrere, "should be as extensive as they could be made, for without
them it would be a mere illu^ory measure. The English," continues he, "from
whom we borrow this system, have given it that extension, and, indeed, they are
to be applauded for it."

When we consider the value that is attached to the carrying trade, in the
opinion of the European nations, we have no reason to be disappointed that Mr.
Jay could not get access to the British Islands on better terms. It was to have
been wished that he could have got the admission of vessels of any burden into
this trade, but this was undoubtedly beyond his power. While Great Britain
consented to admit us to trade to her islands in our own bottoms, we may be
assured she was determined to do it in such a manner as not materially to
affect her carrying trade, the source of her security and greatness. This must
have been the reason with her for restricting our vessels to 70 tons and under
(and indeed it is understood that the treaty was kept open for some time on the
part of Mr. Jay, while he was endeavoring to extend this clause) and from
carrying any molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa or cotton, either from her islands
in vessels of the United States, to any where but this country. It will be
asked why Great Britain shonld wish to restrain us from carrying any of these
articles to Europe, provided they are not the growth of her islands? the answer
is, that nothing short of a total prohibition, would in her opinion,
effectually secure her carrying trade, since her own and foreign sugar or
coffee would not easily be distinguished, and any modification would have
opened a wide door to elude the whole intent of the restraint, would have
rendered the whole prohibition, to use the words of Barrere, a mere illusory
measure.

It is not my intention to vindicate either the justness or liberality of this
policy on the part of Great Britain. It is sufficient to say that it appears to
have been her inflexible policy, and to which she thought herself bound in duty
to adhere. The only question is, whether there was any reasonable prospect at
present of our obtaining better terms; and if not, whether it was not upon the
whole for our interest to accept of the trade upon those terms? This may yet be
a doubtful point, though I acknowledge a considerable objection to the 12th
article as it now stands, that is, the prohibition to carry melasses, sugar,
cotton, etc. to Europe, is so general as to include those articles even of our
own production. This prohibition, with respect to coffee and sugar in
particular, it is said, would be very inconvenient to us during the present
war, though in time of peace it would be of no consequence. -- The 12th article
does not prohibit us from exporting any of those articles from the other West
India islands to any part of the world. We are only restricted from exporting
them from the British West India islands (except to the United States) in order
to preserve to the English their carrying trade, and from the United States in
order to preserve the other restraint from evasion.

It ought not to be forgotten that this article was limited to two years from
the conclusion of the present war, and then the contracting parties were to
endeavor to regulate this trade, with a view to their mutual advantage, and
the extension of commerce; and if they should not agree on new arrangements,
all the articles of the treaty, except the first ten, were to fall to the
ground. At the end of the two years we should most probably have entered on the
negotiation with much less difficulty than at present. -- The British
West Indies would have been for some time accustomed to the benefits of our
trade, and have got into the habit of placing their dependence as well as their
affections upon it; while the mother country would have been a little
familiarized to our trade with her colonies, and her jealousies and prejudices
would probably have greatly diminished with regard to it. We should have
renewed the discussion with all those advantages which we now want, and the
chance is, that the intercourse would not only have been continued but been
attended with a favorable enlargement. And if eventually the negotiation should
have failed and left only the ten first articles of the treaty remaining, yet
those articles, as we noticed in the last number, are well worthy of the
mission, since they restore tranquillity and justice to our country.

The 13th article of the treaty relates to our commerce with the British
East Indies, and all the advantages which art conceded to us by this article,
are without the smallest pretended equivalent on our part. The privileges of
this article are not denied by those who have been most distinguished for their
indiscriminate condemnation of the whole treaty. Decius complains, however,
that our commerce was on a better footing before, by the mere permission of the
British government. It is sufficient to observe in answer to this, that the
same permission can still be continued: there is nothing in this article which
prohibits the India coasting trade. It would have been unnecessary, for such
prohibition existed before. The article barely declares, that none of its
privileges shall be construed to extend to the coasting trade. In other
respects it leaves that trade just as it found it, under the precarious
pleasure of the British government. But prior to this article, our whole
intercourse with British East India was a matter of favor, and surely it is a
very important consideration that we can now claim it as a matter of right. Mr.
Jefferson, in his report on the privileges and restrictions of our commerce in
foreign countries, seems to have thought very differently from Decius on the
subject of a precarious trade. He considered a commerce depending on the sole
discretion of a foreign power, as a real inconvenience. "The disadvantage (he
observes) of a tenure which may be suddenly discontinued, was experienced by
our merchants on a late occasion. The embarrassments of the moment were great,
and the possibility of their renewal lays our commerce to England under a
species of discouragement. The distinction is too remarkable not to be noticed,
that our navigation is excluded from the security of fixed laws, while that
security is given to the navigation of others."

These remarks of Mr. Jefferson are solid; and they outweigh a thousand
town-meeting resolves. Without this treaty our trade to every British port can
be interdicted by a nod of the British executive. But by this treaty, our
commerce to England and the East Indies, which now rests on the will of the
ministry or the colonial government, is placed on the footing of permanent
right. In this respect we gain an immense advantage -- an advantage that we do
not enjoy to the same extent, with any other nation upon earth.

The commercial concessions on the part of Great Britain, which we have been
just reviewing, are not only equal, but superior to those which are to be met
with in the commercial treaties between her and oath powers, for more than a
century past.

The treaty between Great Britain and Spain, in 1667, and which for its
advantages in matters of trade, was confirmed in 1713, takes special care to
limit the commerce of the two nations to the territories, provinces and
islands, to which trade and commerce had before been accustomed. And yet two
years afterward his Catholic majesty, as an evidence of his inclination to
cultivate friendship, does indeed allow the English to gather salt in the isle
of Tortugas, because they had enjoyed that liberty in the reign of Charles II.

In the treaty of commerce and navigation between Great Britain and Russia,
which was made in the year 1766, the friendly privileges of trade between the
two powers, were confined to such places where leave in granted to the subjects
of other nations. In the same spirit of jealousy and colony monopoly, which
appears but too prevalent throughout Europe, Russia takes care in her treaty of
amity and commerce with Denmark, in the year 1782, to except from the
commercial grant, her ports of the Black and Caspain seas, and all her other
possessions in Asia -- and the king of Denmark, on his part, excepts also his
possessions in America, and elsewhere out of Europe. Nay, in the more recent
treaty between France and England in 1786, and which was made with the express
view of promoting a more liberal intercourse, the trade is limited to each
other's territories situated in Europe.

Nor have our own treaties of commerce with the powers of Europe been more
favored in this respect. In the treaty with France, on which so much
unqualified applause has been bestowed by the enemies of the instrument under
consideration, there is no very extensive admission to her colonial
possessions. France indeed grants us as a matter of favor, one or more free
ports in Europe, and the free ports which have been end are open in the French
islands in America. And in our treaty of commerce with Holland, we expressly
stipulate to leave to the Dutch the peaceable enjoyment of their rights in the
countries, islands, and seas, in the East and West Indies, without any
hindrance or molestation. This is, indeed, stipulating for the per petuity of
their monopoly. On the other hand, Great Britain, by the 13th article of the
present treaty, gives us a free and liberal admission into all her territories
in the East Indies; on immense country, which contains more than twenty
millions of inhabitants, is guarded by an army of above 70,000 men -- and
yields an annual revenue of more than eight millions sterling. And the only
restriction to which we bind ourselves, in return, is not to carry her East
India commodities to any country but America, where they shall he unladen -- a
restriction which Britain could very reasonably ask as a security to her
carrying trade.

I cannot but conclude, that every reasonable man will see in this article,
some evidence of a spirit of accommodation on the part of Great Britain, and
much proof of influence and ability in our negociator.

No. VIII.
Article 14.
THIS article admits Americans to a free trade to the British dominions in
Europe, and British subjects to the same free trade in the United States.

One would think that this article was so reciprocal as to admit of no ground
of censure. But even this article has not given us an equivalent in the opinion
of some men, who contend, that as British vessels are excluded from no port in
the United States, so American vessels ought to be excluded from no port in the
British territories.

Decius says, "we can only go to a small part of the British dominions, viz. to
those in Europe;" and he should have added, we are admitted there only by
proclamation from year to year.

But does Decius value a commercial country by its geographical dimensions? Do
these constitute the greatness or smallness of commercial privileges? This
certainly is a new doctrine; and the chicanery of such insinuations deserves
reprobation by every honest man.

No matter what is the size of Great Britain -- admit that it does not
comprehend more land than the state of New York has, in a republican humor,
sold to an individual; this is nothing to the point. The trade of that spot of
earth, is at least double, not to say treble, the trade of the United States,
-- By admitting American citizens to a free participation of this commerce, we
have more than an equivalent for a free admission of British vessels into all
the ports of the United States.

The reflection of Decius, that our "envoy has, in this place, brought the
principles of inequality into conspicuous action, as if anxious to circumscribe
our commerce, and that he loses no opportunity of imposing restrictions on it,"
has not a shadow of foundation -- it is the fabrication of a most malignant
mind. The whole article is founded on most equal and reciprocal principles, so
far as regards Great Britain, independent of her colonies: but in proportion to
the extent of the manufactures and export of that country, it is most
advantageous to America.

It is said we are not admitted into all the British colonies. True; but such
admission would be a concession to us without an equivalent, for we have no
colonies to exchange the benefit.

Let us contrast this article with the privileges obtained by the treaty with
France, negociated by the "Venerable Franklin." By the 30th article of that
treaty, "The most christian majesty will grant the subjects of the United
States one or more free ports in Europe, and the free ports which have been and
are open in the French islands." Since the revolution, necessity has compelled
the convention to open all the ports in France: but which nation was most
liberal in times of peace, or most jealous of its trade?

Great Britain opens all her ports in Europe -- all her ports in the East
Indies -- and all her ports in the West Indies, to vessels of small burden,
restricting only the direct carrying trade (...) her colonies to Europe. France
opened one (...) ports in Europe, some of her ports in the West Indies, and not
one in the East Indies.

This is a fair statement of the advantages of trade with the two countries, as
we enjoyed them with France before the revolution, and as we should enjoy them
by the present treaty with Great Britain; and let any man decide, which treaty
is the most liberal, in respect to opening the ports of the two countries and
their colonies. The advantage is infinitely on the side of the present treaty
with Great Britain.

Article 15.
This article stipulates that each nation shall be treated by the other, on the
footing of the most favored nation. So far the article corresponds exactly with
all our other treaties: viz. with France, Sweden, Holland and Prussia. The
second clause of the article, reserving to Great Britain the right of imposing
duties on our tonnage, equal to what we impose on British tonnage in our ports,
concedes nothing but what Great Britain now enjoys; that is, the right of
treating our trade as we treat hers. And the agreement in the last clause that
the United States will not for a certain period increase the duties on British
tonnage, is a restriction that cannot injure our trade.

Indeed no objection seems to be made to this article, except that it binds the
United States to treat Great Britain as well as we treat other nations. This,
with men of party spirit, who suffer their passions to lead their opinions, is
a most unpardonable crime.

I trust, however, that the government of America will regulate its measures,
even toward Great Britain, with justice and impartiality. I am persuaded it is
not only most honorable, but most expedient; and that justice and a spirit of
accommodation will procure more advantages than a revengeful, retaliating,
hostile disposition.

The 16th, respecting consuls, is probably not objectionable.

Article 17.
This is one of the articles which has excited the most violent clamors. Indeed
we cannot but observe, that such articles as may affect the French, are
reprobated with more warmth than those which affect solely the interests of the
United States. It would seem by the zeal discovered on this occasion, that this
treaty ought first to have consulted the wants and wishes of France; and the
interests of the United States ought to have been only a secondary
consideration. There is certainly a precept of high authority, "that we should
love our neighbor as ourselves;" but I know of no rule that requires one
nation to love another better than itself.

I am disposed to treat the French nation with the utmost impartiality, justice
and friendship; and in our compacts with their enemies, we ought to make no
sacrifices of their interest, and yield no points to their enemies, which the
necessity of the case and the essential interests of our own country do not
require.

By this maxim let the articles which may affect France be fairly examined.

The great objection to the 17th article is, that it "has solemnly relinquished
a point, which to us was of more value than the amount of all the depredations
on our trade, the sums due to us for negroes, and losses by detention of our
posts." Now, what is the point relinquished? The answer is, nothing which was
our own; nothing which we could command: nothing which the British nation did
not enjoy before.

The article stipulates, that vessels captured on suspicion of having enemies'
property on board, or of carrying contraband articles to an enemy, shall be
brought into the nearest or most convenient port, and if any property of an
enemy is found on board, that part only which belongs to the enemy shall be
made prize. This is said to be a relinquishment of an important point on our
part. This is a gross misrepresentation.

Relinquishment implies an abandonment of something possessed. If we never had
a right to prevent the capture of our vessels, on suspicion of having enemies
property on board, and to prevent the seizure of that property, then we have
not relinquished it. But that right, with respect to nations not in treaty with
us, we never possessed; we, therefore, have yielded nothing that we before
enjoyed.

By the law of nations, any neutral vessel may be stopped and searched, and any
property of an enemy found on board, may be seized. This law cannot be altered
but by consent of the contracting parties. Great Britain has that right
confessedly, and she will not at present consent to relinquish it. She will
exercise that right -- she does exercise it -- and where is the power to compel
her to abandon it? -- We have no such power, nor is there a power on earth that
has a right to demand it, or authority to enforce such a demand. If that is
ever surrendered, it must be by voluntary consent.

This being the true state of things, what has the article of the treaty
stipulated? Observe the trade. It is not said the property of an enemy may be
taken -- but, taking the right for granted, it says, the enemy's property,
only, shall be made prize.

The article further stipulates, and this was obviously the main purpose of
inserting it in the treaty, that the vessel shall be suffered to proceed with
the rest of her cargo, without impediment -- that there shall be no delay in
deciding on such cases and in the payment or recovery of indemnification by the
owners or by the masters of the vessels.

In short, the whole amount of the article is, that the practice of stopping
and examining ship for enemy's property -- a practice authorized by the law of
nations -- a practice which Great Britain will not resign, and which we cannot
persuade or compel her to resign -- that this practice shall be rendered as
little inconvenient to our trade as possible. The article was intended to
restrain, as far as possible, the abuses of this practice by licentious
privateers.

There are many men, who, without any rule of conduct prescribed to them, would
behave with unbounded licentiousness; but if a national compact is before their
eyes, they will respect the rules prescribed. So far, therefore, as the article
goes, it can do no harm; but it may and often will do good.

But to exhibit this thing in still stronger light, I will give the whole of
Mr. Jefferson's letter on the subject. It is an answer to a remonstrance from
Mr. Genet to the president, respecting the seizure of French property on board
of American vessels, dated July 9, 1793. It is the very point in question, and
as the reasoning of Mr. Jefferson is, in the present case unanswerable, it is
proper the public should have the letter entire.

Philadelphia, July 24th, 1793.
Mr. Jefferson, Secretary of State, to Mr. Genet, Minister Plenipotentiary of
France.
SIR,
YOUR favor of the 9th inst. covered the information of Silvat Ducamp, Pierre
Nouvel, Chouquet de Savarence, Gaston de Nogere, and G. Beustier, that being on
their passage from the French West Indies to the United States, with slaves and
merchandise of their property, these vessels were stopped by British armed
vessels, and their property taken out as lawful prize.

I believe it cannot be doubted, but that by the general law of nations, the
goods of a friend found in the vessels of an enemy, are free, and the goods of
an enemy, found in the vessel of a friend, are lawful prize. Upon this
principle, I presume, the British armed vessels have taken the property of
French citizens found in our vessels, in the cases abovementioned, and I
confess I should be at a loss on what principle to reclaim it. It is true, that
sundry nations, desirous of avoiding the inconvenience of having their vessels
stopped at sea, ransacked, carried into port, detained, under pretense of
having enemy's goods on board, have, in many instances, introduced by their
special treaties, another principle between them, that enemy bottoms shall make
enemy goods, and friendly bottoms friendly goods; a principle much less
embarrassing to commerce, and equal to all parties in point of gain and loss;
but this is altogether the effect of particular treaty, controuling, in special
cases, the general principle of the law of nations, and therefore taking effect
between such nations only as have so agreed to cantroul it. England has
generally determined to adhere to the rigorous principle, having, in no
instance, as far as I recollect, agreed to the modification of letting the
property of the goods follow that of the vessel, except in the single one of
her treaty with France. We have adopted this modification in our treaties with
France, the United Netherlands, and Prussia; and therefore, as to them, our
vessels cover the goods of their enemies, and we lose our goods when in the
vessels of their enemies. Accordingly, you will be pleased to recollect, that
in the late case of Holland and Mackie, citizens of the United States, who had
laden a cargo of flour on board a British vessel, which was taken by the French
frigate Ambuscade, and brought into this port; when I reclaimed the cargo, it
was only on the ground that they were ignorant of the declaration of war when
it was shipped.

You observed, however, that the 14th article of our treaty had provided that
ignorance should not he pleaded beyond two months after the declaration of war,
which term had elapsed, in this case, by some few days; and finding that to be
the truth, though their real ignorance was equally true, I declined the
reclamation, as it never was in my view to reclaim the cargo, nor in yours to
offer to restore it, by questioning the rule established in our treaty, that
enemy bottoms make enemy goods. With England, Spain, Portugal and Austria, we
have no treaties; therefore we have nothing to oppose to their acting according
to the general law of nations, that enemy goods are lawful prize, though found
in the bottoms of a friend. Nor do I see that France can suffer, on the whole,
for though she loses her goods in our vessels, when found therein by England,
Spain, Portugal or Austria, yet she gains our goods when found in the vessels
of England, Spain, Portugal, Austria, the United Netherlands or Prussia; and I
believe I may safely affirm, that we have more goods afloat in the vessels of
these six nations, than France has afloat in our vessels, and consequently,
that France is the gainer, and we the loser, by the principle of our treaty;
indeed we are losers in every direction of that principle; for when it works in
our favor, it is to save the goods of our friends; when it works against us, it
is to lose our own; and we shall continue to lose while the rule is only
partially established. When we shall have established it with all nations, we
shall be in a condition neither to gain nor lose, but shall be less exposed to
vexatious searches at sea. To this condition we are endeavoring to advance;
but as it depends on the will of other nations, as well as our own, we can only
obtain it when they shall be ready to concur.

I cannot, therefore, but flatter myself, that on revising the cases of Ducamp
and others, you will perceive, that their losses result from the state of war,
which has permitted their enemies to take their goods, though found in our
vessels, and consequently, from circumstances over which we have no control.

The rudeness to their persons practiced by their enemies, is certainly not
favorable to the character of the latter. We feel for it as much as for the
extension of it to our own citizens, their companions, and find in it a motive
for requiring measures to be taken, which may prevent repetitions of it.

I have the honor to be, etc. TH. JEFFERSON.


I beg the reader to note the following clause of the foregoing letter: "To
this condition, we are endeavoring to advance; but as it depends on the will
of other nations as well as our own, we can only obtain it, when THEY shall be
ready to concur."

I will close with remarking, that by our treaty with France, it is expressly
stipulated, that free ships should make free goods. The convention, however in
1793, ordered vessels, laden with provisions, to be carried into their ports,
in violation of that treaty. They afterward revoked the decree with respect to
American vessels. They afterward extended the decree to American vessels, in
defiance of the treaty. A few months ago, they relented, confessed they had
ill-treated their allies, and annulled the decree a second time. A statement of
these facts was made by the president to congress, Dec. 5, 1793. See his
address of that date, prefixed to the correspondence between Mr. Jefferson and
Mr. Hammond.

Such unsteadiness in public measures operates peculiarly to the prejudice of
trade. The merchant, if he knows enemy's property is liable to seizure, may
avoid risk by declining to take it on board. But when a nation is changing its
regulations on this head, the merchant is exposed to vexations, without the
power of avoiding the evil.

No. IX.
Article 18.
THIS is one of the articles in the treaty which gives great offense. The
objections to it are -- "That it enumerates among contraband goods, timber for
ship building, tar and rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and
generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels, unwrought
iron and fir planks only excepted; and that it admits provisions in certain
cases to be contraband," contrary to all our other treaties, and even contrary
to the treaty of 1786, between Great Britain and France.

I frankly acknowledge that no part of the treaty is more vulnerable than this:
-- no part can furnish more substantial grounds of complaint.

This article proceeds from a strict adherence on the part of Great Britain, to
every part of the law of nations, which favors her superiority as a great
maritime power; and its defense rests on the inability of our envoy to procure
a relaxation of those laws.

The time for negociating this article was unfavorable, as in most other
respects it was favorable. Great Britain, always anxious to preserve her naval
strength, the great and only bulwark of the nation, is now engaged in a most
inveterate war with France, a war on which her very existence depends, and at
this time, will not yield one clause of the law of nations, to abridge her own
power of crippling the naval force of her enemy. This is a sixed point; and our
envoy could only admit the article in that form.

There were but two alterations; both of which would result in the same
consequences to our trade. -- This idea is an important one. If the article had
been rejected by our minister, Great Britain has, and actually exercises, the
right by the general laws of nations, to consider all those articles
contraband, and to declare them such, when she judges that by these means she
can reduce her enemy. If the article was received, it could give no greater
latitude to Great Britain than she enjoyed before. Whichever alternative our
envoy might choose, our trade must be subject to the exercise of the same right
and to the same embarrassments.

If the right of treating all the articles mentioned as contraband, results
from the law of nations, and if Great Britain will not abandon that right, is
it not better, in a treaty of a temporary nature, to accede to the right, and
enumerate the articles which are liable to seizure and confiscation, that our
merchants may know the law, and avoid losses, than to suffer that right to
stand on the law of nations, which is less known and which might expose our
citizens to heavy losses.

Every liberal man must wish to see the field of confiscations in war narrowed
as much as possible: but if we cannot circumscribe that field, is it not of
great importance to our citizens, to mark out the ground with distinct lines,
that every man may distinguish it and shun the danger?

Every rational person will say, it is; and this is the effect of this article
of the treaty.

I know it has been contended that timber and provisions are not, by the law of
nations, contraband. But Vattel, a modern French writer, of the highest
authority, includes them among contraband goods. His words are, "Commodities
particularly used in war, and the importation of which to an enemy is
prohibited, are called contraband goods. Such are arms, military and naval
stores, timber, horses, and even provisions, in certain junctures, when there
are hopes of reducing the enemy by famine." Book 3. chapter 7. Sect. 112.

The words, naval stores, includes cordage, hemp, tar, rozin, and every thing
that serves for the equipment of ships of war. In the treaty of 1786,
Great Britain and France had excepted naval stores and provisions from the list
of contraband articles. That treaty is annulled by the present war; and in a
numerous collection of treaties now before me, I find no instance of an
enumeration of naval stores, as excepted from contraband, by Great Britain. But
naval stores are generally left by that nation, as contraband by the general
law of nations. The right to consider them so, can be abridged only by treaty;
and Great Britain, at this moment, will consent to no such abridgment.

Some people say, it is better to let this point rest on the law of nations,
than to admit it in a treaty. This is merely a matter of expedience; but if the
safety of the merchants' property is consulted, it is unquestionably better to
have the contraband articles enumerated.

The stipulations in the 2d and 3d clause, of the 18th article, are in favor of
neutral vessels. The agreement, that when provisions are regarded as
contraband, they shall be paid for to their full value, with a mercantile
profit, freight and demurrage, is a rule of direction to the captors, that may
prove favorable to a neutral trade, subject to be embarrassed by powers at war.
And the provision of the last clause, that neutral vessels entering a blockaded
port, not knowing it to be blockaded, shall not be seized and confiscated for
the first attempt, is equally salutary and favorable.

Article 19.
This article provides against the ill usage which the subjects of neutral
powers are liable to receive from the commanders of ships of war and
privateers. This article is common in treaties -- it is in nearly the same
words, as in all our other treaties with foreign nations.

But it will be of much more use between Great Britain and America, as It will
operate as a prohibition against impressing American seamen on board of English
ships. It has been objected to the treaty, that no provision of this kind is
included in it. But the 19th article is a direct prohibition of this practice.

On account of a sameness of language, it is desirable that some effectual mode
might be devised to distinguish American from British seamen. It might be of
importance that American seamen should be provided with certificates of their
citizenship, under the seal of some public officer. This doubtless deserves the
attention of our executive, perhaps of congress, as not only British
commanders, but French also, have mistaken American seamen for British, and our
citizens are thus exposed to injustice from both parties.

It has been objected that the bonds required of the commanders of privateers
to indemnify persons injured, are not large enough -- the sums being limited to
1500 l. sterling for small privateers, and 3000 l. sterling, in case the
privateer carries more than one hundred and fifty men. It is sufficient to say,
in answer to this, that few cases can occur, where damages to a greater amount
will be incurred: and where the bonds do not secure the damages, a complaint to
government will insure any further claims founded in justice.

It may be observed, that this clause of the article is copied nearly from a
similar one in the treaty of 1786, between Great Britain and France. The sums
limited by that treaty are the same; and will probably be found equal to all
necessary purposes.

The last clause obliges judges of admiralty, in case any sentence of
condemnation has been pronounced against vessels or goods, to deliver on demand
authentic copies of the proceedings to the master, he paying the legal fees. A
stipulation of this kind was necessary; as instances of delay and refusal of
such cop^es have been experienced by our citizens during the present war.

The 20th article is usual in all treaties. It makes provision for guarding
property from pirates, or restoring it to its proper owners -- a provision of
mutual benefit, to the contracting parties, and liable to no objection.

No. X.
Article 21.
THIS article prohibits the subjects of the contracting parties, to commit acts
of hostility against each other -- to accept commissions from a foreign prince
or state, enemies to the other party -- to enlist them into military service,
etc. and declares that the laws against such offenses shall be punctually
executed. The law of the United States, passed in June 1794, enacts the penalty
of a fine, nor exceeding 2000 dollars, and imprisonment for the foregoing
offenses.

The same article of the treaty makes it piracy to accept a foreign commission
or letter of marque, for arming any privateer to act against the other party.
This is prohibited also by the some law of the United States, under a penalty
of imprisonment, at the discretion of the court, and a fine not exceeding 5000
dollars.

When the treaty first appeared, this article excited much acrimony. It was
considered as pointed at the military maneuvers of a late French minister, who
had attempted to excite Americans to war against the Spanish settlements, and
to privateering against Great Britain. It was supposed to restrain the right of
expatriation; a doctrine first propagated by the same Frenchman, to evade the
law of nations and a doctrine which never would have entered the heads of our
citizens, had it not been taught by that artful sophist. In giving their
decided opinion against this article of the treaty, many rash men found
themselves in a dilemma, when they were informed that the article was in our
treaty with France.

So eager were people of a certain faction to condemn the whole treaty, that
they would not give themselves time to be informed whether it was right or
wrong. But when they came to be told that they were restrained from taking
foreign commissions to act against a power at peace with the United States, by
the acknowledged laws of nations, by an express statute of the United States,
and by an article in all our other treaties, they began to blush for their
haste in giving opinions on what they did not understand. No article in the
treaty is more requisite for the peace of our nation, and none more conformable
to the principles of justice between governments.

Vattel says, "a nation ought not to suffer the citizens to do an injury to the
subjects of another state, much less to offend the state itself. If you let
loose the reins of your subjects against foreign nations, these will behave in
the same manner to you; and instead of that friendly intercourse which nature
has established between all men, we should see nothing but one nation robbing
another." B. 2. chapter 6.

"I account associates of an enemy, those who assist him in his war without
being obliged to it by treaty." B. ^. chapter 6.

A nation is not accountable for every act of an individual citizen; but if a
state or nation openly permits the citizens to take part with the enemies of a
third nation, that third nation has a right to consider that state as making a
common cause with its enemies, and to declare war against it of course. The
peace of neutral nations depends on the prohibitions of this article of the
treaty.

It has been objected to this article, that it is unconstitutional, as it
creates the crime of piracy, when the power of defining piracy is vested in
congress. But the act of congress before mentioned, admits the right of the
president and senate to define piracy in treaties; as the 9th section enacts,
"that nothing in the act shall be construed to prevent the prosecution or
punishment of treason or a piracy defined by a treaty, or other law of the
United States."

Nothing marks the partiality of a certain faction more distinctly than their
objections to this article. We have had a similar article in our treaty with
France more than seventeen years: and in our treaties with Sweden, Prussia, and
the States General, more than ten years, and not a syllable of objection was
lisped against the principle. People did not generally know that such an
article existed. But the moment our government treats Great Britain with the
same measure of justice, as we had before observed toward other nations, our
Jacobins begin to clamor.

It is this popular partiality for France; this disposition to favor every
thing French, at the expense of every principle of justice and equity, which
occasions all the difficulty our executive has encountered in preserving our
peace, and in accommodating our differences with Great Britain. Nay more; this
partiality displayed on all occasions, and to a degree highly improper for a
neutral nation, has been a principal cause of the abusive treatment our seamen
have received from British privateers.

It is agreed on all hands, that our interest as a nation is super-eminently
concerned in preserving peace. But how can peace be secured unless we treat the
powers at war with impartiality and justice? Vattel observes, "A neutral nation
desirous safely to enjoy the conveniences of that state, is in all things to
show an exact impartiality between the parties at war; for should one nation
favor another to its detriment, that nation cannot complain if the other
treats it as an adherent and confederate of his enemy."

Our people have indeed a fine apology for showing a preference to France; that
of favoring liberty and republicanism. So far as the French fight for national
independence against the combined powers, they are engaged in a just and
necessary war, and the wishes of all Americans must be with them. But people
who think France has a republican government, or any other free government, are
egregiously mistaken. Nor is there as great a prospect of her establishing a
republic, as there is that she is doomed to despotism, or to be split into a
multitude of small factious democracies, perpetually at war with each other.

People are, therefore, in every view, unjustifiable in aiding any of the
powers at war, in a manner not warranted by the laws of neutrality. As we value
our own government, and the prosperity of the country, we are to avoid every
act which can commit a breach on our public peace. It is rashness and madness
to combine our interest with any European power in such a manner, as to be
drawn into their political contentions. The pretense of aiding the cause of
liberty is a mere artifice to catch our passions. If the nations of Europe
cannot defend their liberties, we cannot be answerable for their ill ^uccess.
We aid them best by our peace and our ^ndustry.

The 22d article of the treaty stipulates, that in case of injuries or damage
on one side or the other, neither party will authorize reprisals, until a
statement of the same, verified by proof, shall be presented to the other, and
satisfaction demanded. This stipulation is in exact conformity with the law of
nations, and is supported by principles of policy and justice.

The provisions in the 23d article are well adapted to advance the intentions
of the contracting parties, and are reciprocally beneficial. The permission of
American vessels to enter prohibited ports in case of distress, is a concession
conformable to the laws of hospitality.

The objection to the clause which enjoins a respect to be paid to officers
according so their commissions, can be raised only by men who are destitute of
the civility, which enjoins that respect.

The 24th article prohibits foreign privateers with commissions, from a prince
or state in enmity with either nation, to arm or sell prizes in the ports of
the parties.

The 25th article makes it lawful for the ships of war and privateers of either
party to enter the ports of the other, without being liable to be searched,
seized, or detained, or to pay admiralty fees.

These stipulations are also in our treaty with France; and no well grounded
objection has been made to them. Some superficial people have supposed that
they clash with our treaty with France. But there is an express declaration
that these stipulations shall not be construed to operate contrary to former
existing treaties. And if no such caution had been taken, the treaty with Great
Britain could not have operated to the prejudice of France: for it is an
express law of nations. "That a sovereign (or state) already bound by a treaty,
cannot make others contrary to the first. The things about which he has entered
into engagements, are no longer at his disposal.

"If it happens that a posterior treaty is found, in some point, to contradict
one that is more ancient, the new treaty is null with respect to that point --
This relates to treaties with different powers." Vattel, B. 2. Chapter 12. Sect.
165.

So far the fears of people are totally groundless. But the following clause
has excited acrimonious remarks. "The two parties agree, that while they
continue in amity, neither of them will in future make a treaty that shall be
inconsistent with this and the preceding article." What can be the objecton to
this clause? The laws of nations, and the rules of moral justice, forbid a
state to make a subsequent treaty to infringe a prior one. No nation can do it.
The passage just quoted from Vattel is expressly to this purpose: and the
clause has done nothing more than convert a moral obligation into a contract, a
law of nations into a conventional law between the parties. Stipulations of
this kind, like statutes in affirming of common law, add the sanction of a
positive contract to an implied one. No new obligation is created; an agreement
of this sort may be considered as strengthening the old one.

The 26th artitcle provides, that in case of war, merchants may continue to
reside in the respective dominions, behaving peaceably -- and in case their
conduct shall render them suspected, the term of twelve months is allowed to
settle their accounts and remove their families and effects. This is a
favorable provision, and highly necessary, between countries so extensively
connected in commerce. The term of 12 months for removal, is longer than is
usually allowed; the term generally assigned in treaties is 6 or 9 months.

To the two last articles, I presume, no objections are made.

No. XI
THUS having attempted to remove every objection of consequence that has been
urged against the treaty, I will lay before the public a general view of our
trade with the different countries of Europe, Asia and the West Indies.

It has been stated by the opposers of the treaty that the commercial
arrangements want reciprocity -- that we concede much, and gain nothing which
we did not before enjoy.

With respect to the inland trade to Canada, the converse of the proposition is
the truth. The United States gain a free trade to Canada, on equal terms with
British subject, which we did not before enjoy. British subjects gain little or
nothing by the stipulation, which they did not before enjoy. In this part of
the treaty, the advantage is on the side of the United States.

With respect to our foreign commerce, it depends on the will of nations over
whom we have no control. All nations claim the right of admitting ships and
goods into their ports, or prohibiting them at pleasure; or of burdening our
commerce with heavy duties. This right is absolute, and when we obtain any
privilege in their trade, it is by way of grant or concession. The United
States have the same right as to their own ports; but they have not seen fit to
exclude the ships of any nation from a free participation of their trade.

The maritime powers of Europe find a navy so necessary to their safety, amidst
the contending interests of the different nations, that every measure is taken
to multiply their seamen, and increase their shipping. Great Britain is the
nation most interested in this system. From her insular situation, a navy is
her only defense -- to man a navy, she must raise seamen -- to secure a supply
of seamen she must extend her commerce and her carrying trade as far as
possible.

In pursuance of this system of defense, originated her navagation act, in
1660, which restricts her trade to British vessels, and manned mostly with
British seamen. That act has been in operation from its first passing to the
present day; and to prevent temporary or local inconveniences, from a rigid
execution, the parliament have empowered the king and council to dispense with
it on occasion, and open the ports of Great Britain, or her colonies, at such
times and to such nations, as necessities may require

All the nations of Europe have laws respecting their trade, which operate more
or less to encourage their own commerce, and lay that of their neighbors to
their own dominions under restrictions.

A view of the privileges and restrictions of commerce, was offered to
Congress, Dec. 16, 1793, by Mr. Jefferson, which, though not sufficiently
correct or comprehensive, throws much light on the subject. These general facts
will be sufficient for my purpose in this place.

The admission of our vessels into the British dominions in Europe, rests now
on an annual proclamation of the king and council. Although interest and
expedience may operate to continue the privilege of entering those ports at all
times, and with vessels of any burden, yet the tenure of the privilege is
precarious.

By the present treaty, this precarious privilege becomes a right, which cannot
be abridged by the executive of the English nation. This is an advantage; and
Mr. Jefferson, in his Report, admits it to be such. It was an objection he
urged against our former state of commerce to Great Britain, that it was
precarious -- That objection by the treaty is removed.

With respect to her colonial possessions, Great Britain has observed the
jealous policy common to all the nations of Europe. The ships of all nations
are excluded from her colonies, unless it may be a port in the West Indies,
where the Spaniards are permitted to enter with logwood.

In opening her West Indies to American vessels of 70 tons burden, and her East
India ports to American-vessels of any burden, she has conceded a privilege,
which she grants to no other nation on earth. The sacrifice of the carrying
trade on the part of the United States, to obtain admission into the English
West Indies, is deemed more than equivalent, and that stipulation will fall to
the ground. But the direct trade to the British East Indies, is generally
admitted to be highly beneficial.

Let us contrast these advantages in trade with those we enjoy with other
nations.

Our navigation to Spain and Portugal is free: but many of our exports are
prohibited, as tobacco, and rice and whale oils to Portugal. The American trade
however to Spain and Portugal is highly advantageous in a number of articles.
But both these countries prohibit all intercourse with their colonial
possessions. The ports of Sweden and Denmark are open; but the duties paid on
most of the American productions amount to a prohibition.

Our navigation to the United Netherlands is free; but some of the most
material articles of our country, as beef, pork and bread-stuff, are
prohibited, as well as by Great Britain. We can have no intercourse with their
possessions in the East Indies.

France, before the war, guaranteed to the United States, one or more free
ports in Europe, and such ports in the West Indies as were free. In general,
her West Indies were open by an arret of the king. Even the coasting trade in
France was principally carried on by foreign vessels.

The revolution has sensibly varied the whole scene of commerce. Necessity has
opened all French ports to neutral nations. But a navigation act, similar to
that of Great Britain, was decreed, September 2, 1793, to take place January 1,
1794. This, with a long spirited report of Barrere, was transmitted to
Congress, and published by their order in February, 1794. This act is suspended
only on account of the nccessities of France, her commerce being wholly
dependant on neutral bottoms. The moment this act shall take place, we shall be
cut off from all right to the trade of France, except what is guaranteed by
treaty, that is, one or more free ports; and such privileges as we shall be
able to obtain by future stipulations.

The decree is in these words: --

ACT of NAVIGATION, of the FRENCH REPUBLIC.
The National Convention, after having heard the report of their committees of
marine, of commerce, and of public safety, considering that the French nation
has the incontestible right of securing by every method, the prosperity of her
agriculture, commerce and industry; that nothing has a more direct tendency to
this end than a navigation act; and that in the solemn declaration of this act
she only makes use of the same right which she acknowledges to belong to all
other nations -- Decrees as follows:

Art. 1. That no foreign commodities, productions, or merchandise, shall be
imported but directly by French vessels, or those belonging to the inhabitants
of the country of which they are the growth, produce or manufacture, or to the
inhabitants of the country of the ordinary ports of sale and first exportation;
the officers and three fourths of the crew of a foreign vessel being of the
country whose flag the vessel bears; the whole on pain of confiscation of the
vessel and cargo, and a fine of 3000 livres, jointly and severally against the
owners, consignces, and agents of the vessel and cargo, the captain and
lieutenant of the vessel.

2. That foreign vessels shall not transport from one French port to another
French port, any commodities productions or merchandises of the growth,
produce, or manufacture of France, the colonies, or possessions of France,
under the penalties declared in article 1 st.

3. That after the 10th of August next, no vessel shall be reputed French, nor
enjoy the privileges of a French vessel, unless such vessel shall have been
built in the colonies or possessions of France, or declared a goad prize taken
from an enemy, or confiscated for contravention of the laws of France, and
unless the officers and three fourths of the crew are Frenchmen.

On the whole, it is demonstrated that no country on earth yields more
extensive privileges to the American merchant, than Great Britain. It is also
equally demonstrable that Great Britain yields more privileges in her trade
with the United States than she grants to any other nation.

It has been objected to several articles of the treaty, that they are not
reciprocal, because from the circumstances of the two countries, British
subjects will be principally benefited. Thus the 9th and 10th articles are said
to yield advantages to Great Eritain, without an equivalent, because her
subjects hold large tracts of land in the United States, and have debts due
them to a great amount: whereas American subjects hold little or no land, and
have no debts or moneys, in Great Britain.

Objections of this kind must proceed from a peevish captious disposition. It
may just as well be objected that we should have no trade with Great Britain at
all, because her exports to this country exceed her imports from it -- or
because her dominions contain double the number of people, that are in the
United States. Nay, it may just as well be aid that every man has not an equal
right to a highway, because some use the highway ten times as much as others.

In all conventions between states, an equality in principle constitutes an
equivalent. If an article of any treaty gives to both parties a right of doing
the same things, and under the same advantages, that article is reciprocal,
though one of the parties never make use of the right.

Thus in our treaty with France, we permit French armed vessels to bring their
prizes into the ports of the United States. The French also permit the American
vessels to carry their prizes into French ports. The French are in a condition
to use the privilege and do use it every day -- We are not at war, and do not
use the privilege. But will any man say, that article of the treaty is not
mutual? Will any man deny that we have an equivalent for the right conceded to
France?

Just so with respect to our commerce with England or any other power. Suppose
a nation to have but a single port for shipping and commerce, and the United
States to have a thousand. Each party agrees to open all their ports, and admit
the other to a free trade; will it be denied that this is reciprocal? Certainly
not. It is equality in the principle, not in the amount or extent of its
operation, which constitutes reciprocity.

If people are disposed to cavil at inequalities of condition, as well as of
principle, they may find as many causes of discontent, in all other treaties,
as in this with Great Britain.

The truth is, when our other treaties were formed, Americans had confidence in
the constituted authorities of our country. They believed men, who had made
commerce, treaties, and the laws of nations, a study and matter of
contemplation, were best capable of negociating treaties. They trusted to the
men appointed for this purpose. The great mass of people are not competent to
decide what is, or is not for our public interests, in complicated negociations
and national compacts; and unless they repose confidence in public characters,
we shall forever be embroiled with factions.

No. XII.
HAVING in the preceding papers, answered such objections to the treaty, as
appear to have any weight, 'I will close this vindication, by addressing to my
fellow citizens, some considerations of a more general nature.

It was the public opinion the last year, and it is an opinion still maintained
among one description of Americans, that Great Britain has been so humbled by
France, that she will consent to make great sacrifices for the purpose of
securing peace and commerce with this country. It is also believed by many
people, that the kingdom is upon the point of an internal revolution: and that
holding in our hands the power of sequestrating the debts of her citizens, we
may command, at all times, peace and favorable treatment.

All these opinions, though unquestionably erroneous, have contributed to raise
the public expectation, respecting the success of the treaty, to an
unwarrantable pitch.

With respect to the humble condition of Great Britain, where are the proofs?
That her land forces were defeated and cut to pieces, the last campaign, is
undeniable; and there is no question that any combat by land, would be decided
in favor of of France. The numbers, the discipline, and the enthusiasm of the
French forces on land render them irresistible. But the best troops and the
best discipline, without other resources, will not maintain the greatness of a
state or kingdom, for any glenth of time.

France now supports her armies mostly upon her conquered countries. Her
finances are exhausted; and what is, if possible, a more serious calamity, her
internal dissentions debilitate her force, distract her councils, and
disconcert her operations.

The plan of Robespierre was a system of despair. By putting every thing in
requisition, the persons of men, their goods, provisions, and money, the whole
force of France was collected to a point, and the whole energy of that force
was exerted to defeat the most formidable combination ever raised against the
independence of a nation.

This measure was perhaps indispensable in the crisis when it was adopted. But
unfortunately violent exertions in the body politic, as well as in the human
body, are ever followed by debility and languor. The system of requisitions and
the maximum, were calculated to destroy the capital of a country, which, in all
cases, ought to be left untouched, as a source of further productions. The
interest or income only of a country can be safely used for national purposes;
and when a state is compelled to seize the capital stock, though its exertions
may be great, they must certainly be of short duration.

But this is not the only calamity incurred by the system of terror. To enforce
such an arbitrary system, recourse must be had to violent punishment, for
refusals to comply with it; and the summary mode of condemning, as well as the
sanguinary process of executing, tend to excite all the malicious and
revengeful passions of men. The guillotine of France has left every deadly and
rancorous passion, waiting only for a favorable moment for vengeance. The
surviving friends of those who fell victims, to the system of terror, will not
easily forget or forgive the injuries they suffered; and thus that terrible
despotism, which for a few months, compelled all men to unite to defeat foreign
foes and to crush internal insurrections; that system has spread over France
the seeds of faction and dissension, which will afflict the country and weaken
al its exertions, for at least a generation to come. Thus the last season, the
victories of France by land, astonished all nations, and spread dismay through
Europe, while her frigates scoured the ocean, and marred the commerce of her
enemies. But the present season, her armies and her fleet are inactive, her
resources fail, and all is debility and languor.

Great Britain, on the other hand, though her army was destroyed in the
Netherlands, retains all her activity and resources. Her territories have not
been the seat of war; her land has been under full cultivation, her
manufactures have been carried on as usual, her goods are exported nearly as
cheap, and in nearly the same quantities, as in time of peace; her government
retains its vigor, and her fleet, notwithstanding a scarcity of seamen, still
rides mistress of the ocean. The commerce of Great Britain, though a little
impaired, still exceeds that of any other country; and the government has not
been compelled to distress her trade to man her navy. Were there a pressing
necessity for so violent a step, that country, by stripping her merchantmen for
a time, would bring upon the ocean a fleet superior to any that has ever
appeared under one command. But Great Britain has not yet been compelled to
adopt this ruinous expedient; she has not materially impaired her commerce by
impressing seamen -- she has not entrenched upon the capital stock of her
husbandmen and manufacturers. Her debt has indeed been augmented; but still
immense sums of money are offered, and the only question, with government is
whose money shall be received on loan; for the competitors, are numerous. Such
is the monied capital of that country, and such the resources that Great
Britain will probably be able to carry on the war longer than any other power.

Nor is the idea of an approaching revolution, well founded. Ireland may
perhaps give trouble: but the government of England has seldom ever been
supported by a more numerous and powerful majority of the people. The private
associations in England and Scotland, gave some uneasiness for a time; but the
moment government called for a suspension of the habeas corpus act, it was
granted, and the executive dissipated all private societies, with their plans
of revolution. The ease with which this whole business was conducted, certainly
does not mark either fear or weakness in the administration of the government
of Great Britain.

Where, then, is the ground for supposing Great Britain in a distressed state
of humiliation, compelling her to make sacrifices to the United States?

On the contrary, Great Britain at this moment, maintains as commanding an
attitude among the powers of the earth, as at any former period. All the hopes
of Americans, founded on an opinion of the depressed state of that nation, are
wholly delusory. Nor can we expect any thing from the generosity or good will
of the British, or any other nation. National generosity is a mere phantom of
the imagination. It is to the interest, or, at most, to the jastice of a nation
we must address ourselves; and no nation will make concessions beyond what
these require. We are not in a situation to command any foreign nation, to
enforce our claims, or to compel the exercise of justice.

If our sanguine enthusiasts are mistaken totally as to the present power of
Great Britain, they are equally so, as to the force and effect of
sequestration. The injustice of attacking private debts for national wrongs, is
generally admitted; but many people contend that it may be necessary at times
to resort to this measure, as the only effectual weapon in our power, to
terrify Great Britain, a perfidious nation into a sense of justice.

It is surprising how such reasoners mistake the real and certain effects of
such a step. Any man who will give himself time to reflect on the pride of
nations, and especially of the English nation, must be convined, that the use
of this weapon, instead of inducing concessions on the part of Great Britain,
would excite every hostile feeling, not only in the government, but in the very
creditors whose debts should be sequestered. Such a violation of all good
faith, such an attack upon commercial confidence, as the sequestration of
private debts, to avenge national injuries, would put it out of our power to
accommodate differences but by the sword. It would provoke a war of double
sury; and the very man whose debts should be detained, would be the first to
encourage and the last to abandon the contest.

All the high raised expectations of our citizens of obtaining from
Great Britain in her present state, humiliating concessions which her pride
would forbid her to yield in time of peace, are supported by not one
circumstance of rational probability. People who dwell on such prospects of
success, are grossly deceived, both as to facts, and as to the character of the
English nation.

But Judge Rutledge of South Carolina has, on this subject, uttered the
silliest expressions that ever fell from human lips. "England (says he) is
hoping for peace on whatever terms France may grant it: she is reduced to the
last gasp, and were America to seize her by the throat, she would expire in
agonies at her feet."

A man must be little less than insane, to utter such absurd ideas, especially
at a moment when Great Britain possesses more actual resources, the sinews of
war, than all the other powers at war, even France included. And no man, but an
insolvent debtor, who hates his creditor, because he has injured him, would
wish to see a great agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial nation expiring
in agonies. Whatever be the injujuries Great Britain has done this country, it
is not for the interest of mankind, that she should be blotted out of
existence. In no country on earth do the American merchants find more good
faith, fair dealing, aad convenient credit, than among British merchants -- no
creditors are more indulgent to debtors than the British -- and no country on
earth finds extensive credit more useful than the United States.

Whatever be the resentments of our citizens toward Great Britain, they may
rest assured of one fact, and it is of no small moment to some of the United
States, that the treatment Americans will receive from that country will be
more friendly, when the conduct of American debtors is more just.

Another objection to the treaty, or to any treaty with Great Britain, is, that
it begets an unnatural alliance between a monarchy and a republic. This is
clearly the most trifling objection ever offered, and is beneath a serious
answer. And those who make it, ought to blush at their inconsistency,
especially as these very men are rejoicing at the late treaty between France
and the monarch of Prussia, and earnestly expecting every day, to hear of a
treaty between France and Spain.

On the whole, let me ask my fellow citizens what sacrifices we may make by the
treaty?

We have old inveterate disputes with Great Britain, which must be terminated.
War or accommodation are the alternatives. If we wish a war, we waste the blood
and treasure of America, without an object: ^or at the close of the war, the
old disputes will remain, and new ones be originated. Instead of bettering our
condition, we render it infinitely worse by hostilities.

Is it not wise, therefore to compromise these differences? And though
considerable time and expense, perhaps some sacrifices of just claims, should
be incurred on our part, yet between these evils, and the continuance of
inveterate enmity and hostile views, on which side does the balance lie? Every
reflecting man must say. on the side of accommodation and peace.

The commercial part of the treaty is of a temporary nature; and even if some
sacrifices were to be made, these will not come in competition with the other
great and important objects of the treaty. But it is not true that any material
sacrifice is made in the commercial part of this compact. We do not cede one
material privilege which Great Britain does not enjoy by the laws of nations or
the laws of the United States. I am bold in the assertion, and call on my
opposers to name the part in which such sacrifice is made.

On the other hand, some material concessions on the part of Great Britain, are
made to the United States by the treaty.

It is said, Great Britain may enter with her ships into all the ports of the
United States. -- True; but she enjoys that privilege without this treaty. She
gains nothing in this respect except that she changes a precarious privilege
for a right; just as we do, in the trade to the British European dominions.

It is said, we bind ourselves not to increase the duties on British tonnage
and goods imported in her ships beyond what we lay on those of other nations.
-- True; we agree on this head, to treat Great Britain as well as the most
favored nation. If this is a concession on our part, it cannot be a material
sacrifice, for we have an equivalent in this, that Great Britain stipulates the
same thing to the United States.

It is said, we cede to Great Britain the right of increasing duties on our
tonnage to equal our present duties on hers and on goods imported in British
bottoms. Nothing can be more puerile than such an allegation. In this respect
we cede nothing. -- Great Britain had that right before the treaty; and her
right is precisely the same as before.

It has been said, we cede to Great Britain the right of seizing our vessels
and taking the enemy's property; and that we have made naval stores and
provisions contraband by treaty.

These charges have been proved not true. Great Britain enjoys these rights by
the law of nations, independent of all treaties.

We have therefore made very few sacrifices in this part of the treaty; but we
have gained something. We have obtained a permanence of trade to Great Britain.
We have gained a free trade to Canada and the British East Indies, without any
considerable concessions, and what is more, we have preserved the BLESSINGS OF
PEACE.

Why then, my fellow Citizens, will you not leave the management of this treaty
where the Constitution has placed it? What ground have you to suppose, that the
President, our late Envoy and the majority of the Senate, have, in a moment and
on this single occasion, deserted the interest of our country? What reason have
you to believe that old tried patriots have renounced the uniform principles of
their lives, and turned apostates? Is there a shadow of reason to believe, that
men grown gray in the service of their country, whose patriotism and virtue
were never suspected, have now in the evening of life, and at the close of all
their active public scenes, commenced traitors? You cannot believe insinuations
of this kind. The suggestion of British gold and undue influence, is the work
of dark malicious hearts, detested by all good men, and discredited by the very
children in the streets.

No, my countrymen, you have been deceived. Your passions have been taken by
surprise; you have been precipitated into rush opinions, and violent measures,
by a set of men who are the foes of our present free and happy government and
its administration. You may be assured, there is a confederation of characters,
from New Hampshire to Georgia arrayed in opposition, either to the ^nstitution
of the United States, to its administration or to particular men in office. The
opposition of the principal men in this confederacy can be traced to some known
causes, originally of a personal nature. Disappointment in application for some
office, or the failure of some favorite scheme in their political system, has
converted many of the friends of our late revolution, into determined opposers
of the general system of the present administration. These men will never be
contented ^ill they can displace the present officers of government, and
introduce themselves, their friends, and their measures, into our councils. You
may rest assured, that most of the serment raised against the Treaty,
originated with men of this description.

This confederacy was formed and is still maintained and strengthened, by
spreading jealousies and suspicions among the people, who, though honest in their
views, are very liable to be misled by artful men. One of the most successful
weapons ever wielded by this coalition of disappointed men, is furnished them
by the present war in Europe. The combination of powers against France, which
we all reprobate, is said to be a combination against liberty in general. and
if France should fail of success, it is said we shall be the next object of
attack.

This is a mere suggestion of our restless men, to alarm your fears, and drive
you, if possible, from your neutral ground into hostilities. The suggestion was
first made by the late French minister, whose mission to this country was for
the express purpose of slattering, intriging, or forcing you into the war. His
instructions are clear and explicit on this point.

That minister was displaced, and his views counteracted by the firmness of our
President, seconded by the northern states. But the party which originally
rallied under that man, still exists, and forms a league, co-extensive with the
United States connected in all its parts and acting by a single impulse.

Thus, in the infancy of our empire, the bane of all republics, is already
diffused over our country, and poisons the whole body politic. Faction is a
disease which has proved fatal to all popular governments; but in America it
has assumed an aspect more formidable than in any other country. In ancient
republics, popular commotions were sudden things, excited by the emergencies of
the moment, bursting instantly on the existing government, producing a
revolution, banishing a tyrant who was powerful, or a patriot who was popular,
and an object of jealousy to some ambitious competitor.

But in America, faction has assumed consistency and system -- it is a
conspiracy perpetually existing -- an opposition organized and disciplined, for
the purposes of defeating the regular exercise of the constitutional powers of
our government, whenever a measure does not please the secret leaders of the
Confederacy: --

My countrymen, be watchful of the progress of the associations, formed on the
plan of the Jacobin Society in France. That society was a powerful instrument
in the work of demolishing the monarchy; but on the ruins of monarchy, it
raised the most frightful despotism recorded in history. Leagued with sister
societies in every village and city of France, the Jacobins governed the
Convention, Paris and all France for a long time, and filled it with blood,
confiscation and ruin. So terrible was the tyranny of these associations, that
the Convention were compelled to prohibit their meetings; but so numerous are
the members, and so active the spirit of revenge, that two or three
insurrections have been raised by the Jacobins in Paris, blood has been shed in
various parts by that faction, they have been in possession of Toulon, a civil
war is often excited and it seems yet doubtful whether the national
representatives, ex private unauthorized clubs shall govern France.

My countrymen, you are threatened with a similarevil. Under the pretended mask
of patriotism and watching over our liberties, private associations are formed
and extending their influence over our country. The popular Societies of
Francedid the same. The cry of patriotism was forever on their tongue: but when
they became strong enough, they ruled with a rod of iron. Fire, sword and the
guillotine were instrments of their administration.

Be not deceived into a belief that our citizens are incapable of similar
outrages. Violent men may be found in every country, and already are the heads
of our government denounced as traitors; already is our country threatened with
blood and civil war. -- If men who regard their rights, and who believe the
constitution and laws alone to be the guarantee of those rights, do not unite
and show a formidable countenance against all irregular opposition to those
laws, our whole country will be speedily subject to a confederacy of men, a
small minority indeed, but bold, though secret in their machinations,
indefatigable in their measures, and determined on success.

It is not the treaty alone which is oppesed; this is a convenient instrument
for them to wield; but the causes of opposition lie deeper. The treaty is not
^^together satisfactory; but if carried into cffect, it will not be followed
with any dangerous consequences, except what will be created by its opposers.
If last to go peaceably into operation, it would have no general effect on
business which people at large could feel -- agriculture would still slourish;
trade would be carried on as usual with little variation; national disputes
would be in a train of adjustment, and peace and tranqu^lity would reign
throughout our happy land. But if the opposers of the treaty can possibly
embroil our country in civil war, it will be effected -- From such a frightful
calamity, may your good sense, my fellow citizens, preserve us!

Should the treaty, not be ratisied, and should the consequences be foreign
war, the people, not the government of America, must be answerable for all its
melancholy consequences.

No period of our political life has been more critical -- or deserving of more
temper on the part of the people and of more prudence and firmness on the part
of our executive.

One party wishes to dra^ loser our alliance with France, even at the hazard of
war with all the world. Our government and its supporters wish for prefect
neutrality toward all the powers at war -- they wish for strict justice and
impartiality to be preserved toward all parties, and they wish for friendly
intercourse with all -- in fine, they wish for uninterrupted peace.

When parties are thus marshalled, it behooves all good men to determine on
which side, they will range themselves. One or the other must prevail; and on
the final prevalence of one or the other of these parties, are suspended the
peace, prosperity and happiness of the United States.

BRITISH PROCLAMATIONS.
GEORGE R.

Additional Instructions to the Commanders of all our ships of war, and
privateers that have, or may have letters of marque against France. (L. S.)
Given at our Court at St. James's, the 6th day of November, 1793, in the
thirty-fourth year of our reign.

That they shall stop and detain all ships laden with goods, the produce of any
colony belonging to France, or carrying provisions or other supplies for the
use of any such colony, and shall bring the same, with their cargoes, to legal
adjudication in our Courts of Admiralty.

By his Majesty's command, HENRY DUNDAS. A Copy, Jno. Ibbertson.


Instructions to Commanders of our Ships of war and Privateers, that have or
may have Letters of Marque against France.
Given at our court at St. James's, the 8th of Jan. 1794. GEORGE R.

WHREAS by a former instruction to the Commanders of our Ships of War and
Privateers dated the 6th day of Nov. 1794 -- We signified that they should stop
and detain all ships laden with goods, the produce of any colony belonging to
France, or carrying provisions or other supplies for the use of any such
colony, and should bring the same with their cargoes to legal adjudication. We
are pleased to revoke the said instructions, and in lieu thereof, have thought
sit to issue these our instructions, to be duly observed by the commanders of
all our ships of war and privateers that have or may have letters of marque
against France.

1. That they shall bring in for lawful adjudication, all vessels with their
cargoes that are laden with goods, the produce of the French West India
islands, and coming directly from any part of the said islands to any part of
Europe.

2. That they shall bring in for lawful adjudication, all ships with their
cargoes that are laden with goods, the produce of the said islands, the
property of which goods shall belong to subjects of France, to whatsoever ports
they may be bound.

3. That they shall seize all ships, that shall be found attempting to enter
any port of the said islands that is, or shall be blockaded by the arms of his
majesty or his allies; and shall send them in with their cargoes for
adjudication, according to the terms of the second article of the former
instructions bearing date 8th of June, 1793.

4. That they shall seize all vessels laden wholly or in part with naval or
military stores, bound to any port of the said islands, and shall send them
into some convenient port belonging to his majesty, in order that they,
together with their cargoes, may be proceeded against according to the rules of
the law of nations.

H. DUNDAS.

REPLY of his Excellency Lord DORCHESTER to the Indians of the seven Villages
of Lower Canada, as Deputies from all the Nations who were at the general
Council held at the Miami, in the Year 1793; except the Chawauous, Miamis, and
Loups.
Children,
I HAVE well considered your words, and am now prepared to reply.

Children,

You have informed me that you are deputed by the seven villages of Lower
Canada, and by all the nations of the upper country which sent deputies to the
general council held at the Miamis, except the Chawauous, Miamis and Loups.

Children,

You remind me of what passed at the council fire at Quebec, just before my
last departure for England, when I promised to represent their situation and
wisher to the king their father, and expressed my hope that all the grievances
they complained of, on the part of the United States, would soon be done away,
by a just and lasting peace.

Children,

I remember all very well; I remember that they pointed out to me the line of
separation, whieh they wished for between them and the United States, and with
which they would be satisfied and make peace.

Children,

I was in expectation of hearing from the people of the United States what was
required by tham; I hoped I should have been able to bring you together, and
make you friends.

Children,

I have waited long, and listened with great attention; but I have not heard
one word from them.

Children,

I flattered myself with the hope that the line, proposed in the year
eighty-three, to separate us from the United States, which was immediately
broken by themselves as soon as the peace was signed, would have been minded,
or a new one drawn in an am cable manner; here also I have been disappointed.

Children,

Since my return, I find no appearance of ^ li^ remains; and from the manner in
which the people of the States push on, and act and talk on this side, and from
what I learn of their conduct toward the sea, I shall not be surprised if we
are at war with them in the course of the present year: and if we are, a line
must then be drawn by the warriors.

Children,

You ask for a passport to go to New York; a passport is useless in peace; it
appears therefore that you expect we shall be at war with the States before you
return -- you shall have a passport, that, whether peace or war, you shall be
received by the king's warriors.

Children,

They have destroyed their right of pre-emption; therefore all their approaches
toward us since that time, and all the purchases made by them, I consider as
an infringement on the king's rights; and when a line is drawn between us, be
it peace, or war, they must lose all their improvements and houses on out side
of it; the people must be gone, who do not obtain leave to become the king's
subjects; what belongs to the Indians will of course be confirmed and secured
to them.

Children,

What further can I say to you? -- You are our witnesses, that on our part we
have acted in the most-peaceable manner and bore the language ^ the United
States with patience; and I believe our patience is almost exhausted.

Given under my hand at the castle of St. Lewis, in the city of Quebec, on the
tenth day of February, in the year of our Lord 1794. DORCHESTER.
By his Excellency's command, HERMAN WITSIUS RYLANG, Secretary.

RESOLUTIONS Laid before the House of Representatives of the United States, on
Friday, the 3d of January, 1794, by Mr. Madison.
RESOLVED, as the opinion of this committee, That the interest of the United
States would be promoted by further restrictions and higher duties, in certain
cases, on the manufactures and navigation of foreign nations employed in the
commerce of the United States, than those now imposed.

1. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That an additional duty ought
to be laid on the following articles, manufactured by European nations, having
no commercial treaty with the United States.

On all articles of which leather is the material of chief value, an additional
duty of per centum ad valorem.

On all manufactured iron, steel, tin, pewter, copper, brass or articles of
which either of these metals is the material of chief value, an additional duty
of per centum ad valorem.

On all articles of which cotton is the material of chief value, an additional
duty of per centum ad valorem.

On all articles of which wool is the material of chief value, where the
estimated value on which the duty is payable, is above an additional duty of
per centum ad valorem; where such value is below an additional duty of per
centum ad valorem.

On all cloths, of which hemp or flax is the material of chief value, and of
which the estimate value on which the duty is payable, is below an additional
duty of per centum ad valorem.

On all manufactures of which silk is the material of chief value, an
additional duty of per centum ad valorem.

2. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That an additional duty of per
ton ought to be laid on the vessels belonging to nations having no commercial
treaties with the United States.

3. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That the duties on vessels
belonging to nations having commercial treaties with the United States, ought
to (...) reduced to per ton.

4. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That where any nation may
refuse to consider as vessels of the United States, any vessels not built
within the United States, the foreign built vessels of such nation ought to be
subjected to a like refusal, unless built within the United States.

5. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That where any nation may
refuse to admit the produce or manufactures of the United States, unlese in
vessels belonging to the United States, or to admit them in vessels of the
United States, if last imported from any place within the United States, a like
restriction ought, after the day of to be extended to the produce and
manufactures of such nation; and that in the mean time, a duty of per ton,
extraordinary, ought to be imposed on vessels so importing any such produce or
manufacture.

6. Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That where any nation may
refuse to the vessels of the United States a carriage of the produce or
manufactures thereof, whilst such produce or manufactures are admitted by it in
its own vessels, it would be just to make the restriction reciprocal; but in as
much as such a measure, if suddenly adopted, might be particularly distressing
in cases which merit the benevolent attention of the United States, it is
expedient for the present, that a tonnage extraordinary only of be imposed on
the vessels so employed; and that all distilled spirits imported therein shall
be subjected to an additional duty of one part of the existing duty.

Resolved, as the opinion of this committee, That provision ought to be made
for liquidating and ascertaining the losses sustained by citizens of the United
States from the operation of particular regulations of any country,
contravening the law of nations, and that such losses be reimbursed in the
first instance, out of the additional duties on the manufactures, productions
and vessels of the nation establishing such unlawful rgulations.

RESOLUTIONS Laid before the House of Representatives of the United States, on
Thursday the 27th of March, 1794, by Mr. Dayton.
RESOLVED, That provision ought to be made by law, for the sequestration of all
the debts due from the citizens of the United States to the subjects of the
king of Great Britain.

Resolved, That provision ought, in like manner, to be made for securing the
payment of all such debts into the treasury of the United States, there to be
held as a pledge for the indemnification of such of the citizens of the said
States, as shall have syffered from the ships of war, privateers, or from any
person, or description of persons, acting under the commission or autherity of
the British king, in contravention of the laws of nations, and in violation of
the rights of neutrality.

RESOLUTION Laid before the House of Representatives of the United States, on
Monday the 7th of April, 1794, by Mr. Clarke.
RESOLVED, That until the government of Great Britain shall cause restitution
to be made for all losses and damages sustained by the citizens of the United
States, from armed vessels, or from any person or persons acting under
commission or authority of the British king, contrary to the laws of nations,
and in violation of the rights of neutrality; and also, until all the posts,
now held and detained by the king of Great Britain, within the territories of
the United States, shall be surrendered and given up, all commercial
intercourse, between the citizens of the United States, and the subjects of the
king of Great Britain, so far as the same respects articles of the growth or
manufacture of Great Britain or Ireland, shall be prohibited; provided such
prohibition shall not extend to vessels, or their cargoes, arriving in any of
the ports of the United States, before the (...) day of (...) next.

FINIS.

