Mr. WARE'S THANKSGIVING SERMON, February 19, 1795.

THE CONTINUANCE OF PEACE AND INCREASING PROSPERITY A SOURCE OF CONSOLATION AND
JUST CAUSE OF GRATITUDE TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE UNITED STATES.

A SERMON, DELIVERED FEBRUARY 19, 1795; BEING A DAY SET APART BY THE PRESIDENT,
FOR THANKSGIVING AND PRAYER THROUGH THE UNITED STATES.

BY HENRY WARE, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN HINGHAM.

Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us as a Prey to their Teeth.
-- The Snare is broken and we are escaped.
That I may see the Good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the Gladness of
thy Nation.
D^^^D. Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1795.

PSALM CXLVII. 12, 13, and 14 ver. PRAISE THE LORD, O JERUSALEM; PRAISE THY
GOD, O ZION.
FOR HE HAS STRENGTHENED THE BARS OF THY GATES: HE HAS BLESSED THY CHILDREN
WITHIN THEE.
HE MAKES PEACE IN THY BORDERS, AND FILLS THEE WITH THE FINEST OF THE WHEAT.

THE occasion, my christian friends, which calls us together this day to the
house of God, is equally important and joyous; and the observance of this day
by the whole people of united America, in public expressions of gratitude to
God for important national blessings, exhibits to the imagination a most
magnificent and interesting scene.

To aid us in contemplations suited to the occasion, I have selected the
passage of Scripture which has now been read.

It may be applied, perhaps, with as striking propriety to the present
circumstances of the inhabitants of this country, as it ever could be to those
of any people, since its original application, by the sacred penman, to the
situation of the children of Israel, at a time of great prosperity.

In the President's proclamation for this day, we have a representation of the
present condition of the United States, which remarkably corresponds, in its
leading features, with the elegant and sublime description in the text.

He makes peace, says the Psalmist, in thy borders. The President, in the
preamble to the proclamation, speaks of our exemption hitherto from foreign
war, and an increasing prospect of the continuance of that exemption. The
Psalmist says, He has strengthened the bars of thy gates. The President takes
notice of the great degree of internal tranquillity we have enjoyed, and the
recent confirmation of that tranquillity, by the suppression of an insurrection
which so wantonly threatened it. And parallel to the words of the text, He has
blessed thy children within thee, and fills thee with the finest of the
wheat, are those of the proclamation, which remind us of the happy course of
our public affairs in general, and the unexampled prosperity of all classes of
our citizens.

On account of such important public blessings, the children of Israel are
called upon to express their gratitude to God. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,
praise thy God, O Zion! And in circumstances which so peculiarly mark our
situation with indications of the divine beneficence toward us, we are
reminded in the proclamation of our duty as a people, with devout reverence,
and affectionate gratitude, to acknowledge our many and great obligations to
Almighty God, and to implore him to continue and confirm the blessings we
experience.

That we may know the extent of our obligations, and have feelings awakened
answerable to them; let us now take a particular view of that state of
prosperity, which, at this day, marks the condition of the United States; the
general outlines of which are so justly sketched in the proclamation.

The basis of all our public happiness are certainly the constitutions of
government under which we live; which, in a degree perhaps never before
experienced in any country, "unite, and by their union establish, liberty with
order."

In other countries, liberty has usually languished under a system of
corruption, or been crushed beneath the arm of arbitrary power; or else the
social order has become the victim of faction; and liberty has degenerated into
a licentiousness, more dreadful in its operation, and more oppressive in its
effects than any other system of tyranny.

The constitution of the United States, and those of the several states which
compose the Union, are formed on purely republican principles. They were the
deliberate act of the people, -- intended to secure their rights, by guarding,
on the one hand, against encroachment and oppression by persons invested with
civil power; and, on the other, against the numberless evils, which must result
from a relapse into licentiousness and disorder. And they happily embrace the
two great objects of government, -- security of rights to individuals, and of
strength, dignity, and order to society.

Under these constitutions every man enjoys perfect security, and feels an
honest independence, while he conducts consistently with the general good, and
does not contravene the rights of others. The poorest member of the community
is conscious of a perfect equality with the richest, in respect to the
protection of his person, and the security of his property. And not only so,
but, under the constitution of this Commonwealth with few exceptions, and under
that of the United States without any, he is taught to feel his importance as a
member of the body politic, by his having an equal voice in the election of
persons to hold the most important offices of government, and by being himself,
equally with others, eligible to the first offices.

It is a great excellency of our government, that our rulers are from among
ourselves; and that they do not derive their stations from birth, or any
adventitious circumstances, but are raised to office by the suffrages of the
people; that they enjoy no hereditary distinction, or right of domination; that
they are servants of the people, -- accountable to them for their conduct in
the offices in which they are placed by their voice, and liable to be
displaced, if they are found to neglect their duty, or betray their trust.

Our constitutions of government, under which all enjoy equal rights, by having
equal protection of persons and security of property, and by being equally
represented in the administration, are the glory of our land, and the
admiration and envy of the friends of freedom in other countries. Imperfections
they doubtless have in common with all other productions of human wisdom; yet
such is, notwithstanding, their intrinsic excellence and real importance, that
the contemplation of them this day may with the greatest propriety fill with
satisfaction our hearts, who are so deeply interested in them, and our lips
with praise to the benign Author of all good: inasmuch as they lay the
foundation of all our civil and political advantages, and are the source of
most of our social and domestic felicity.

Next to the glorious fabric of our government, "the preservation of our peace
foreign and domestic," by which we continue to enjoy its blessings, lays claim
to a tribute of gratitude to the God of peace.

In order justly to estimate the blessing of peace foreign and domestic at the
present day, and in the present posture of affairs, it is necessary for us to
lend our attention to the circumstances which have, for some time, endangered
its existence.

Several circumstances, in the course of two years past, have concurred to
embarrass our internal affairs, and to render our situation with foreign
nations extremely delicate and critical.

The war, which has been carried on with so much zeal and obstinacy between
France and several of the European powers combined against her liberties and
independence, could not, from the nature of the thing, be uninteresting to this
country. Having ourselves, so lately, made a glorious and successful sacrifice
in the cause of liberty, it was natural for us to rejoice to see the principles
of freedom extending their influence. And we could not but behold with peculiar
satisfaction the ardent and resolute exertions for freedom in a large and
powerful nation with which we were in alliance; and which had long groaned
under as refined and systematic despotism, as, perhaps, ever existed in the
world. -- And, proportioned to our satisfaction in the efforts made by the
French nation to shake off the fetters of slavery, and recover their freedom,
was our indignation at the unprovoked, and unreasonable interference of a
wicked combination in her internal concerns. And as sincerely as we lamented
the excesses, which, till lately, disgraced the glorious cause in which France
was engaged; and as much as we detested the sanguinary measures pursued by a
faction within her; the American people had discernment enough to know, that
these excesses were not to be attributed to the cause in which she was engaged;
and they had candor enough to trace them to their true source. They knew that
great convulsions were inevitable in so great a revolution, and that violent
measures were to be expected in the exertions of a people, who were engaged
with zeal and resolution in crushing an ancient and established tyranny; and
still felt the deepest resentment against those, who had been the instruments
of their oppression, and who, they naturally supposed, were wishing to prolong
it. They were aware, befides, that the open invasion of France by the combined
powers, and their secret intrigues in the heart of the country, by exasperating
the friends of the revolution, by sowing jealousies and distrust among the
leaders of it, and fomenting faction in every form through the nation, were the
principal causes, to which were to be imputed the shocking scenes, which cast a
deep shade over the dawn of freedom in that country.

The American people, in general, have wished well to the cause of the French,
through every stage of the revolution; at the same time that they had to lament
it should be the occasion of so much incidental misery, and such shocking
scenes of wanton cruelty and injustice.

This partiality of the Americans to the cause of the French, expressed perhaps
by individuals too strongly and pointedly for a neutral power, operated as an
encouragement to them to employ every effort to engage us to take an active
part in their cause; at the same time it awakened the jealousy of some of the
combined powers, and might probably be one occasion of the unfriendly and
hostile mode of treatment adopted toward us by the British court.

Thus were we exposed to the attempts of one nation to draw us into the war,
which through the arts of an intriguing minister had nearly proved effectual;
while by another we were provoked by various insults, and by acts of robbery,
outrage, and hostility challenged to unsheath the sword.

To defeat the views and frustrate the expectations of those, who wished us to
take part with them in the war, in such a manner as to preserve at the same
time their friendship and confidence; and to support our national consequence
with those, who had grossly insulted and injured us, without drawing the sword
to resent the insult, and seek satisfaction for the injury; required in our
government more wisdom and address, and more coolness and moderation united
with firmness, than generally fall to the lot of men, to whom are entrusted the
affairs of nations.

And the difficulty of conducting in such a manner as to avoid taking a side in
the European war was increased by several inauspicious circumstances among
ourselves.

There were some men among us so regardless of the common good, and entirely
under the influence of selfish views, as to rejoice in the prospect of war,
from the hope of rising to wealth by the calamities of their country. There
were with us, as there are in all countries, men who are impatient of the
lingering process of industry and regular business to make their fortune. To
such men war presents the most fascinating prospects. Having, before their
eyes, examples of enormous estates very easily and rapidly amassed, in the
course of the late revolution in this country, by privateering, and various
kinds of speculation, which war, and its consequence, a general derangement of
affairs, never fail to present; they dream of nothing but war and revolution:
and nothing will satisfy their avaricious desires, till by war they can be
furnished with an easy and expeditious way of rising to opulence; or by
producing internal confusion, and effecting a change in the order of things,
they can avail themselves of the general convulsion and shift of property to
secure an ample share to themselves.

Characters of this description abounded in every part of the Union; and they
were not deficient in exertions, nor very scrupulous in their measures, to
engage others with them in the cause.

They were joined by all the restless, ambitious, and disappointed persons,
who, having abilities which rendered them dangerous, but wanting those virtues
which beget respect and confidence in mankind, had been defeated in their
ambitious and aspiring views by the good sense and caution of the people.
Stimulated at once by ambition, chagrin and refentment, these men were ready to
join in a measure, which furnished so alluring a prospect of producing a
revolution in government, or changing the present order of things in such a
manner, as to give them an opportunity of rising to eminence and distinction.

Some were advocates for war from an opinion that the national honor required
it. Some, because they cherished an old grudge against Great Britain, and,
without attending well to the probable consequences of the measure, were ready
to seize on any opportunity to manifest their resentment. And some there were,
who thought this country obliged, either by treaty or by the principle of
gratitude, to engage actively with France in her contest against the enemies of
her freedom and independence.

It happened unfortunately that within the United States were many citizens
deeply indebted to British merchants. A rupture with Great Britain presented a
certain prospect of either an entire extinction of those debts, or at least a
delay of the term of payment. -- And we cannot but lament that the language
employed, and measures proposed by some influential members of Congress were
such, as to expose them to the suspicion of acting under the influence of this
consideration. Candor, however, and a regard to the honor of our country
would lead us to hope, that no man, entrusted with a share in the management of
our national concerns, would advise to measures obviously tending to involve
the whole country in a ruinous war, for the sake of relieving some individuals,
in the state to which he belonged, from the necessity of paying their just
debts.

The several characters and descriptions of men which have been mentioned,
besides their own direct exertions, had their several spheres of influence; and
being joined in their measures by the disorderly, the discontented, the enemies
of the Federal Government, and those who were disaffected on account of its
general operation, or particular parts of its administration, they constituted
a very formidable faction in the state.

The more effectually to accomplish their purposes, they instituted societies
in imitation of the jacobin clubs in France; and in order to strengthen their
party and carry into effect their designs, they had recourse to measures which
must have sunk a good cause into disrepute, -- a bad one it rendered infamous.
By seditious and inflammatory publications they endeavored to poison the
public mind, -- to deceive the people, -- to excite their jealousy, and rouse
their passions.

The enemies of peace and order were greatly aided in their designs, by
finding, in several parts of the Union, printers of newspapers, who regarded
so little their duty to the public, as to devote their presses to the cause of
sedition, and to suffer falsehood, slander, and misrepresentation to flow
copiously in those papers, which should have been sacredly employed as the
vehicles of public instruction and political information. In those papers they
defamed and abused public characters, -- they misrepresented and censured the
measures of government, -- they endeavored to cast an odium on the most
meritorious officers of government on account of their most meritorious
actions, and thus to destroy the public confidence in them. They abused the
President for exerting his constitutional authority in order to preserve our
peace. They vilified and traduced those members of Congress, who advocated
moderate and pacific measures; holding them up to public detestation as
lukewarm patriots, as being under British influence, -- friends to
Great Britain, and enemies to their country. Their speeches they mutilated, and
handed scraps of them to the public in such a form, and so detached from their
connection, as entirely to pervert their meaning, and convey sentiments which
were never entertained by their authors.

By the circulation of those papers, suspicions were sown among the people, the
public sentiment was misled, and the public feelings agitated. And the spirit
of disorder, uneasiness, and opposition, by which the public tranquillity was
threatened in every part of the Union, in one part of it actually broke out in
avowed opposition to the laws, and open rebellion against the government.

These, which I have mentioned, are some of the leading circumstances, which
have operated to disturb our internal tranquillity, -- threatened to shake the
fabric of our government -- thus endangered our freedom, and rendered it
difficult for the friends of peace, in the administration of government, to
prevent our country from being entangled in the European war.

Amidst all these obstacles to the continuance of peace and tranquillity,
through the wise and seasonable measures adopted by the President, and the
faithful exertions of the friends of peace and order in Congress, supported by
the concurrence of public sentiment, and accompanied with the smiles of heaven,
we yet enjoy the blessing of peace; and a fair prospect, which is daily
brightening, that we shall continue to enjoy it under circumstances highly
advantageous, and consistent with public faith and national honor. Rejoicing
in the continuance of peace, and the check, which has been given to a spirit of
disorder and insurrection; we have reason to bless the day, when the friends of
peace and advocates of moderate measures prevailed over those, who, by rash and
violent proceedings, would have precipitated our country into a ruinous war.
And we have the further satisfaction of seeing, that the leaders of faction are
losing their influence, -- that the honest and wellmeaning citizens, who had
been duped by their artifices, and betrayed into their measures, begin to be
undeceived, -- and that the societies, which had arrogantly usurped the
prerogative of the people, and were endeavoring to dictate to their
representative government, and to control its measures, are fast dwindling
into insignificance.

To the continuance of peace, the suppression of insurrection, and the triumph
of order it is chiefly owing, that this country is, in other respects, in so
flourishing a condition.

It requires but little discernment and only common attention to perceive, that
the unexampled prosperity of the several classes of our citizens, our rapid
improvement in agriculture and manufactures, the surprising increase of our
commerce and navigation, the prodigious accession of wealth and strength to the
community at large, and the easy circumstances of the inhabitants in general,
of every class, are chiefly owing to that regular course of things, which
several years peace, a good government, and internal tranquillity have produced.
And nothing is more certain, than that all these marks of prosperity must
receive a check, and some of them perhaps be utterly annihilated, were we to
engage in a war with any of the European powers, or were our government to be
materially shocked by faction.

There never was a time heretofore when this country was in so flourishing a
condition, and made so respectable a figure abroad, as it does at this day.
Among many other evidences of our increasing wealth, power, and importance, it
is particularly worthy of our present notice, that notwithstanding the long and
expensive war by which we purchased our independence, the resources of the
United States are such, as to enable them to pay, with a great deal of ease,
the interest of the public debt; and that the present debates in Congress, on
the reduction of the public debt, discover to us that there is ability in the
nation and a disposition in our government, by a pretty rapid process to sink
the principal. It is highly honorary to the United States, and a source of
consolation to the citizens; that, while other nations, already burdened with
debt to the utmost extent of their resources, are yet madly plunging into the
most ruinous wars to add to their embarrassments; it is the enlightened policy
of our government to avail itself of the present prosperity to relieve the
country of existing debt, and, if possible, to avoid the necessity of
increasing it, and to prolong that peace and prosperity, which furnish the only
hope of its final extinction.

The success, which has attended the late negotiation with the court of
Great Britain, furnishes another proof of our national respectability. We have
authentic, though not official notice, that the Envoy Extraordinary, lately
sent by our Supreme Executive to the British court, on business of the most
interesting nature, has effected the design of his mission. This success, while
it evinces that our friendship is of some importance in the estimation of other
powers, we have reason to hope and expect, will contribute much to our future
prosperity and happiness.

To enumerate the marks of private prosperity would lead me beyond the limits
of a sermon. It is, besides, unnecessary. They are seen and felt by all the
inhabitants of our land. That people in general of nearly every class and
occupation enjoy a state of unusual prosperity; that the means of a comfortable
subsistence were never more than now within the reach of all; that industry and
enterprise in every line of life are highly encouraged -- that they receive a
sure and ample reward -- and that this reward is well secured to him who earns
it, are facts so obvious, that they can neither be overlooked nor contested.

Equally certain it is, that we live under a mild and free government; as mild
and free as we can bear -- a government, under which each individual has given
up as few of his natural rights, as is consistent with the secure possession of
the rest in a state of society.

For all these public blessings and marks of private prosperity, which
distinguish our condition as a people and as individuals, let the just tribute
of our united thanks ascend this day, as an acceptable sacrifice, to that God,
by whose providence we enjoy them all.

And while, with hearts deeply impressed with a sense of our obligations, we
unitedly praise the Lord for these indications of divine benignity; piously
noticing the footsteps of a kind providence in our national concerns: the
proclamation directs us, at the same time humbly and fervently to beseech the
kind Author of these blessings graciously to prolong them to us, and to imprint
on our hearts a deep and solemn sense of our obligations to him for them.

While we hold in just estimation the patriotic exertions of those men, who
were instrumental in framing and establishing the happy government under which
we live, as well as of those who have been the means of preserving to us the
great blessing of peace, and promoting our prosperity; let us yet always bear
in mind, that, in effecting these blessed ends, they were but the instruments
of that providence, which rules over all; and that our first acknowlegements
are due to the Father of lights, from whom comes down every good and perfect
gift.

This direction of the President to express a pious sense of dependence on the
great Governor of the world is peculiarly seasonable at the present day, when
we are in so great danger of imbiding the atheistic sentiments so openly avowed
and publicly countenanced by a nation, with which we have close connections and
constant intercourse.

The French people, as was naturally to be expected, in their zeal to destroy
every vestige of the ancient tyranny and superstition, have gone to a
lamentable excess on the other extreme. They have too evidently confounded
government with tyranny, and religion with superstition. We are not however to
imagine, as has been too hastily believed by some, that the French are become a
nation of atheists. -- Yet it is certain that a very considerable proportion of
the nation have exploded all religion; and, in some of their most public and
solemn acts, their government has virtually rejected the doctrine of a God
governing the world by his providence. While we put a candid construction on
the present infidelity and irreligion of the French, attributing it to their
zeal to exterminate all superstition; and while we hope and believe that, ere
long, they will vibrate back again to some rational system of religion, we
cannot be too careful to avoid the contagion of their present principles.

Next to acknowleging the hand from which our blessings flow, it is necessary
for us rightly to estimate their immense value. If we estimate our public
blessings according to their worth, we shall never be willing to sacrifice them
to private interest, party prejudices, national pride, passion, or resentment.
It will be our wish to prolong them to the latest period, and to preserve them
unimpaired.

We are directed to pray, that God would preserve us from the arrogance of
prosperity, and from hazarding the advantages we enjoy by delusive pursuits.

Nations are apt to grow arrogant and presumptuous, as they become rich and
powerful; and wantonly to engage in destructive wars, which serve to exhaust
the treasures, and waste the strength of the country, to contaminate the morals
of the people, and, by a certain process, to corrupt their government and
undermine their liberties. They will sacrifice the lives and property of the
inhabitants to national pride and resentment; and, instead of endeavoring to
reconcile differences with other nations by fair negotiation, will bring the
heaviest calamities on the country, by appealing to the sword for decision on
the most trifling occasions.

Another danger to which we are exposed by prosperity is, that, as we increase
in wealth, we shall progress in luxury; that distinctions in society will be
marked by stronger lines, as we depart from that mediocrity of condition,
which, as yet, very much distinguishes the situation of the inhabitants of this
country; and that, as inequality of condition gradually increases, we shall
gradually lose our republican sentiments and manners, and with them our
republican form of government. God forbid this should ever be the case! But
certainly there is a natural tendency toward it, which it requires some care
both in the Government and in the people to guard against.

The body of the people, especially in the middle and lower walks of life, must
cherish the republican virtues. They must be distinguished by industry,
frugality, and temperance; so as to maintain their individual freedom and
independence, and prevent the wealth, and with it the power of the community,
from settling into the hands of a few.

And the Government would do well to set the people an example of republican
plainness and frugality. Were persons in high office in government to
discountenance by their example the introduction of luxury, extravagance, and
dissipation, it might have considerable influence on the manners of society at
large. They may further subserve essentially the public good by pursuing
regular and uniform measures in the administration of government; by a fixed and
permanent policy; and by holding up as few objects of speculation as possible,
which serve to discourage the exertions of patient industry, by enabling
enterprizing individuals, and often the least useful members of the community,
to acquire large fortunes without industry, and without pursuing any regular
business.

The President's caution against delusive pursuits, which endanger the
advantages we now enjoy, reminds us of certain commercial regulations proposed
in Congress for the purpose of promoting the commercial interest of the
country. Upon thorough examination of their nature and tendency it appeared
that they must, in the issue, have operated extremely to our disadvantage. This
being the case, the adoption of them with the expectation of their promoting
our advantage must have proved a very delusive pursuit.

It reminds us of the vigorous effort afterward made, by taking advantage of
the general indignation at the depredations made on our commerce by the British
in the West Indies, to stir up the people and the government to acts of
hostility in return. Besides the numberless incidental calamities of war, the
exposure of the lives and property of the citizens, such a measure must have
brought on us, it must have been the occasion of increasing beyond all
calculation our public debt, and in equal proportion augmenting our public
burdens.

A more delusive pursuit can scarcely be imagined, than that of plunging a
nation in war to obtain indemnification for injuries, which, if obtained, would
pay but an inconsiderable part of the probable expenses of the war. Especially
where any hope remains of an amicable adjustment of difficulties by negotiation.

It leads us again to think of the clamours, daily made against our government
by persons, who would make the people believe it too aristocratic in its form
and oppressive in its operation.

Under our present government, where each man is fairly reprefented, where all,
except in a very few cases of incapacity, are alike candidates for office, and
every public officer is subject to the law, and accountable for his conduct in
office, there is as much freedom and equality as can exist with social order.
Every attempt to lessen the confidence of the people in their public servants,
to spread discontent and jealousy, to foment a spirit of faction, to excite
insurrection or opposition to the measures of government; and all
misrepresentations of the designs and measures of men in office, have a certain
tendency to undermine and destroy, instead of increasing, the freedom of the
people. This the leaders of faction know. But they have popular themes of
declamation with which to deceive the people; and they have it in their power,
by disguising well their real views, to delude into their measures many honest
and firm friends to liberty with order.

Equally unfriendly to the continuance of liberty and equal rights are the
popular societies established in this country as checks on our government.
Whatever may be their pretenses to democratic principles, they constitute a
dangerous aristocracy. They are inconsistent with any permanent government, as
they tend to keep a country in a state of perpetual revolution. In the history
of France for three years past we have melancholy evidence, that they put it in
the power of a few popular and ambitious individuals to control the operations
of the representatives of the people, and in effect to exercise the whole power
of the government.

A spirit of jealousy is the soul of a republican government. By watching
faithfully the measures of government, the people have it in their power to
keep in office those men who serve them with sidelity, and pursue measures
promotive of the general good, and to displace those who do not.

But this is a service they can only perform themselves. It is not capable of
being delegated to others. They can neither with propriety nor safety entrust
it in the hands of men they do not know; men who have nothing to recommend them
to public confidence, but their own high pretensions to exalted patriotism and
concern for the liberties of the people -- pretensions, which none but their
own society have acknowleged, and which we do not know that they have ever
supported by actual exertions for the public good.

While, as friends to order, we reprobate all combinations of men for the
purpose of opposing, embarrassing, or controuling the operations of government,
or influencing elections; as friends to liberty, we should cherish a spirit of
jealousy, and earnestly wish that all might be vigilant in guarding their
rights, and in preventing the corruption of government, and checking its
tendency toward despotism.

The prayer of David respecting those, who were combined against him and
opposed his wise government, seems peculiarly applicable to the combinations
against our Federal Government. Slay them not, lest my people forget; scatter
them by thy power, and bring them down. It is not to be wished that opposition
should be wholly extinguished. It would be an unfavourable symptom. It would
denote a political lethargy. But it is desirable that it should be prevented
from rising to excess, and, by powerful combinations of men, shaking the fabric
of government. A little fermentation gives a proper animation and vigor to the
body politic; but, carried to excess, it produces convulsions, which threaten
dissolution.

Again. We are not to expect the continuance of our present advantages, unless
we merit it by not abusing them, by our gratitude for them, and by a
corresponding conduct as citizens, and as men.

We shall be guilty of abusing our advantages, if, as a nation, or as
individuals, we become vain, presumptuous, and insensible of our obligations;
corrupt and licentious in our manners, regardless of the principles of piety
and morality, and inattentive to religious obligation and social duties. And we
shall deserve to lose our excellent government and the freedom it secures, if
we ever become, on the one hand, so inattentive to our rights, as to allow the
government to become oppressive; or suffer intriguing men, on the other hand,
to amuse us with the idea of more perfect freedom, so as to undermine the
principles of our excellent constitution, and by their insidious maneuvers to
excite discontent, and produce a revolution.

While our primary and principal view, in improving with fidelity our national
advantages, and making our conduct as citizens and as men, correspondent to
them, is to secure and perpetuate thereby our individual interest and the
common good of our country; it is natural and just for us to make it a
secondary consideration, at a time when the convulsions of Europe oblige so
many to quit their native countries and seek a secure and peaceful retreat
abroad, to render this country a safe and propitious asylum to the unfortunate
of other countries: and, with our faithful exertions, to join our united and
fervent prayers for this happy effect.

While we again pray, that true and useful knowledge may be extended among us,
and that habits of sobriety, order, morality and piety may be diffused and
established, let us accompany our prayers with the most zealous and faithful
exertions to promote these desirable ends.

As long as the inhabitants of this country shall be attentive to the subject
of education, extending public advantages, as is now done in this and some of
the other states in the union, to the children of every class of citizens; and
as long as we shall be distinguished by the general prevalence of the habits of
sobriety, order, morality and piety, there can be no danger of our losing the
blessings of freedom and good government. But, certain it is, these blessings
will be no longer ours, when those habits shall be lost, and the general
extension of the means of education shall be neglected. We shall always have a
government suited to our character. Freedom and order can be supported only in
an enlightened and virtuous community. Ignorance and vice require the severer
discipline of arbitrary power. And it is their natural tendency to introduce it.

When we extend our view to other countries, in many of them we meet with
striking evidences of the justice of this last remark. We find that ignorance
and superstition, and a prevalence of bad morals are the support of despotic
power.

Our satisfaction in contemplating the flourishing condition and bright
prospects of the United States is checked, when we contrast with it the
calamities of other nations, which are either oppressed by despotic power,
involved in the miseries of destructive war, or struggling with faction at home
and conflicting with foes abroad in the cause of liberty.

Enjoying ourselves the sweets of peace, freedom, social order, and prosperity,
and sympathizing in the sufferings of those to whom these blessings are denied,
let it be our fervent and devout prayer to Almighty God, that all the blessings
we possess or ask for ourselves, may be imparted to the whole family of mankind.

FINIS.

