AUTHENTIC.

TREATY OF Amity, Commerce, and Navigation, Between his BRITANIC MAJESTY, and
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, By their PRESIDENT, with the Advice and Consent
of their SENATE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HURTIN AND COMMARDINGER, 1795.

TREATY Of AMITY, COMMERCE and NAVIGATION,
Between his Britanic Majesty and the United States of America.
HIS Britanic Majesty, and the United States of America, being desirous, by a
Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, to terminate their differences in
such a manner, as, without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretentions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding: And also to regulate the Commerce and
Navigation between their respective Countries, Territories and People, in such
a manner as to render the same reciprocally beneficial and satisfactory; they
have respectively named their Plenipotentiaries, and given them full powers to
treat of, and conclude the said Treaty: that is to say: His Britannic Majesty
has named for his Plenipotentiary, the Right Hon. William Wyndham Baron
Grenville, of Wotton, one of his Majesty's privy council, and his Majesty's
principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and the President of the
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, have
appointed for their Plenipotentiary, the Hon. John Jay, Chief Justice of the
said United States, and their Envoy Extraordinary to his Majesty, who have
agreed on and concluded the following articles:

ARTICLE I. There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true
and sincere friendship, between his Britanic Majesty, his heirs and successors,
and the United States of America; and between their respective countries,
territories, cities, towns and people of every degree, without exception of
persons or places.

ART. II. His Majesty will withdraw all his troops and garrisons from all posts
and places within the boundary lines, assigned by the treaty of peace to the
United States. This evacuation shall take place on or before the first day of
June one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six, and all the proper measures
shall in the interval be taken by concert between the government of the United
States, and his Majesty's Governor General in America, for settling the
previous arrangemnets which may be necessary respecting the delivery of the
said posts: The United States in the mean time at their discretion, extending
their settlements to any part within the said boundary line, except within the
precincts or jurisdiction of any of the said posts. All settlers and traders,
within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said posts shall continue to enjoy,
unmolested, all their property of every kind, and shall be protected therein.
They shall be at full liberty to remain there, or to remove with all or any
part of their effects; and it shall also be free to them to sell their lands,
houses, or effects, or to retain the property thereof, at their discretion;
such of them as shall continue to reside within the said boundary lines shall
not be compelled to become citizens of the United States, or to take any oath
of allegiance to the government thereof, but they shall be at full liberty so
to do, if they think proper, and they shall make and declare their election
within one year after the evacuation aforesaid. And all persons who shall
continue there after the expiration of the said year, without having declared
their intention of remaining subjects of his Britanic Majesty, shall be
considered as having elected to become citizens of the United States.

ART. III. It is agreed that it shall at all times be free for his Majesty's
subjects, and to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians
dwelling on either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and repass by
land or inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the
two parties on the continent of America [the country within the limits of the
Hudson's Bay Company only excepted] and to navigate all the Lakes, Rivers, and
Waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the Sea Ports, Harbors, Bays, or Creeks of his
Majesty's said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest
port of entry from the Sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between
Montreal and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent
the possibility of any frauds in this respect. Nor, to the admission of British
vessels from the Sea into the Rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
ports of entry for foreign vessels from the Sea. The River Missisippi shall
however, according to the Treaty of Peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its Eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to, and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner as any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his Majesty in Great
Britain.

All goods and merchandise whose importation into his Majesty's said
territories in America, shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid, by the
citizens of the United States, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties than would be payable by his majesty's subjects on
the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories. And in like
manner, all goods and merchandise whose importation into the United State shall
not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of Commerce, be carried
into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by his Majesty's subjects, and such
goods and merchandise shall be subject to no higher or other duties than would
be payable by the citizens of the United States on the importation of the same
in American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said States. And all goods
not prohibited to be exported from the said territories, respectively, may in
like manner be carried out of the same by the two parties respectively, paying
duty as aforesaid.

No duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on peltries brought by
land, or inland navigation into the said territories respectively, nor shall
the Indians passing or re-passing with their own proper goods and effects of
whatever nature, pay for the same any impost or duty whatever. But goods in
bales, or other large packages unusual among Indians shall not be considered as
goods belonging bona fide to Indians.

No higher or other tolls or rates of ferriage than what are or shall be
payable by natives, shall be demanded on either side; and no duties shall be
payable on any goods which shall merely be carried over any of the portages or
carrying places on either side; for the purpose of being immediately reimbarked
and carried to some other place or places. But as by this stipulation it is
only meant to secure to each party a free passage accross the portages on both
sides, it is agreed, that this exemption from duty shall extend only to such
goods as are carried in the usual and direct road across the portage, and are
not attempted to be in any manner sold or exchanged during their passage across
the same, and proper regulations may be established to prevent the possibility
of any frauds in this respect.

As this article in intended to render in a great degree, the local advantages
of each party common to both, and thereby to promote a disposition favorable
to friendship and good neighborhood, it is agreed, that the respective
Governments will mutually promote this amicable intercourse, by causing speedy
and impartial justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to
all who may be concerned therein.

ART. IV. Whereas it is uncertain whether the River Missisippi extends so far
to the Northward as to be intersected by a line to be drawn due West from the
Lake of the Woods in the manner mentioned in the Treaty of Peace between his
Majesty and the United States, it is agreed, that measures shall be taken in
concert between his Majesty's government in America and the government of the
United States for making a joint survey of the said river from one degree of
latitude below the Falls of St. Anthony, to the principal source or sources of
the said river, and also of the parts adjacent thereto; and that if on the
result of such survey, it should appear that the said river would not be
intersected by such a line as is abovementioned, the two parties will
thereupon proceed by amicable negotiation to regulate the boundary line in that
quarter, as well as all other points to be adjusted between the said parties,
according to justice and mutual convenience, and in conformity to the intent of
the said Treaty.

ART. V. Whereas doubts have arisen what river was truly intended under the
name of the river St. Croix mentioned in the said Treaty of Peace, and forming
a part of the boundary therein described, that question shall be referred to
the final decision of Commissions to be appointed in the following manner, viz.

One Commissioner shall be named by his Majesty and one by the President of the
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and
the said two Commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third; or if they
cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two original
Commissioners. And the three Commissioners so appointed, shall be sworn
impartially to examine and decide the said question according to such evidence
as shall respectively be laid before them on the part of the British Government
and of the U. States. The said Commissioners shall meet at Halifax, and shall
have power to adjourn to such other place or places as they shall think fit.
They shall have power to appoint a Scretary, and to employ such surveyors or
other persons as they shall judge necessary. The said Commissioners shall by a
declaration under their hands and seals decide what river is the River St.
Croix intended by the treaty. The said declaration shall contain a description
of the said river and shall particularize the latitude and longitude of its
mouth and of its source. Duplicates of this declaration and of the statements
of their accounts, and of the journal of their proceedings shall be delivered
by them to the Agent of his Majesty and to the Agent of the United States who
may be respectively appointed and authorized to manage the business on behalf
of the respective Governments. And both parties agree to consider such decision
as final and conclusive, so as that the same shall never thereafter be called
into question, or made the subject of dispute or difference between them.

ART, VI. Whereas it is alleged by diverse British merchants and others his
Majesty's subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide
contracted before the peace, still remain owing to them by citizens or
inhabitants of the United States, and that by the operation of various lawful
impediments since the peace not only the full recovery of the said debts has
been delayed, but also the value and security thereof have, in several
instances, impaired and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judical
proceedings, the British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and
receive full and adequate compensation for the losses and damages which they
have thereby sustained: It is agreed, that complaints, as under the said
article shall be preferred to the said Commissioners; and that I will forbear
to act as a Commissioner in any case in which I may be personally interested.

Three of the said Commissioners shall constitute a board, and shall have power
to do any act appertaining to the said commission, provided that one of the
Commissioners named on each side, and the fifth commissioner shall be present,
and all decisions shall be made by the majority of the voices of the
Commissioners then present; 18 months from the day on which the said
Commissioners shall form a board, and be ready to proceed to business, are
assigned for receiving complaints, and applications; but they are nevertheless
authorized in any particular cases in which it shall appear to them to be
reasonable and just, to extend the said term of eighteen months for any term
not exceeding six months, after the expiration thereof. The said Cemmissioners
shall ^^rst meet at Philadelphia, but they shall have power to adjourn from
place to place as they shall see cause.

The said Commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them, are empowered and required, in pursuance of the true intent
and meaning of this article, to take into their consideration all claims,
whether of principal or interest, or balances of principal and interest, and to
determine the same respectively, according to the merits of the several cases,
due regard being had to all the circumstances thereof, and as equity and
justice shall appear to them to require. And the said commissioners shall have
power to examine all such persons as shall come before them on oath or
affirmation touching the premises; and also to receive evidence according as
they may think most consistent with equity and justice, all written
depositions, or books, or paper, or copy, or extract being duly authenticated,
either according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two
countries, or in such other manner as the said Commissioners shall see cause to
require or allow.

The award of the said Commissioners or of any there of them as aforesaid,
shall in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the
claim, and to the amount of the sum to be paid to the creditor or claimant: And
the United States undertake to cause the sum so awarded to be paid in specie to
such creditor or claimant without deduction; and at such time or times, and at
such place or places, as shall be awarded by the said Commissioners; and on
condition of such releases or assignment to be given by the creditor or
claimant, as by the said Commissioners may be directed: Provided always, that
no such payment shall be fixed by the said Commissioners to take place sooner
than twelve months from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of this
Treaty.

ART. VII. Whereas complaints have been made by diverse merchants and others,
citizens of the United States, that during the course of the war in which his
Majesty is now engaged, they have sustained considerable losses and damage, by
reason of irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels other
property under color of authority or commissions from his Majesty, and that
from various circumstances belonging to the said bases, adequate compensation
for the losses and damages so sustained cannot now be actually obtained, had
and received by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings; it is agreed, that
in all such cases where adequate compensation cannot, for whatever reason, be
now actually obtained, had and received by the said merchants and others in the
ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation for the same will be
made by the British Government to the said complainants. But it is distinctly
understood that this provision is not to extend to such losses or damages as to
this Treaty; the complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are referred to
the commissioners to be appointed by virtue of this article, who are hereby
authorized and required to proceed in the like manner relative to these as to
the other cases committed to them; and the United States undertake to pay to
the complainants or claimants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such
sums as shall be awarded to them respectively by the said commissioners, and at
the times and places which in such awards shall be specified; and on conditions
of such release^ or assignments to be given by the claimants as in the said
awards may be directed: And it is further agreed that not only the now existing
cases of both descriptions but also all such as shall exist at the time of
exchanging the ratifications of this treaty shall be considered as being within
the provisions, intent and meaning of this article.

ART. VIII. It is further agreed, that the commissioners mentioned in this and
in the two preceding articles shall be respectively paid in such manner as
shall be agreed between the two parties? such agreement being to be settled at
the time of the exchange of the ratifications of this Treaty. And all other
expenses attending the said commissions shall be defrayed jointly by the two
parties, the same being previously ascertained and allowed by the majority of
the commissioners, And in the case of death, sickness or necessary absence, the
place of every such commissioner respectively shall be supplied in the same
manner as such commissioner was first appointed, and the new commissioners
shall take the same oath or affirmation and do the same duties.

ART. IX. It is agreed that British subjects who now hold lands in the
territories of the United States and American Citizens who now hold lands in
the dominions of his Majesty shall continue to hold them according to the
nature and tenure of their respective estates and titles therein; and may
grant, sell or devise the same to whom they please, in like manner as if they
were natives; and that neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall so far as
may respect the said lands and the legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded
as aliens.

ART. X. Neither the debts due from individuals of the other, for shares nor
moneys which they may have in the public funds, or in the public or private
banks shall ever in any event of war or national differences be sequestered or
confiscated, it being unjust and impolitic that debts and engagements
contracted and made by individuals having confidence in each other and in their
respective governments should ever be destroyed or impaired by national
authority on account of national differences and discontents.

ART. XI. It is agreed between his Majesty and the United States of America
that there shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and
commerce between their respective people; in the manner, under the limitations
and on the conditions specified in the following articles.

ART. XII. His Majesty consents that it shall and may be lawful during the time
herein after limited for the citizens of the United States to carry to any of
his Majesty's islands and ports in the West Indies from the United States, in
their own vessels, not being above the burden of 70 tons, any goods or
merchandises being of the growth, manufacture or produce of the said States,
which is or may be lawful to carry to the said Islands or Ports from the said
States in British vessels; and that the said American vessels shall be subject
there to no other or higher tonnage duties or charge than shall be payable by
British vessels in the ports of the United States; and that the cargoes of the
said American vessels shall be subject there to no other or higher duties or
charges than shall be payable on the like articles if imported there from the
said States in British vessels.

And his Majesty also consents that it shall be lawful for the said American
citizens to pnrchase, load and carry away in their said vesses to the United
States from the said Islands and Ports all such articles being of the growth,
manufacture or produce of the said Islands as may now by law be carried from
thence to the said States in British vessels and subject only to the same
duties and charges on exportation to which British vessels and their cargoes
are or shall be subject in similar circumstances.

Provided always that the said American vessels do carry and land their cargoes
in the United States, only, it being expressly agreed and declared that during
the continuance of this article, the United States will prohibit and restrain
the carrying any molasses, sugar, coffee cocoa or cotton in American vessels,
either from his Majesty's Islands or from the United States to any part of the
world except the United States, reasonable sea stores excepted. Provided also,
that it shall and may be lawful, during the same period, for British vesses to
import from the said Islands into the United States and to export from the
United States to the said Islands, all articles what ever being of the growth,
produce or manufacture of the said Islands, or of the United States
respectively, which no man by the laws of the said United States, be so
imported and exported, And that the cargoes of the said British vessels shall
be subject to no other or higher duties or charges, than shall be payable on
the same articles if so imported or exported in American vessels.

It is agreed that this article and every matter and thing therein contained
shall continue to be in force during the continuance of the war in which his
Majesty is now engaged; and also for two year from and after the day of the
signature of the preliminary other articles of peace by which the same may be
terminated.

And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce in this
respect according to the situation in which his Majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arangements as may
best conduce to the material advantage and extensive of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and what cases, (...) vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what caes provisions and other articles, not generally contraband may become
such. But in the mean time their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be re^^^^^^ by the articles herein after inserted on those (...).

ART. XIII. His Mejesty consents that the vessels belonging to the citizens of
the U S. of America shall be admitted and hospitably received in all the
seaports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies. And that
the Citizens of the said United States may freely carry on a Trade between the
said territories and the said United States in all articles of which the
Importation or Exportation respectively to or from the said Territories, should
not be entirely prohibited. Provided only that it shall not be lawful for them
in any time of War between the British Government and any other Power or State
whatever, to Export from the said Territories, without the special permission
of the British Government there, any Military Stores or Naval Stores or Rice.
The Citizens of the United States shall pay for their vessels when admitted
into the said ports no other or higher Tonage duty than shall be payable on
British vessels when admitted into the parts of the United States. And they
shall pay no other or higher duties or charges on the Importation or
Exportation of the cargoes of the said vessels, than shall be payable on the
same articles when imported or exported in British vessels. But it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories to any port or
place except have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or
wilful omission of the claimants.

That for the purpose of ascertaining the amount any such losses and damages,
five commissioners shall (...) appointed and authorized to act in London, (...)
the manner directed with respect to those (...) the preceding article, and
after having taken (...) oath or affirmation (mutatis mutandis) the said (...)
eighteen months is also assigned for the (...) claims, and they are in like
manner authorized (...) the same in particular cases. They shall (...), books,
papers and evidence in the same (...), and exercise the like discretion and
powers respecting that subject; and shall decide the claims in question
according to the merits of the several cases, and to justice, equity, and the
laws of nations. The award of the said Commissioners, or any such three of them
as aforesaid, shall, in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the
justice of the claim, and the amount of the sum to be paid to the claimant; and
his Britannic Majesty undertakes to cause the same to be paid to such claimant
in specie, without any deduction, at such place or places, and at such time or
times as shall be awarded by the said Commissioners, and on condition of such
releases (...) assignments to be given by the claimants, as by the said
Commissioners may be directed.

And whereas certain merchants and others his Majesty's subjects complain that
in the course of the (...) they have sustained loss and damage by reason (...)
capture of the vessels and merchandise taken within the limits and jurisdiction
of the states and brought into the ports of the same, or taken by vessels
originally armed in ports of the said states.

It is agreed that in all such cases where restitution shall not have been made
agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated
at Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1793, a copy of which is annexed to some port or
place in America, where the same shall be unladen, and such regulations shall
be adopted by both parties, as shall from time to time be found necessary to
enforce the due and faithful observance of this stipulation. It is also
understood that the permission granted by this article is not to extend to
allow the vessels of the United States to carry on any part of the coasting
trade of the said British territories; but vessels going with their original
cargoes, or part thereof, from one port of discharge to another, are not to be
considered as carrying on the coasting trade. Neither is this article to be
construed to allow the citizens of the said States to settle or reside within
the said territories, or to go into the interior parts thereof, without the
permission of the British Government established there; and if any
transgression should be attempted against the regulations of the British
government in this respect, the observance of the same shall and may be
enforced against the Citizens of America in the same manner as against British
subjects or others transgressing the same rule. And the citizens of the United
States whenever they arrive in any port or harbor in the said territories, or
if they should be permitted in manner aforesaid, to go to any other place
therein, shall always be subject to the laws, government and jurisdiction of
what nature established in such harbor, port or place, according as the same
may be: The citizens of the United States, may also touch for refreshment at
the island of St. Helena, but subject in all respects to such regulations as
the British Government may from time to time establish there.

ART. XIV. There shall be between all the dominions of his majesty in Europe
and the territories of the U. states a reciprocal and perfect liberty of
commerce and navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries shall
have liberty freely and securely and without hindrance and molestation to come
with their ships and cargoes to the lands, countries, cities, ports, places and
rivers within the dominions and terrories aforesaid, to enter into the same, to
resort there and to remain and reside there, without any limitation of time:
Also to hire and possess houses and warehouses for the purposes of their
commerce, and generally the merchants and traders on each side shall enjoy the
most complete protection and security for their commerce; but subject always as
to what respects this article, to the laws and statutes of the two countries
respectively.

ART. XV. It is agreed that no other or higher duties shall be paid by the
ships or merchandise of the one party in the ports of the other, than such as
are paid by the like vessels or merchandise of all other nations. Nor shall any
other or higher duty be imposed in one country on the importation of any
articles the growth, produce or manufacture of the other than are or shall be
payable on the importation of the like articles being of the growth, produce,
or manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any prohibition be
imposed on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from the
territories of the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend to
all other nations.

But the British Government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe a tonnage duty equal
to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of America: And
also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of duty now
payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods when imported into the
United States in British or in American vessels.

The two parties agree to treat for the more exact equalization of the duties
on the respective navigation of their subjects and people in such manner as may
be most beneficial to the two countries. The arrangements for this purpose
shall be made at the same time with those mentioned at the conclusion of the
12th article of this treaty, and are to be considered as a part thereof. In the
interval it is agreed, that the United States will not impose any new or
additional tonnage duties on British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting
difference between the duties payable on the importation of any articles in
British or American vessels.

ART. XVI. It shall be free for the two contracting parties, respectively to
appoint consuls for the protection of trade, to reside in the dominions and
territories aforesaid, and the said consuls shall enjoy those liberties and
rights which belong to them by reason of their function. But before any consul
shall act as such he shall be in the usual forms approved and admitted by the
party to whom he is sent; and it is hereby declared to be lawful and proper,
that in case of illegal or improper conduct toward the laws or government a
Consul may either be punished according to law, if the laws will reach the case
nor be dismissed, or even sent back, the offended government assigning to the
other their reasons for the same.

Either of the parties may except from the residence of consuls such particular
places as such party shall judge proper to be so excepted.

ART. XVII. It is agreed, that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or
detained on just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying
to the enemy any of the articles which are contraband of war, the said vessel
shall be brought to the nearest or most convenient (...); and if any property
of an enemy should be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs
to the enemy shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed
with the remainder without any impediment And it is agreed, that all proper
measures shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or
cargoes so brought in for adudication; and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters of owners of such
ships.

ART. XVIII. In order to regulate what is in future to be deemed contraband of
war, it is agreed that under the said denomination shall be comprised all arms
and implements serving for the purposes of war, by land or sea, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenadoes, carcasses, saucisses, carriages
for cannon, musket rests, bandoliers, gunpowder, match, saltpeter, ball pikes,
swords, head pieces, cutlasses, halberts, lances, javelins, horse furniture,
holsters, belts, and generally other implements of war; as also timber for ship
building, tar or rozin, copper in sheets, sails, hemp and cordage, and
generally whatever may serve directly to equipment of vessels, unwrought iron
and fir planks only excepted; and all the above articles are hereby declared to
be just objects of confiscation, whenever they are attempted to be carried to
an enemy.

And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions and other articles not generally contraband may be regarded as such,
renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles so becoming contraband according to the existing laws of
Nations, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessels the full value of all
articles, with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

And whereas it frequently happens that vessels sail for a port or place
belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded or invested, it is agreed, that every vessel so circumstanced may be
turned away from such port or place, but she shall not be detained not her
cargo, if not contraband, be consiscated unless after notice she shall again
attempt to enter, but file shall be permitted to go to any other port or place
she may think proper: Nor shall any vessel or goods of either party. that may
have entered into such port or place, before the same was besieged, blockaded
or invested by the. other, and be sound therein after the. reduction or
surrender of such place, be liable to confiscation, but shall be restored to
the owners or proprietors thereof.

ART. XIX. And that more abundant care be taken for the security of the
respective subjects and citizens of the contracting parties, to prevent their
suffering injuries by the men of war, or privateers of either party, all
commanders of ships of war and privateers and all others the said subjects and
citizens shall forbear doing any damage to those of the other partys or
committing any outrage against them, and if they act to the contrary they shall
be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates to make
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be.

For this cause all commanders of privateers before they receive their
commissions shall hereafter be obliged to give before a competent judge,
sufficient security by at least two responsible suretica, who have no interest
in the said privateer each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of fifteen hundred pounds sterling, or
if such ships be provided with above one hundred and fifty seamen or soldiers,
in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, to satisfy all damages and
injuries, which the said privateer or her officers or men, or any of them may
do or commit during their cruize, contrary to the tenor of this treaty, or to
the laws and instructions for regulating their conduct; and further that in all
cases of aggressions the said commissions shall be revoked and annulled.

It is also agreed that whenever a judge of a court of admiralty of either of
the parties, shall pronounce sentence against any vessel or goods or property
belonging to the subjects or citizens of the other party a formal and duly
authenticated Copy of all the proceedings in the cause, and of the said
sentence, shall if required be delivered to the commander of the said vessel,
without the smallest delay, he paying all legal fees and demands for the same.

ART. XX. It is further agreed that both the said contracting parties, shall
not only refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or
towns, or permit any of their inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal
or assist them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such
inhabitants as shall be guilty of such acts or offenses. And all their ships
with goods or merchandises taken by them and brought into the port of either of
the said party, shall be seized as far as they can be discovered and shall be
restored to the owners or their factors or agents duly deputed and authorized
in writing by them [proper evidence being first given in the Court of Admiralty
for proving the property] even in case such effects should have passed into
other hands by sale, if it be proved that the buyers knew or had good reason to
believe, or suspect that they had been piratically taken.

ART. XXI. It is like wise agreed, that the subjects and citizens of the two
nations, shall not do any acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor
accept commissions or instructions so to act from any foreign prince or state,
enemies to the other party; nor shall the enemies of one of the parties be
permitted to invite, or endeavor to enlist in their military service any of the
subjects or citizens of the other party; and the laws against all such offenses
and aggressions shall be punctually executed. And if any subject or citizen of
the said parties respectively shall accept any foreign commission, or letters
of marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party,
and be taken by the. other party, it is hereby declared to be lawful for the
said party to treat and punish the said subject or citizen having such
commission or letters of marque, as a pirate.

ART. XXII. It is. expressly stipulated that neither of the said contracting
parties will order or authorize any acts of reprizal against the other, on
complaints of injuries or damages until the said party shall first have
presented to the other a statement thereof, verified by competent proof and
evidence, and demanding justice and satisfaction, and the same shall either
have been refused or unreasonably delayed.

ART. XXIII. The ships of war of each of the conracting parties shall, at all
times, be hospitably received in the ports of the other, their officers and
crews payng due respect to the laws and government of the country. The officers
shall be treated with that respect which is due to the commissions which they
bear and if any insult should be offered to them by any of the inhabitants, all
offenders in this respect shall be punished, as disturbers of the peace and
amity between, the two countries. And his majesty consents that in case an
American vessels should by stress of weather, danger from enemies or other
misfortunes be reduced to the necessity of seeking shelter in any of his
majesty's ports, into which such vessel could not in ordinary cases claim to be
admitted, she shall on manifesting that necessity, to the satisfaction of the
government of the place, be hospitably received and permitted to refit and to
purchase at the market price such necessaries, as she may stand in neesof,
conformably to such orders and regulations as the government of the place,
having respect to the circumstances of each case, shall prescribe. She shall
not be allowed to break bulk or unload her cargo, Unless the same shall be bona
fide necessary to her being refitted; nor shall be permitted to sell any part
of her cargo, unless so much only as may be necessary to defray her expenses,
and then not without the express permission of the government of the place; nor
shall she be obliged to pay any duties whatever, except only on such articles
as she may be permitted to sell for the purpose aforesaid.

ART. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers (not being subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties) who have commissions from any other
prince or state in enmity with either nation, to arm their ships in the ports
of either of the said parties, nor to sell what they have taken, nor is any
other manner to exchange the same; nor shall they be allowed to purchase more
provisions than shall be necessary for their going to the nearest port of that
prince or state from whom they obtained their commissions.

ART. XXV. It shall be lawful for ships of war and privateers, belonging to the
said parties respectively, to carry whithersoever they please the ships and
goods taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any fee to the
officers of the admiralty, or to any judges Whatever; nor shall the said
prizes, when they arrive at end enter the ports of the said parties, be
detained or seized, neither shall the searchers or other officers of those
places visit such prizes (except for the purpose of preventing the carrying of
any part of the cargo thereof on more, in any manner contrary to the
established laws of revenue, navigation or commerce) nor shall such officers
take cognizance of the validity of such prizes; but they shall be at liberty to
hoist sail, and depart as speedily as maybe, and carry their said prizes to the
place mentioned in their commissions or patents, which the commanders of the
said ships of war or privateers shall be obliged to show. No shelter or refuge
shall be given in their ports to such as have made a prize upon the subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties; but if forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to
hasten their departure, and to cause them to retire at soon as possible.
Nothing in this treaty contained shall however be construed or operate contrary
to former and existing public treaties with other sovereign states. But the two
parties agree, that while they continue in amity, neither of them will in
future make any treaty that shall be inconsistent with this or the preceding
article.

Neither of the said parties shall permit the ships or goods belonging to the
subjects or citizens of the other to be taken within cannon shot of the coast,
nor in any of the bays, ports or rivers, of their territories, by ships of war,
or others, having commission from any prince, republic, or state whatever. But
in case it should so happen, the party whose territorial right shall thus have
been violated, shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain from the offending
party full and ample satsfaction for the vessel or vessels so taken, whether
the same be vessels of war or merchant vessels.

ART. XXVI. If at any time a rupture should take place (which God forbid)
between his Majesty and the United States, the merchants and others of each of
the two nations residing in the dominions of the other shall have the privilege
of remaining and continuing, their trade, so long as they behave peaceably, and
commit no offense against the laws; and in case their conduct should render
them suspected, and the respective governments should think proper to order
them to remove, the term of twelve months from the publication of the order
shall be allowed them for that purpose, to remove with their families, effects
and property; but this favor shall not be extended to those who shall act
contrary to the established laws; and for greater certainty it is declared,
that such rupture shall not be deemed to exist while negociations for
accommodating differences shall be depending, nor until the respective
ambassadors or ministers, if such there shall be, shall be recalled, or sent
home, on account of such differences, and not on account of personal
misconduct, according to the nature and degrees of which both parties retain
their rights, either to request the, recall, or immediately to send home the
ambassador of minister of the other; and that without prejedice to their mutual
friendship and good understanding.

ART. XXVII. It is further agrreed, that his Majesty and the United States, or
mutual requsition by them respectively; or by their respective ministers or
officers authorized to make the same, will deliver up to justice all persons,
who being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other, provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of cirminality as, according to
the laws of the place, where the fugative or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had
there been committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be
borne and defrayed by those who make the requistion, and receive the fugitive.

ART. XXVIII. It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this treaty shall be
permanent, and that the subsequent article, except the twelfth, shall be
limited in their duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which
the ratification of this treaty shall be exchanged; but subject to this
condition that whereas the said twelfth article will expire, by the limitation
therein contained, at the end of two years from the signing the preliminary or
other articles of peace, which shall terminate the present war in which his
Majesty is engaged; it is agreed, that proper measures shall by concert be
taken for bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty and
discussion, so early before the expiration of the said term, as that new
arrangements on that head may by that time bo perfected and ready to take
place. But if it should unfortunately happen, that his Majesty and the United
States should not be able to agree on such new arrangements in that case all
the articles of this treaty, except the first ten, shall then coase and expire
together.

Lastly. This treaty, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty,
and by the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent
of their Senate, and the respective ratification mutually exchanged, shall be
binding and obligatory on his Majesty and on the said States, and shall be by
them respectively executed and observed with punctuality, and the most sincere
regard to good faith. And whereas it will be expedient, in order the better to
facilitate intercourse and obviate difficulties, that other articles be
proposed and added to this treaty which articles, for want of time and other
circumstances, cannot now be perfected -- it is agreed, that the said parties
will, from time to time, readily treat of and concerning such articles, and
will sincerely endeavor so to form them, as that they may conduce to mutual
convenience, and tend to promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and that
the said articles, after having been truly ratified, shall be added to, and
make a part of this treaty. In faith whereof, we, the undersigned Minister
Plenipotentiary of his majesty the King of Great Britain, and the United States
of America, have signed this present Treaty, and have caused to be fixed
thereto the seal of our arms.

Done at London, this nineteenth day of November, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety four. GRENVILLE. (Seal)
JOHN JAY. (Seal)

CONDITIONAL RATIFICATION, On the part of the United States, In Senate, June
25, 1795
Resolved, That the Senate do consent to, and advise the President of the
United States, to ratify the Treaty of Amity Commerce and Navigation between
his Britanic Majesty and the United States of America, concluded at London the
19th November 1794, on condition that there be added to the said Treaty; an
article whereby it shall be agreed to suspend the operation of so much of the
12th article as respects the trade, which said Majesty thereby consents may be
carried on between the United States and his Islands in the West Indies, in the
manner and on the terms and conditions therein specified.

And the Senate recommend to the President to proceed without delay to further
friendly negociations with his Majesty on the subject of the said trade, and of
the terms and conditions in question.

Letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, referred to in the 7th article.
Philadelphia, September 5, 1793. SIR,
I am honored with yours of August 30. Mine of the 7th of that month assured
you that measures were taken for excluding from all further asylum in our ports
vessels armed in them to cruize on nations with which we are at peace and for
the restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince William Henry, and the
Jane of Dublin; and that should the measures for restitution fail in their
effect, the President considered it as incumbent on the U. S. to make
compensation for the vessels.

We are bound by our Treaties with three of the belligerent nations, by all the
means in our power to protect and defend their vessels and effects in our
ports, or waters, or on the seas near our shores, and to recover and restore
the same to the right owners when taken from them. If all the means in our
power are used, and fail in their effect, we are not bound by our treaties with
those nations to make compensation.

Though we have no similar Treaty with Great Britain, it was the opinion of the
President, that we should use toward that nation the same rule, which under
this article, was to govern us with the other nations; and even to extend it to
captures made on the high seas, and brought into our ports; if done by vessels
which had been armed within them.

Having for particular reasons, forbore to use all the means in our power for
the restitution of the three vessels mentioned in my letter of August 7th, the
President thought it incumbent on the U. S. to make compensation for them: And
though nothing was said in that letter of other vessels taken under like
circumstances and brought in after the fifth of June, and before the date of
that letter, yet when the forbearance had taken place it was and is his opinion
that compensation would be equally due.

As to prizes make under the same circumstances, and bro't in after the date of
that letter the President determined that all the means in our power should be
used for their restitution. If these said, as we should not be bound by our
treaties to make compensation to the other powers in the analogous case, he did
not mean to give an opinion that it ought to be done to Great Britain. But
still if any cases shall arise subsequent to that date, the circumstances of
which shall place them on similar ground with those before it, the President
would think compensation equally incumbant on the United States.

Instructions are given to the governors of the different states to use all the
means in their power for restoring prizes of this last description found within
their ports. Though they will of course take measures to be informed of them, and
the general government has given them the aid of the Custom House officers for
this purpose, yet you will be sensible of the importance of multiplying the
channels of their information as far as shall depend on yourself, or any person
under your direction, in order that the governors may use the means in their
power for making restitution.

Without knowledge of the capture they cannot restore it. It will always be
best to give the notice to them directly; but any information which you shall
be pleased to send to me also at any time, shall be forwarded to them quickly
as distance will permit.

Hence you will perceive sir, that the President contemplates restitution or
compensation in the cases before the seventh of August: and after that date
restitution if it can be effected by any means in our power. And that it will
be important that you should substantiate the fact, that such prizes are in our
ports or waters.

Your list of the privateers illicitly armed in our port is, I believe, correct.

With respect to losses by detention, waste, spoilation sustained by vessels
taken as beforementioned between the dates of June 5th and 7th, it is proposed
as a provisional measure, that the Collector of the customs of the district,
and the British Consul, or any other person you please, shall appoint persons
to establish the value of the vessel and cargo, at the time of her capture and
of her arrival in the port into which she is brought, according to their value
in that port. If this shall be agreeable to you, and you will be pleased to
signify it to me, with the names of the prizes understood to be of this
description, instructions will be given accordingly to the Collector of the
customs where the respective vessels are.

I have the honor to be, etc. (Signed) THOMAS JEFFERSON.

Geo. Hammond, Esquire
Whilst the Treaty was under discussion in the Senate the following
propositions were brought forward and respectively differed as substitutes to
the resolution of ratification which ultimately prevailed.

Mr. BURR's MOTION.
THAT the further consideration of the Treaty concluded at London, the 19th of
November 1794, be postponed, and that it be recommended to the President of the
United States to proceed without delay, to further friendly negotiation with
his Britanic Majesty, in order to effect alterations in the said treaty, in the
following particulars:

That the 6th, 10th, and 24th articles, and to so much of the 25th as relates
to the shelter of refuge to be given to the armed vessels of states or
sovereigns at war with either party, be expunged.

2d. Art. That no privilege or right be allowed to the settlers or traders
mentioned in the second article, other than those which are secured to them by
the Treaty of 1793, and existing laws.

3d Art. That the 3d Article be expunged, or so modified that the citizens of
the United States may have the use of all rivers, ports and places within the
territories of his Britanic Majesty, in North America in the same manner as his
subjects may have of those of the United States.

6th Art. That the value of the negroes and other property, carried away
contrary to the 17th Article of the Treaty of 1783, and the loss and damage
sustained by the United States, by the detention of the posts, be paid for by
the British government; the amount to be ascertained by the commissioners who
may be appointed to liquidate the claims of the British creditors.

12th Art. That what relates to the West India trade and the provisos and
conditions thereof in the 12th Art. be expunged, or rendered much more
favorable to the United States, and without any restraint on the exportation in
vessels of the U. States of any articles not the growth, produce or manufacture
of the said Islands of his Britanic Majesty.

15th Art. That no clause be admitted which may restrain the United States,
from reciprocating benefits by discriminating between foreign nations, in their
commercial arrangement, or prevent them from increasing the tonnage, or other
duties on British vessels, on terms of reciprocity or in a stipulated ratio.

21st Art. That the subjects or citizens of either party, be not restrained
from accepting commissions in the army or navy of any foreign power.

Mr. TAZEWELL's MOTION.
That the President of the United States be informed, that the Senate will not
consent to the ratification of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation,
between the United States and his Brittannic Majesty, concluded at London on
the 19th of November, 1794, for the reasons following:

l. Because so much of the treaty as was intended to terminate the complaints,
flowing from the inexecution of the treaty of 1783, contains stipulations that
were not rightfully or justly requirable of the United States, and which are
both impolitic and injurious to their interest: and because the treaty has not
secured that satisfaction from the British government, for the removal of
negroes in violation of the treaty of 1783, to which the citizens of the United
States were justly entitled. 2. Because the rights of individual States are, by
the 9th article of this treaty, unconstitutionally invaded. 3. Because however
impolitic or unjust it may generrally be, to exercise the power prohibited by
the 10th article, yet it rests on legislative discretion, and ought not to be
prohibited by treaty. 4. Because so much of the treaty as relates to commercial
arrangements between the parties, wants that reciprocity, upon which alone such
like arrangements ought to be founded, and will operate ruinously to the
American commerce and navigation. 5. Because the treaty prevents the United
States from the exercise of that control over their commerce and navigation,
as connected with other nations, which might better the condition of their
intercourse with friendly nations. 6. Because the treaty asserts a power in the
President and Senate, to control and even annihilate the constitutional right
of the congress of the United States over their commercial intercourse with
foreign nations. 7. Because if the construction of this treaty should not
produce an infraction of the treaties now subsisting between the United States
and their allies, it is calculated to excite sensations which may not operate
beneficially to the United States.
Notwithstanding the Senate will not consent to the ratification of this
treaty, they advise the President of the United States to continue his
endeavors, by friendly discussion with his Britannic Majesty, to adjust all
the real causes of complaint between the two nations.

These propositions were both rejected by a vote of 20 to 10. We are informed,
that the members who voted in the affirmative were,

Messrs. Bingham, Bradford, Cabot, Elsworth, Frelinghuysen, Foster, Gunn,
Henry, King, Latimer, Pain, Potts, Read, Ross, Rutherford, Strong, Trumbull,
Vining, Livermore and Marshall.

In the Negative,

Brown, Bloodworth, Burr, Butler, Jackson, Langdon, Martin, Robinson, Mason,
and Tazewell.

FINIS.

