BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, A Proclamation.
WHEN we review the calamities which afflict so many other nations, the present
condition of the United States affords much matter of consolation and
satisfaction. Our exemption hitherto from foreign war -- an increasing prospect
of the continuance of that exemption -- the great degree of internal
tranquillity we have enjoyed -- the recent confirmation of that tranquillity, by
the suppression of an insurrection which so wantonly threatened it -- the happy
course of our public affairs in general -- the unexampled prosperity of all
classes of our citizens, are circumstances which peculiarly mark our situation
with indications of the Divine Benificence toward us. In such a state of
things it is, in an especial manner, our duty as a people, with (...) reverence
and affectionate gratitude, to acknowledge our many and great (...) ^^tions to
ALMIGHTY GOD, and to implore him to continue and confirm the blessings we
experience.

Deeply penetrated with this sentiment, I GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the
United States, do recommend to all religious societies and denominations, and
to all persons whomsoever within the United States, to set apart and observe
Thursday the nineteenth day of February next, as a Day of Public Thanksgiving
and Prayer; and on that day to meet together, and render their sincere and
hearty thanks to the Great Ruler of nations, for the manifold and signal
mercies, which distinguish our lot as a nation; particularly for the possession
of constitutions of government which unite, and by their union establish
liberty with order -- for the preservation of our peace foreign and domestic --
for the seasonable control which has been given to a spirit of disorder, in
the suppression of the late insurrection -- and generally, for the prosperous
course of our affairs public and private; and at the (...) time, humbly and
fervently to beseech the Kind Author of these blessings, graciously to prolong
them to us -- to imprint on our hearts a deep and solemn sense of our
obligations to him for them -- to teach us rightly to (...) their immense value
-- to preserve us from the arrogance of prosperity, and from hazarding the
advantages we enjoy by delusive (...) -- to dispose us to merit the continuance
of his favors, by not abusing them, by our gratitude for them, and by a
correspondent conduct as citizens and as men -- to render this country more and
more a safe and propritious asylum for the unfortunat of other countries -- to
extend among us true and useful knowledge -- to diffuse and establish habits of
sobriety, order, morality and piety; and finally, to impart all the blessings
we possess, or ask for ourselves, to the whole family of mankind.

L.S.

In testimony whereof, I have caused the SEAL of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA,
to be affixed to these presents, and signed the same with my Hand. Done at the
city of PHILADELPHIA, (...) first day of January, one thousand seven hundred
and ninety-(...), and of the (...) the United States of America the (...).

Go: WASHINGTON.
By the President, EDM: RANDOLPH.


