IMPORTANT STATE PAPERS: CONTAINING THE TREATIES EXISTING BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND FOREIGN POWERS.

NEW YORK, PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF THE DIARY, No. 81, Water Street. 1795.

Important State-Papers.
Treaty of Commerce between France and the United States of America.
THE Most Christian King and the Thirteen United States of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachussetts-Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia, willing to fix in an equitable and permanent manner, the
rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and commerce
which the two parties desire to establish between their respective countries,
states and subjects; His Most Christian Majesty and the said United States have
judged that the said end could not be better obtained, than by taking for the
basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and reciprocity, and by
carefully avoiding all those burdensome preferences which are usually sources
of debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also each party at liberty
to make respecting navigation and commerce, those interior regulations which it
shall find most convenient to itself, and by founding the advantage of commerce
solely upon reprocal utility, and the just rules of free intercourse; reserving
withal to each party the liberty of admitting, at its pleasure, other nations
to a participation of the same advantages. It is in the spirit of this
intention, and to fulfill these views, that his said majesty having named and
appointed for his plenipotentiary, Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the
city of Strasbourg, secretary of his majesty's council of state; and the united
states on their part, having fully empowered Bejamin Franklin, deputy from the
state of Pennsylvania to the general congress, and president to the Convention
of the said state; Silas Deane, late deputy from the state of Connecticut to
the said Congress, and Arthur Lee, counselor at law: The said respective
Plenipotentiaries, after exchanging their powers, and after mature
deliberation, have concluded and agreed upon the following articles.

Article 1. THERE shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true
and sincere friendship between the most christian king, his heirs and
successors, and the United States of America, and the subjects of the most
christian king and of the said states, and between the countries, islands,
cities and towns situate under the jurisdiction of the most christian king and
of the said United States, and the people and inhabitants of every degree,
without exception of persons or places, and the terms herein aftermentioned,
shall be perpetual between the most christian king, his heirs and successors,
and the said United States.

Art. 2. The most christian king and the United States engage mutual not to
grant any particular favor to other nations, in respect of commerce and
navigation, which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who
shall enjoy the same favor freely if the concession was freely made, or on
allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

Art. 3. The subjects of the most christian king shall pay in the ports,
havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or towns of the United States, or any
of them, no other, or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may
be, or by what name soever called, than those which the nations most favored
are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said states to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations do
or shall enjoy.

Art. 4. The subjects, people and inhabitants of the said United States, and
each of them shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities, and
places under the denomination of his most christian majesty, in Europe, any
other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by
what name soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or shall
be obliged to pay: and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce, whether in
passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another or in going
to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations
do or shall enjoy.

Art. 5. In the above exemption is particularly comprised, the imposition of
one hundred sous p^r ton, established in France on foreign ships, unless when
the ships of the United States shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion; in which case the said ships shall pay the
duty above mentioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it; but it is understood, that the said United States, or any of
them are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

Art. 6. The most christian king shall endeavor, by all means in his power to
protect and defend all vessels and the effects belonging to the subjects,
people or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them being in his
ports, havens, or roads, or on the seas near his countries, islands cities or
towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their agents or
attorneys, all such vessels and effects which shall be taken within his
jurisdiction -- and the ships of war of his most christian majesty, or any
convoy sailing under his authority, shall upon all occasions, take under their
protection all vessels belonging to the subjects, people, or inhabitants of the
said United States, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going the
same way, and shall defend such vessels as long as they hold the same course,
or go the same way, against all attacks, force or violence, in the same manner
as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the subjects of
the most christian king.

Art. 7. In like manner the said United States and their ships of war sailing
under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the preceding
article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of the most
christian king, and use all their endeavors to recover, and cause to be
restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within the
jurisdiction of the said United States or any of them.

Art. 8. The most christian king will employ his good offices and interposition
with the king or emperor of Morocco or Fez; and the regencies of Algiers,
Tunis, and Tripoly, or with any of them; and also with every other prince State
or power of the coast of Barbary in Africa; and the subjects of the said king,
emperor, states and powers, and each of them, in order to provide as fully and
efficaciously as possible for the benefit convenience and safety of the said
United-States, and each of them, their subjects, people and inhabitants, and
their vessels and effects, against all violence, insults, attacks or
depredations on the part of the said princes, and states of Barbary, or their
subjects.

Art. 9. The subjects, inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters,
and mariners of the states, provinces and dominions of each party respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed, by the other party, the most christian king's subjects shall not
fish in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts or places which the said United
States hold, or shall hereafter hold; and in like manner the subjects, people
and inhabitants of the United States, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks roads, coasts or places, which the most christian king possesses or
shall hereafter possess; and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated; it is however understood that
the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so long
and so far, as the most christian king or the United States shall not in this
respect have granted an exemption to some other nation.

Art. 10. The United States their citizens and inhabitants, shall never disturb
the subjects of the most christain king in the enjoyment and exercise of the
right of fishing on the banks of New-foundland, nor in the indefinite and
exclusive right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island
which is designed by the treaty of Utrecht, nor in the right relative to all
and each of the isles which belong to his most christian majesty, the whole
conformable to the true sense of the treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

Art. 11. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States, or any one of
them, shall not be reputed Aubains in France, and consequently shall be
exempted from the Droit d' Aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name
soever; they may by testiment, donation or otherwise, dispose of their goods,
moveable and immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good,
and their heirs, subjects of the United States, residing in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded, under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities, or private persons; and the said heirs, whether by such particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called Droit de
detraction, or other duty of the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties, as much and as long as similar ones are not established by
the United States, or any of them. The subjects of the most christian king
shall enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said States, an entire
and perfect reciprocity, relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: But it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shll remain in all their force and vigor; and the United Sates, on their
part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws, relative to that
matter, as to them shall seem proper.

Art. 12. The merchant ships of either of the parties, which shall be making
into a port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whose
voyage and the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of
suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas, as in the
ports and havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly
showing that her goods are not of the number of those which have been
prohibited as contraband.

Art. 13. If by exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party
discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned for a port under the obedience of his enemy,
it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to open any
chest, co^fers, packs, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or to remove
the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belong to the subjects of
France, or the inhabitants of the said United States, unless the lading be
brought on shore, in the presence of the officers of the court of admiralty,
and an inventory thereof made; but there shall be no allowance to sell,
exchange, or alieniate the same in any manner, until that after (...) and
lawful process shall have been ^ad against such prohibited goods, and the court
of admiralty shall, by a sentence pronounced, having confiscated the same,
saving always as well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which
by this treaty are to be esteemed free; neither may they be detained on
pretense of their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods, much less
shall they be confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo but only
part thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander
of the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship, and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound. But in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

Art. 14. On the contrary it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be
laden by the subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to
the enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not
of the sort of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war or even after such declaration, if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration; so that the goods of the
subjects of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as are
prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the same,
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it shall not be any ways
lawful to carry them afterward to any port belonging to the enemy. The two
contracting parties agree, that the terms of two months being passed after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

Art. 15. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the
subjects and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men
of war or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of his
most christian majesty and of the said United States, and all their subjects
and inhabitants, shall be forbid doing any injury or damage to the other side;
and if they act to the contrary they shall be punished, and shall moreover be
bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof
by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their persons and goods.

Art. 16. All ships and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be
brought into some port of either State, and shall be delivered to the custody
of the officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true
proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning the
property thereof.

Art. 17. It shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and
privateers, freely to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers
of the admiralty, or any other judges; nor shall such prizes be arrested or
seized when they come to and enter the port of either party; nor shall the
searchers or other officers of those places search the same, or make
examination concerning the lawfulness of such prizes; but they may hoist sail
at any time, and depart and carry their prizes to the places expressed in their
commissions, which the commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to
show: On the contrary, no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to
such as shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of either of
the parties, but if such shall come in, being forced by ^^ress (...) weather,
or the danger of the sea, a^^ proper means shall be vigorously used, that they
go ^^t and retire from thence as soon as possible.

Art. 18. If any ship belonging to either of the parties, their people or
subjects, shall within the coasts or dominions of the ^ther, stick upon the
sands, or be ^^^cked or suffer any other damage, all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in danger
thereof. And letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for their
free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his own
country.

Art. 19. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
s^^^ping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates, or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter, and harbor, to retreat, and enter into any
of the rivers, bays, roads or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with victuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships and convenience of
their voyage, and they shall no way be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they
please, without any let or hindrance.

Art. 20. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war should break out between the said two nations, six months after
the proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and
town^s where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and
merchandises; and if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them
within that term, by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full
satisfaction shall be made for the same.

Art. 21. No subject of the most christian king shall apply or take any
commission or ^etters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said United States or any of them, or against the
subjects, people, or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them or
against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of them from any prince
of state with which the United States shall be at war; nor shall any citizen,
subject, or inhabitant of the said United States or any of them, apply for or
take any commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the subjects of the most christian king, or any of them, or
the property of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said king
shall be at war; and if any person of either nation shall take such commission
or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 22. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateer net belonging (...)
the subjects of the most christian king, nor citizens of the said United
States, who have commissions from any other prince or state at enmity with
either nation to (...) their ships in the ports of either of the one or the
other of the aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other
manner whatsoever, to exchange their ships, merchandises or any other lading:
neither shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall
be necessary for going to the next port of that prince or state from which they
have commissions.

Art. 23. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the most
christian king, and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United
States, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, (...)
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandise laden
thereon; from any port to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall be
at enmity with the most christian king or the United States. It shall likewise
be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships
and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the (...) liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or
either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned to neutral places, but
also from one place belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same prince or under
several. And it is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods and that every thing shall be deemed free and exempt which shall be
found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although, the who^e lading or any part thereof should appertain
to the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers and in ^^^ual service of the enemies.

Art. 24. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises except those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs with their fuses and other things
belonging to them, cannon-ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberts, mortars, pedarts, grenadoes, (...), muskets, musket-balls,
helmets, bucklers, brest-plates, ^^^ts of mail, and the like kinds of arms
proper for arming soldiers, musket-rests, belts horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever^ These merchandises, which follow
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to say, all
sorts any wool, flax, and all other manufactures woven of of clothes, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever, all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with the species whereof they are u^^d to be made, gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals, as also wheat and
barley, any other kind of corn or pulse, tobacco, and likewise all manner of
spices, salted and smoked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter, beer, oil,
wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all provisions which
serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life; furthermore,
all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails, sail-cloth,
anchors and any parts of anchors, also ship-masts, planks, boards and beams of
what trees soever, and all other things either proper for building, or
repairing ships, and all other goods whatever, which have not been worked into
the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war by land or sea, shall not
be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already wrought up for any
other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among free goods as likewise all
other merchandises and things, which are not comprehended and particularly
mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of contraband goods, so that they may be
transported and carried in the freest manner by the subjects of both
confederates, even to places belonging to an enemy, such towns or places being
only excepted, as are at that time besieged, blocked up or invested.

Art. 25. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided
and prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of
the parties hereto, should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging
to the subjects or people of the other ally must be furnished with sea-letters
or passports, expressing the name property and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship, that
it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of
one of the parties, which pasport shall be made out and granted according to
the form annexed to this treaty; they shall likewise be recalled every year,
that is, if the ship happens to return home in the space of a year; it is
likewise agreed, that such ships being laden are to be provided not only with
passports as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whither
she is bound, that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods
be on board of the same, which certificates shall be made out by the officers
(...) place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed form; and if any one
shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates, the
person to whom the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

Art. 26. The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties
coming upon any coast belonging to either of the said allies; but not willing
to enter into port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules
prescribed or to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

Art. 27. If the ships of the said subjects people or inhabitants of either of
the parties shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts or on the high
seas, by any ships of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of
war or privateers, for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon
shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship which they shall so
meet with, and may enter her to the number of two or three men only, to whom
the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present treaty, and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search in any manner or to give her chase or to force her to quit
her intended course.

Art. 28. It is also agreed, that all goods when once put on board the ships or
vessels of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no
further visitation, but all visitation or search shall be made before hand, and
all prohibited goods shall be stopped on the spot before the same be put on
board, unless there are manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice; nor
shall either the persons or goods of the subjects of his most christian majesty
or the United States, be put under any arrest or molested by any other kind of
embargo for that cause, and only the subject of that state to whom the said
goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to sell or
alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

Art. 29. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each
in the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents, and commissaries,
whose functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

Art. 30. And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects
of the United States may have with France, the most christian king will grant
them in Europe one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all
the produce and merchandise of the thirteen united states; and his majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said states, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America, of all which free ports the
said subjects of the united states shall enjoy the use agreeable to the
regulations which relate to them.

Art. 31. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles both in the French and English languages; declaring, nevertheless,
that the present treaty was originally proposed and concluded in the French
language and they have there to affixed their seals.

DONE at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


TREATY OF ALLIANCE EVENTFUL AND DEFENSIVE. BETWEEN FRANCE and AMERICA.
THE Most Christian King and the thirteen united states of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, having this day concluded a Treaty of Amity and
Commerce, for the reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have
thought it necessary to take into consideration the means of strengthening
those engagements, and of rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity
of the two parties; particularly in case Great Britain, in resentment of that
connection, and of the good correspondence, which is the object of the said
treaty, should break the peace with France, either by direct hostilities, or by
hindering her commerce and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of
nations, and the peace subsisting between the two crowns. And his majesty and
the said united states having resolved in that case, to join their councils and
efforts against tht enterprises of their common enemy.

The respective plenipotentiaries empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper (...) fulfill the said intentions, have, after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles.

ARTICLE 1.

IF war should break out between France and Great Britain, during the
continuance of the present war between the united states and England, his
majesty and the said united states shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels and their forces
according to the exigencies of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful
allies.

Art. 2. The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to
maintain effectually, the liberty, sovereignty and independence absolute and
unlimited of the said united states, as well in matters of government as of
commerce.

Art. 3. The two contracting parties, shall each on his own part, and in the
manner it may judge most proper, make all the efforts in its power against
their common enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

Art. 4. The contracting parties agree, that if either of them should form any
particular enterprise in which the concurrence of the other may be desired, the
party whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join to
act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own particular
situation will permit, and in that case, they shall regulate by a particular
convention, the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and the time and
manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages which are to
be its compensation.

Art. 5. If the united states should think ^it to attempt the reduction of the
British power, remaining in the northern parts of America, or the islands of
Bermudas, those countries or islands in case of success, shall be confederated
with, or dependent upon the said United States.

Art, 6. The most christian king renounces forever the possession of the
islands of Bermudas, as well as of any part of the continent of north America,
which before the treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the United States,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the King and Crown of Great Britain.

Art. 7. If his most christian majesty shall think proper to attack any of the
islands situated in the Gulf of Mexico, or near that Gulf which are at
present under the power of Great Britain all the said isles in case of success,
shall appertain to the crown of France.

Art. 8. Neither of the two parties shall conclude either truce or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained; and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the independence of the
United States shall have been formally or tacitly assured, by the treaty or
treaties that shall terminate the war.

Art. 9. The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on
its own part, the clauses and conditions of the present treaty of alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after claim of
compensation, on one side, or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

Art. 10. The most christian king and the United States, agree, to invite or
admit other powers, who may have received injuries from England to make common
cause with them, and to accede to the present alliance under such conditions as
shall be freely agreed to, and settled between all the parties.

Art. 11. The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time and forever,
against all other powers, to wit, the United States to his Most christian
majesty, the present possessions of the crown of France in America, as well as
those which it may acquire by the future treaty of peace; and his most
christian majesty guarantees on his part to the United States, their liberty
sovereignty and independence, absolute and unlimited, as well in matters of
government as commerce, and all their possessions, and the additions, or
conquests, that their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the
dominions now or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America;
conformable to the fifth and has articles above written, the whole as their
possession shall be fixed and assured to the said states, at the moment of the
cessation of their present war with England.

Art. 12. In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the
preceding article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture
between France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said
article, shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break
out; and if such rupture shall not take place, the natural obligations of the
said guarantee, shall not commence until the moment of the cessation of the
present war, between the United States and England, shall have ascertained
their possessions.

Art. 13. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of (...) months, or sooner, if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries, to wit, on the part of the
most christian king, Conrad ^^^^^nder Gerard, Royal Syndic of the city of
Strasbourg, and secretary of his Majesty's cou^^^^ of state ^ and on the part
of the United States, Benjamin Franklin deputy to the general Congress from the
state of Pennsylvania, and president to the convention of said state; Silas
Deane, heretofore deputy from the state of Connecticut; and Arthur Lee,
counselor at law, have signed the above articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring nevertheless, that the present treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language, and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


Form of the Passports and Letters which are to be given to the ships and
barques according to the twenty-fifth article of the Treaty of Amity and
Commerce.
To all who shall see these presents, Greeting,
It is hereby made known, that leave and permission has been given to (...)
master and commander of the ship called (...) of the town of (...) burden
(...) tons or thereabouts, lying at present in the port and haven of (...) and
bound for (...) and laden with (...) After this ship has been visited, and
before sailing, he shall make an oath before the officers who have the
jurisdiction of maritime affairs, that the said ship belongs to one or more of
the subjects of (...) the act whereof shall be put at the end of these
presents; as likewise that he will keep and cause to be kept by his crew on
board, the marine ordinances and regulations, and enter in the proper office a
list, signed and witnessed, containing the names and sirnames, the places of
birth and abode of the crew of his ship, and of ll who shall embark on board
her, whom he shall not take on board without the knowledge and permission of
the officers of the marine, and in every part or haven where he shall enter
with with his ship, he shall show his present leave to his officers and judges
of the marine, and shall give a faithful acount to them of what passed and was
done during his voyage, and he shall carry the colors, arms, and ensign of the
king or united states during his voyage, in witness whereof we have signed
these presents, and put the seals of our arms thereunto, and caused the same to
be coutersigned by (...) at (...) day of (...) anno Domini.

Authentic copy of the DECREE of the Queen of Portugal, for opening a
Commercial Intercourse between her Subjects, and those of the United States.
PORTUGAL.
Her Majesty has been pleased to order the following decree to be transmitted
to her Royal Court of Exchequer, that publication may be made of the same.

WHEREAS by the Declaration of the Independence of the United States of North
America, the object intended by the Royal Decree of the 4th of July, 1776, and
the publication thereof, by our Court of Exchequer, on the 5th of the same
month, have ceased to operate. We are therefore pleased to abolish and annul
the decree and publication aforesaid; and do hereby order, that free entrance
be granted in all the ports of our dominions, unto all ships and vessels coming
from North America, in the same manner as was formerly had in the admission of
those which arrived from the said colonies in the ports aforesaid, and that all
hospitality and favor be shown them, which is usually done to other friendly
nations.

Our court of Exchequer will see this performed accordingly; and are ordered to
cause this decree to be printed and set up in all public places of our city of
Lisbon, and of other ports of this kingdom and Algarve, that all persons may
have due notice thereof, and none plead ignorance of the same.

GIVEN at Salv^terta de Magos, the 13th of February 1783, (Signed) With her
Majesty's Cipher
And in order that all persons may have notice of this royal resolution of our
Lady aforesaid, we have caused these presents to be printed, and affixed at all
public places of this city and other parts of this kingdom, agreeable to the
tenor of the Decree above mentioned.

Lisbon, this 17th of February, 1783. (Signed Gonsola Jose da Silveira Preto.
Jose da Consta Ribeiro.




A Treaty of AMITY and COMMERCE, between their High Mightinesses the
States General of the United Netherlands, and the United States of America.
THEIR High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands, and the
United States of America, to wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island
and Providence plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia,
desiring to ascertain, in a permanent and equitable manner, the rules to be
observed, relative to the commerce and correspondence which they intend to
establish between their respctive states, countries and inhabitants, have
judged that the said end cannot be better obtained, than by establishing the
most perfect equality and reciprocity for the basis of their agreement, and by
avoiding all those burdensome preferences which are usually the sources of
debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also each party at liberty to
make, respecting commerce and navigation, such ulterior regulations as it shall
find most convenient to itself, and by founding the advantages of commerce
solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just rules of free intercourse,
reserving withal, to each party, the liberty of admitting at its pleasure,
other nations to a participation of the same advantages.

On these principles their High Mightinesses the States General of the United
Netherlands, have named for their Plenipotentiaries, from the midst of their
assembly, Messi^urs their deputies for the foreign affairs; and the said United
States of America, on their part, have furnished with full powers, Mr. John
Adams, late Commissioner of the United States of America at the court of
Versailles, heretofore delegate in Congress from the State of
Massachusetts Bay, and Chief Justice of the said State; who have agreed and
concluded as follows, to wit:

Art. 1. There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace and sincere
friendship between their High Mightinesses, the Lords, the States General of
the United Netherlands, and the United States of America; and between the
subjects and inhabitants of the said parties, and between the countries,
islands, cities and places, situated under the jurisdiction of the said United
Netherlands and the said United States of America, their subjects and
inhabitants of every degree, without exception of persons or places.

Art. 2. The said subjects of the States General of the United Netherlands,
shall pay in the ports, havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or places of
the United States of America, or any of them no other nor greater duties or
imposts, of whatever nature or denomination they may be, than those which the
nations the most favored are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy
all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade,
navigation and commerce which the said nations do, or shall enjoy, whether in
passing from one port to another in the said states, or in going from any of
those ports to any foreign port of the world, or from any foreign port of the
world to any of those ports.

Art. 3. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States of America,
shall pay in the ports, havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or places of
the said United Netherlands, or any of them, no other nor greater duties or
imposts of whatever nature or denomination they may be, than these which the
nations the most favored are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy
all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade,
navigation and commerce, which the said nations do or shall enjoy, whether in
passing from one port to another in the said states, or from any one toward
any one of those ports, from or to any foreign port of the world: And the
United States of America with their subjects and inhabitants, shall leave to
those of their High Mightinesses, the peaceable enjoyment of their rights in
the countries, islands and seas in the East and West Indies, without any
hindrance or molestation.

Art. 4. There shall be an entire and perfect liberty of conscience allowed to
the subjects and inhabitants of each party and to their families, and no one
shall be molested in regard to his worship, provided he submits as to the
public demonstration of it, to the laws of the country: There shall be given
moreover liberty, when any subjects or inhabitants of either party shall die in
the territory of the other to bury them in the usual burying places, or in
decent and convenient grounds to be appointed for that purpose, as occasion
shall require: And the dead bodies of those who are buried, shall not in any
wise be molested. And the two contracting parties shall provide each one in his
jurisdiction, that their respective subjects and inhabitants may henceforward
obtain the requisite certificates in cases of deaths in which they shall be
interested.

Art. 5. Their High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands,
and the United States of America shall endeavor, by all the means in their
power, to defend and protect all vessels and other effects belonging to their
subjects and inhabitants respectively, or to any of them, in their ports,
roads, havens, internal seas, passes, rivers, and as far as their jurisdiction
extends at sea, and to recover and cause to be restored to the true
proprietors, their agents or attorneys, all such vessels and effects, which
shall be taken under their jurisdiction: and their vessels of war, and convoys,
in cases when they may have a common enemy, shall take under their protection
all the vessels, belonging to the subjects and inhabitants of either party,
which shall not be laden with contraband goods, according to the description
which shall be made of them hereafter, for places with which one of the parties
is in the peace, and the other at war, nor destined for any place blocked, and
which shall hold the same course or follow the same route; and they shall
defend such vessels as long as they shall hold the same course or follow the
same route, against all attacks, force and violence of the common enemy, in the
same manner as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to their
own respective subjects.

Art. 6. The subjects of the contracting parties may on one side and on the
other, in the respective countries and states, dispose of their effects by
testament, donation, or otherwise; and their heirs, subjects of one of the
parties, and residing in the country of the other, or elsewhere, shall all
receive such succession even ab intestato, whether in person or by their
attorney or substitute, even although they shall not have obtained ^etters of
naturalization, without having the effect of such commission contested under
pretext of any right or prerogatives of any province, city or private person;
and if the heirs, to whom such succession may have fallen, shall be minors, the
tutors, or curators, established by the judge domiciliary, of the said minors,
may govern, direct, administer, sell, and alienate the effects falling to the
said minors, by inheritance, and in general in relation to the successions and
effects, use all the rights and fulfill all the functions, which belong by the
disposition of the laws, to guardians, tutors, and curators: Provided
nevertheless, that this disposition cannot take place, but in cases where the
testator shall not have named guardians, tutors, curators by testament,
codicil, or other legal instrument.

Art. 7. It shall be lawful and free for the subjects of each party, to employ
such advocates, attorneys, notaries, solicitors or factors, as they shall judge
proper.

Art. 8. Merchants, masters and owners of ships, mariners, men of all kinds,
ships and vessels, and all merchandises, and goods in general, of one of the
confederates, or of the subjects thereof, shall not be seized or detained in
any of the countres, lands, islands, cities, places, ports, (...), or
dominations whatever of the other confederates, for any military expedition,
public or private use of any one, by arrests, violence, or any color thereof:
Much less shall it be permitted to the subjects of either party, to take or
extort by force, any thing from the subjects of the other party, without the
consent of the owner: Which however is not to be understood of seizures,
detentions and arrests, which shall be made by the command and authority of
justice, and by the ordinary methods on account of debts or crimes, in respect
whereof, the proceedings must be, by way of law according to the forms of
justice.

Art. 9. It is further agreed and concluded, that it shall be who ^ free for
all merchants, commanders of ships and other subjects and inhabitants of the
contracting parties, in every place subjected to the jurisdiction of the two
powers respectively, to manage themselves, their own business: And moreover as
to the use of interpreters or brokers, as also in relation to the loading or
unloading of their vessels, and ever^ thing which as relation thereto, they
shall be, on one side and on the other, considered and ^^eated upon the footing
of natural subjects, o^ at least upon an equality with the most favored nation.

Art. 10. The merchant ships of either of the parties coming from the port of
an enemy, or from their own or a neutral port, may navigate freely toward any
port of an enemy of the other ally: They shall be nevertheless held, whenever
it shall be required, to exhibit, as well upon the high seas as in the ports,
their sea-letters and other documents, described in the twenty-fifth article,
stating expressly that their effects are not of the number of those, which are
prohibited as contraband: and not having any contraband goods, for an enemy's
port, they may freely and without hindrance, pursue their voyage toward the
port of an enemy. Nevertheless it shall not be required to examine the papers
of vessels convoyed by vessels of war, but credence shall be given to the word
of the officer, who shall conduct the convoy.

Art. 11. If by exhibiting the sea-letters, and other documents described more
particularly in the twenty fifth article of this treaty, the other party shall
discover there are any of those sorts of goods, which are declared prohibited
and contraband, and that they are consigned for a port under the obedience of
his enemy, it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to
open any chest, coffers, packs, casks, or other vessel found therein, or to
remove the smallest parcel of her goods, whether the said vessel belongs to the
subjects of their High Mightinesses the States General of the United
Netherlands, or to the subjects or inhabitants of the said United States of
America, unless the lading be brought on shore, in presence of the officers of
the Court of the Admiralty, and an inventory thereof made, but there shall be
no allowance to sell, exchange, or alienate the same until after that due and
lawful process shall have been had against such prohibited goods or contraband,
and the Court of Admiralty by a sentence pronounced shall have confiscated the
same, saving always as well as the ship itself as any other good found therein,
which are to be esteemed free, and may not be detained on pretense of their
being infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they be confiscated as
lawful prize: But on the contrary when by the visitation at land, it shall be
found there are no contraband goods in the vessel, and it shall not appear by
the papers that he who has taken and carried in the vessel, has been able to
discover any there, he ought to be condemned in all the charges, damages and
interest of them, which he shall have caused both to the owner of such vessels
and to the owners and freighters of cargoes, with which they shall be loaded,
by his demerity in taking and carrying them in, declaring most expressly the
free vessels shall assure the liberty of the effects with which they shall be
loaded, and that this liberty shall extend itself equally to the persons who
shall be found in a free vessel, who may not be taken out of her, unless they
are military men, actually in the service of an enemy.

Art. 12. On the contrary, it is agreed, whatever shall be found to be laden by
the subjects and inhabitants of either party, on any ship belonging to th^e
enemies of the other, or to their subjects, although it be not comprehended
under the sort of prohibited goods, the whole may be confiscated in the same
manner as if it belonged to the enemy, except nevertheless such effects and
merchandise, as were put on board such vessel, before the declaration of war or
in the space of six months after it, which effects shall not be in any manner
subject to confiscation, but shall be faithfully and without delay restored in
nature to the owners, who shall claim them, or cause them to be claimed, before
the confiscation and sale, as also their proceeds, if the claim could not be
made but in the space of eight months, after the sale, which ought to be
public; provided nevertheless, that if the said merchandises are contraband, it
shall by no means be lawful to transport them afterward to any port belonging
to enemies.

A^T. 13. And that more effectual care may be taken for security of subjects
and people of either party, that they do not suffer molestation from the
vessels of war, or privateers of the other party, it shall be forbidden to all
commanders of vessels of war, and other armed vessels of the said
States General of the United Netherlands, and the said United States of
America, as well as to all their officers, subjects and people, to give any
offense or do any damage to those of the other party: and if they act to the
contrary, they shall be upon the first complaint which shall be made of it,
being found guilty after a just examination, punished by their proper judges,
andr moreover obliged to make satisfaction for all damages and interests
thereof, by reparation, undepain and obligation of their persons and goods.

Art. 14. For further determining of what has been said, all captains of
privateers, or ^itters out of vessels armed for war under commission, and on
account of private persons shall be held before their departure, to give
sufficient caution before competent judges, either to be responsible for the
^alversations which they may commit in their cruizes or voyages, as well as for
the contraventions of their captains and officers, against the present treaty,
and against the ordinances and edicts which shall1 be published in consequence
of, and conformity to it, under pain of forfeiture and nullity of the said
commission.

Art. 15. All vessels and merchandises of whatsoever nature, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers, navigating the high seas,
without requisite commissions, shall be brought into some port of one of the
two states, and deposited in the hands of the officers of that port; in order
to be restored entire to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient
proof shall be made, concerning the property thereof.

Art. 16. If any ships or vessels belonging to either of the parties, their
subjects or people shall within the coasts or dominions of the other, stick
upon the sands or be wrecked, or suffer any sea damage, all friendly assistance
and relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in
danger thereof; and the vessels, effects and merchandises, or the part of them
which shall have been saved, or the proceeds of them, if being perishable they
shall have been sold, being claimed within a year and a day, by the masters, or
owners, or their agents or attorneys, shall be restored, paying only the
reasonable charges; and that which must be paid in the same case, for the
salvage, by the proper subjects of the country: there shall also be delivered
them safe conducts or passports, for their free and safe passage from thence,
and return each one to his own country.

Art. 17. In case the subjects or people of either party with their shipping,
whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced through
stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter and harbor to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, creeks, bays, ports, roads or shores belonging to the other party,
they shall be received with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help, and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with victuals and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships; and they shall no
ways be detained or hindered from returning out of the said ports or roads, but
may remove and depart when and whither they please, without any let or
hindrance.

Art. 18. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war should break out between their high Mightinesses the States
General of the United Netherlands and the United States of America, there shall
always be granted to the subjects on each side, the term of nine months, after
the date of the rupture o^ the proclamation of war; to the end that they may
retire with their effects, and transport them where they please; which it shall
be lawful for them to do, as well as to sell or transport their effects and
goods in all freedom, and without any hindrance, and without being able to
proceed during the said term of nine months, to any arrest of their effects,
much less of their persons; on the contrary; there shall be given them, for
their vessels and their effects which they would carry away, passports and safe
conducts, for the nearest ports of their respective countries; and for the time
necessary for the voyage, and no prize made at sea, shall be adjudged lawful,
at least if the declaration of war was not or could not be known, in the last
port, which the vessel taken has quitted. But for whatever may have been taken
from the subjects and inhabitants of either party, and for the offenses which
may have been given them, in the interval of the said terms, a complete
satisfaction shall be given them.

Art. 19. No subjects of their High Mightinesses the States General of the
United Netherlands, shall apply for, or take any commissions or letters of
marque for arming any ship or ships to act as privateers, against the said
United States of America or any of them, or the subjects and inhabitants of the
said United States or any of them, or against the property of the inhabitants
of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said United States of
America may happen to be at war; nor shall any subject or inhabitant of the
said United States of America or any of them, apply for or take any commission
or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships, to act as privateers against
the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands, or
against the subjects of their high Mightinesses, or any of them, or against the
property of any one of them, from any prince or state with which their high
mightinesses may be at war: And if any person of either nation shall take such
commission or letters of marque he shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 20. If the vessels of the subjects or inhabitants of one of the parties,
come upon any coast belonging to either of the said allies, but not willing to
enter into port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, or take in any cargo they shall not be obliged to pay
neither for the vessels, nor the cargoes, any duties of entry in or out, nor to
render any account of their cargoes, at least if there is not just cause to
presume, that they carry to an enemy merchandises of contraband.

Art. 21. The two contracting parties grant to each other mutually, the liberty
of having each in the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents, and
commissaries, of their own appointing, whose functions shall be regulated by
particular agreement, whenever either party choose to make such appointments.

Art. 22. This treaty shall not be understood in any manner to derogate from
the ninth, tenth, nineteenth and twenty-fourth articles of the treaty with
France, as they were numbered in the same treaty concluded the 6th of February,
1778, and which makes the articles ninth, tenth, seventeenth, and twenty-second
of the treaty of commerce now subsisting between the United States of America
and the crown of France; nor shall it hinder his catholic majesty from acceding
to that treaty, and enjoying the advantages of the said four articles.

Art. 23. If at any time the United States of America, shall judge necessary to
commence negociations with the king or emperor of Morocco and Fez, and the
Regencies of Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli, or with any of them to obtain passports
for the security of their navigation in the Mediterranean sea; their high
mightinesses promise that upon the requisition which the United States of
America shall make of it, they will second such negociations in the most
favorable manner by means of their consuls residing near the said king, emperor
and regencies.

Art. 24. The liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all sorts of
merchandises, excepting only those which are distinguished under the name of
contraband or merchandises prohibited: and under this denomination of
contraband and merchandises prohibited shall be comprehended only warlike
stores and arms, as mortars, artillery with their artifices and appurtenances,
fusils, pistols, bombs, grenades, gunpowder, saltpeter, sulpher, match,
bullets, and balls, pikes, sabres, lances, halberts, casques, cutlasses, and
other sort of arms, as also soldiers, horses saddles, and furniture for horses.
All other effects and merchandises, not before specified expressly, and even
all sorts of naval matters, however proper they may be for the construction and
equipment of vessels of war, or for the manufacture of one or another sort of
machines of war, by land or sea, shall not be judged contraband, neither by the
letter, nor according to any pretended interpretation, whatever, ought they, or
can they be comprehended, under the notion of effects prohibited or contraband.
So that all effects and merchandises, which are not expressly before named, may
without any exception, and in perfect liberty be transported by the subjects
and inhabitants of both allies, from and to places belonging to the enemy,
excepting only the places which at the same time shall be besieged, blocked or
invested, and those places only shall be held for such, which are surrounded
nearly by some of the belligerent powers.

Art. 25. To the end that all dissension and quarrel may be avoided and
prevented, it has been agreed, that in case one of the two parties happens to
be at war, the vessels belonging to the subjects or inhabitants of the other
ally, (...) be provided with sea letters or passports, expressing the name, the
property and the burden of the vessel, as also the name and the place of abode
of the master or commander of the said vessel, to the end, that thereby it may
appear, that the vessel really and truly belongs to the subjects or inhabitants
of one of the parties; which passports shall be drawn and distributed according
to the form anexed to this treaty; each time that the vessel shall return, she
should have such her passort renewed, or at least they ought not to be of more
ancient date than two years, before the vessel has been returned to her own
country.

It has also been agreed that such vessels, being loaded ought to be provided
not only with the said passports or sea-letters, but also with a general
passport, or with particular passports or manifests, or other public documents,
which are ordinarily given to vessels outward bound, in the ports from whence
the vessels have set sail in the last place, containing a specification of the
cargo, of the place from whence the vessel departed, and of that of her
destination; or instead of all these, with certificates from the magistrates or
governors, of cities places and colonies, from whence the vessel came given in
the usual form, to the end that it may be known whether there are any effects
prohibited or contraband on board the vessels, and whether they are destined to
be carried to an enemy's country or not. And in case any one judges proper, to
express in the said documents, the persons to whom the effects on board belong,
he may do it freely without however, being bound to do it; and the omission of
such expressions connot and ought not to cause a confiscation.

Art. 26. If the vessels of the said subjects, or inhabitants of either of the
parties, failing along the coast or on the high seas, are met by a vessel of
war or privateer, or other armed vessels of the other party, the said vessels
of war, privateers or armed vessels for avoiding all disorder, shall remain
without the reach of cannon, but may send their boats on board the merchant
vessel which they shall meet in this manner, upon which they may not pass more
than two or three men to whom the master or commander shall exhibit his
passport concerning the property of the vessel according to the form annexed to
this treaty; and the vessel, after having exhibited such a passport, sea-letter
and other documents, shall be free to continue her voyage, so that it shall not
be lawful to molest her, or search her in any manner, nor to give her chase,
nor to force her to alter her course.

Art. 27. It shall be lawful for merchants, captains and commanders of vessels,
whether public, and of war, or private and of merchants, belonging to the said
United States of America, or any of them, or to their subjects and inhabitants,
to take freely into their service, and receive on board their vessels, in any
port or place in the jurisdiction of their High Mightinesses aforesaid, seamen
or others, natives or inhabitants of any of the said states upon such condition
as they shall agree on, without being subject for this to any fine, penalty,
punishment, process or reprehension whatever: And reciprocally, all merchants,
captains and commanders, belonging to the said United Netherlands, shall enjoy
in all the ports and places under the obedience of the said United States of
America, the same privilege of engaging and receiving seamen, or others natives
or inhabitants of any country or the domination of the said States General;
provided, that neither on one side nor the other, they may not take into their
service such of their countrymen who have already engaged in the service of the
other party contracting, whether in war or trade, and whether they meet them by
land or sea; at least if the captains or masters, under the command of whom
such persons may he found, will not of his own consent, discharge them from the
service, upon pain of being otherwise treated and punished as deserters.

Art. 28. The affair of refraction shall be regulated in all equity and
justice, by the Magistrates of cities respectively, where it shall be judged
that there is any room to complain in this respect.

Art. 29. The present treaty shall be ratified and approved of by their High
Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands, and by the United
States of America, and the acts of ratification shall be delivered in good and
due form on one side and on the other, in the space of six months, or sooner if
possible, to be computed from the day of the signature.

In faith of which, we the Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the
States General of the United Netherlands, and the Minister Plenipotentiary of
the United States of America, in virtue of our respective authorities and full
powers have signed the present Treaty, and oppose thereto the seals of our arms.

Done at the Hague, the 8th of October, 1782.
A Treaty of AMITY and COMMERCE concluded between his Majesty the king of
Sweden and the United States of America.
The King of Sweden, of the Goths and Vandals, etc. etc. and the Thirteen
United States of North America, to wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Counties of
New Castle, Kent, and Sussex, on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, desiring to establish in a stable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be observed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties have judged necessary to establish between their
respective countries, states and subjects; his Majesty and the United States
have thought that they could not better accomplish that end, than by taking for
a basis of their arrangements the mutual interests and advantage of both
nations, thereby avoiding all those burdensome preferences, which are usually
sources of debate, embarrassment and discontent, and by leaving each party at
liberty to make, respecting navigation and commerce, those interior regulations
which shall be most convenient to itself.

With this view, his Majesty the King of Sweden has nominated and appointed for
his Plenipotentiary, Count Gustavus Philip de Creutz, his Ambassador
extraordinary to his Most Christian Majesty, and Knight, Commander of his
orders; and the United States, on their part have fully empowered Benjamin
Franklin, their minister Plenipotentiary to his most Christian Majesty; the
said Plenipotentiaries, after exchanging their full powers, and after mature
deliberation in consequence thereof have agreed upon, concluded and signed the
following articles:

ARTICLE 1.
There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true and sincere
friendship between the king of Sweden, his heirs and successors, and the United
States of America, and the subjects of his Majesty and those of the said
States, and between the countries, islands, cities, and towns, situated under
the jurisdiction of the king and of the said United States, without any
exception of persons or places; and the conditions agreed to in this present
treaty, shall be perpetual and permanent between the king his heirs and
successors, and the said United States.

Art. 2. The King and the United States engage mutually, not to grant hereafter
any particular favor to other nations in respect to commerce and navigation,
which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who shall enjoy
the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made, or on allowing the
same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

Art. 3. The subjects of the king of Sweden shall not pay in the ports, havens,
roads, countries, islands, cities and towns, of the United States, or any of
them, any other nor greater duties or imposts of what nature soever they may
be, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be obliged to pay;
and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and
exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce which the said nations do or shall
enjoy, whether in passing from one port to another of the United States, or in
going to or from the same, from or to any part of the world whatever.

Art. 4. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States shall not pay
in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities and towns under the dominion of
the king of Sweden, any other or greater duties or imposts of what nature
soever they may be, or by what name soever called, than those which the most
favored nations are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the
rights liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade, navigation
and commerce, which the said nations do or shall enjoy, whether in passing from
one port to another of the dominion of his said majesty, or in going to or from
the same, from or to any part of the world whatever.

Art. 5. There shall be granted a full, perfect and entire liberty of
conscience to the inhabitants and subjects of each party, and no person shall
be molested on account of his worship, provided ^e submits so far (...) regards
the public demonstrations of it to the laws of the country: Moreover liberty
shall1 be granted, when any of the subjects or inhabitants of either party die
in the territory of the other, to bury them in convenient and decent places,
which shall be assigned for the purpose: And the two contracting parties will
provide each in its jurisdiction, that subjects and inhabitants respectively
may obtain certificates of the death in case the delivery of them is required.

Art. 6. The subjects of the contracting parties in the respective States, may
freely dispose of their goods and effects either by testament, donation or
otherwise in favor of such persons as they think proper; and their heirs in
whatever place they shall reside, shall receive the succession even ab
intestato, either in person or by their attorney, without having occasion to
take out letters of naturalization. These inheritances, as well as the capitals
and effects, which the subjects of the two parties, in changing their abode,
shall be desirous of removing from the place of their abode, shall be exempt
from all duty, called "droit de detraction" on the part of the government of
the two States respectively. But it is at the same time agreed, that nothing
contained in this article shall in any manner derogate from the ordinances
published in Sweden against emigrations, or which may hereafter be published,
which shall remain in full force and vigor. The United States on their part,
or any of them, shall be at liberty to make respecting this matter, such laws
as they think proper.

Art. 7. All and every the subjects inhabitants of the kingdom of Sweden, as
well as those of the United States, shall be permitted to navigate with their
vessels in all safety and freedom, and without any regard to those to whom the
merchandise and cargoes may belong, from any port whatever, and the subjects
and inhabitants of the two states shall likewise be permitted to sail and trade
with their vessels, and with the same liberty and safety to frequent the
places, ports and havens of powers, enemies to both or either of the
contracting parties, without being in any wise molested or troubled, and to
carry on a commerce not only directly from the ports of an enemy to a neutral
port, but even from one port of an enemy, to another of an enemy, whether it be
under the jurisdiction of the same or of different princes. And as it is
acknowledged by this treaty with respect to ships and merchandises that free
ships shall make the merchandises free, and that every thing which shall be on
board of ships belonging to subjects of the one or the other of the contracting
parties, shall be considered as free, even though the cargo or a part of it
should belong to the enemies of one or both; it is nevertheless provided that
contraband goods shall always be excepted; which being intercepted, shall be
proceeded against according to the spirit of the following article. It is
likewise agreed, that the same liberty be extended to persons who may be on
board a free ship, with this effect that although they be enemies to both or
either of the p^^^ies, they shall not be taken out of the free ship, unless
they are soldiers in the actual service of the said enemies.

Art. 8. The liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises except those only which are expressed in the following article and
are distinguished under the name of contraband goods.

Art. 9. Under the name of contraband or prohibited goods, shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, cannon-balls, arquebuses, muskets, bombs,
petards, grenadoes, saucisses, pitch, balls, carriages for ordinance, musket
rests, bandoliers, cannon powder, matches, salt petre, sulpher, bullets, pikes,
sabres, swords, morions, helmets, cuirasses, halbards, javelins, pistols,
holsters, belts, bayonets, horses with their harness, and other like kind of
arms and instruments of war for the use of troops.

Art. 10. These which follow shall not be reckoned in the number of prohibited
goods, that is to say all sorts of clothes, and all other manufactures of wool,
flax, silk, cotton or any other materials, all kinds of wearing apparel
together with the things of which they are commonly made; gold, silver coined
or uncoined, brass, iron, lead, copper, latten, coals, wheat, ^^rley, and all
sorts of corn or pulse, tobacco, all kinds of spices, salted or smoaked flesh,
salted fish, cheese, butter, beer, oil, wines, sugar, all sorts of salt and
provisions which serve for the nourishment and sustenance of man; -- all kinds
of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails, sail-cloth, anchors,
and any part of anchors, ship masts, planks, boards, beams and all sorts of
trees and other things proper for building or repairing ships; nor shall any
goods be considered as contraband, which have not been worked into the form of
any instrument or thing for the purpose of war by land or by sea, much less
such as have been prepared or wrought up for any other use. All which shall be
reckoned free goods, as likewise all others which are not comprehenhed and
particularly mentioned in the foregoing article; so that they shall not by any
pretended interpretation be comprehended among prohibited or contraband goods:
on the contrary they may freely be transported by the subjects of the King and
of the United States, even to places belonging to an enemy, such places only
excepted as are besieged, blocked o invested, and those places only shall be
considered as such, which are nearly surrounded by one of the belligerent
powers.

Art. 11. In order to avoid and prevent on both sides all disputes and
discords, it is agreed that in case one of the parties shall be engaged in a
war, the ships and vessels belonging to the subjects or inhabitants of the
other shall be furnished with sea-letters, or passorts expressing the name
property and port of the vessel, and also the name and place of abode of the
master or commander of the said vessel, in order that it may thereby appear
that the said vessel really and truly belongs to the subjects of the one or the
other party. -- These passports which shall be drawn up in good and due form,
shall be renewed every time the vessel returns home in the course of the yearr.
-- It is also agreed that the said vessels when loaded shall be provided not
only with sea-letters but also with certificates containing a particular
account of the cargo, the place from which the vessel sailed and that of her
destination, in order that it may be known whether they carry any of the
prohibited or contraband merchandises mentioned in the ninth article of the
present treaty; which certificates shall be made out by the officers of the
place from which the vessel shall depart.

Art. 12. Although the vessels of the one and the other party may navigate
freely and with all safety, as is explained in the seventh article they shall
nevertheless be bound at all times when required to exhibit as well on the high
seas as in port, their passports and certificates above mentioned. And not
having contraband merchandises on board for an enemy's port, they may freely
and without hindrance pursue their voyage to the place of their destination.
Nevertheless the exhibition of papers shall not be demanded of merchant ships
under convoy of vessels of war, but credit shall be given to the word of the
officeer commanding the convoy.

Art. 13. If on producing the said certificates it be discovered, that the
vessel carries some of the goods which are declared to be prohibited or
contraband, and which are consigned to an enemy's port, it shall not however be
lawful to break up the hatches of such ships, nor to open any chest coffers,
packs, casks or vessels, nor to remove the smallest part of the merchandises,
until the cargo has been landed in the presence of officers appointed for the
purpose, and until an inventory thereof has been taken; nor shall it be lawful
to sell, exchange or alienate the cargo or any part thereof, until legal
process shall have been made against the prohibited merchandises and sentences
shall have passed, declaring them liable to confiscation; saving nevertheless,
as well the ships themselves, as the other merchandises, which shall have been
found therein, which by virtue of this present treaty, are to be esteemed free,
and which are not to be detained on pretense of their having been loaded with
prohibited merchandise, and much less confiscated as lawful prize. And in case
the contraband merchandise be only a part of the cargo and the master of the
vessel agrees, consents and offers to deliver them the vessel, that has
discovered them, in that case the latter, after receiving the merchandises
which are good prize, shall immediately let the vessel go and shall not by any
means hinder her from pursuing her voyage to the place of her destination. When
a vessel is taken and brought into any of the ports of the contracting parties,
if (...) be ^^und to (...) only with merchandises declared to be free, the
(...) or he who has made the prize shall be ^^^nd to pay all costs and damages
to the master of the vessel unjustly detained.

Art. 14. It is likewise agreed that whatever shall be found to be laden by the
subjects of either of the two contracting parties on a ship belonging to the
enemies of the other party, the whole effects, although not of the number of
those declared contraband, shall be confiscated as if they belonged to the
enemy, excepting nevertheless, such goods and merchandises as were put on board
before the declaration of war, and even six months after the declaration, after
which (...) none shall be preju^^^d to be ignorant of (...) which merchandises
shall not in any manner be subject to confiscation, but shall be faithfully and
specifically delivered to the owners who shall claim, or cause them to be
claimed before confiscation and sale, as also their proceeds, if the claim be
made within eight months and could not be made sooner after the sale, which is
to be public: provided nevertheless, that if the said merchandises be
contraband, it shall not be in any wise lawful to carry them afterward to a
port belonging to the enemy.

Art, 15. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the two
contracting parties, that they suffer no prejudice by the men of war of the
other party, or by privateers; all captains and commanders of ships of his
Swedish majesty, and of the United States, and all (...) subjects shall be
forbidden to do any injury or damage to those of the other party; and if they
(...) to the contrary, having been found guilty on (...) ^amination by their
proper judges, they shall (...) bound to make satisfaction for all damages,
(...) the interest thereof, and make them good, (...) pain and obligation of
their persons and goods.

Art. 16. For this cause, every individual who is desirous of fitting out a
privateer, shall before he receives letters patent or special commission, be
obliged to give bond with sufficient sureties before a competent judge, for a
sufficient sum to answer all damages and wrongs which the owner of the
privateer, his officers or others in his employ may commit during the cruize
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, and contrary to the edicts published by
either party, whether by the King of Sweden, or by the United States, in virtue
of this same treaty, and also under the penalty of having the said letters
patent and special commission revoked and made void.

Art. 17. One of the contracting parties being at war, and the other remaining
neuter, if it should happen that a merchant ship of the neutral power be taken
by the enemy of the other party and be afterward retaken by a ship of war or
privateer of the power at war, also ships and merchandises of what nature
soever they may be when recovered from a pirate or sea rover, shall be brought
into a port of one of the two powers, and shall be committed to the custody of
the officers of the said port, that they may be restored entire to the true
proprietor as soon as he shall have produced full proof of the property.
Merchants, masters and owners of ships, seamen, people of all sorts, ships and
vessels, and in general, all merchandises and effects of one of the allies or
their subjects, shall not be subject to any embargo, nor detained in any of the
countries, territories, islands, cities, towns, ports, rivers or domains
whatever of the other ally, on account of any military expedition, or any
public or private purpose whatever, by seizure, by force, or by any such
manner; much less shall it be lawful for the subjects of one of the parties to
seize or take any thing by force from the subjects of the other party, without
the consent of the owner. This, however, is not to be understood to comprehend
seizures, detensions and arrests, made by order and by the authority of
justice, and according to the ordinary course for debts or faults of the
subject, for which process shall be had in the way of right according to the
forms of justice.

Art. 18. If it should happen that the two contracting parties should be
engaged in a war at the same time, with a common enemy, the following points
shall be observed on both sides.

1st. If the ships of one of the two nations retaken by the privateers of the
other, have not been in the power of the enemy more than twenty-four hours,
they shall be restored to the original owner on payment of one third of the
value of the ship and cargo. If on the contrary, the vessel retaken has been
more than twenty four hours in the power of the enemy, it shall belong wholly
to him who has retaken it.

2d. In case during the interval of twenty-four hours a vessel be retaken by a
man of war, of either of the two parties, it shall be restored to the original
owner on payment of a thirtieth part of the value of the vessel and cargo, and
a tenth part of it has been retaken after the twenty four hours, which sums
shall be distributed as a gratification among the crew of the men of war, that
shall have made the recapture.

3d. The prizes made in manner abovementioned, shall be restored to the owners
after proof made of the property, upon giving security for the part coming to
him who has recovered the vessel from the hands of the enemy.

4th. The men of war and privateers of the two nations shall reciprocally be
admitted with their prizes into each others ports; but the prizes shall not be
unloaded or sold there until the legality of a prize made by Swedish ships
shall have been determined according to the laws and regulations established in
Sweden, as also that of the prizes made by American vessels, shall have been
determined according to the laws and regulations established by the United
States of America.

5th. Moreover the King of Sweden, and the United States of America, shall be
at liberty to make such regulations as they shall judge necessary respecting
the conduct which their men of war and privateers respectively shall be bound
to observe with regard to vessels which they shall take and carry into the
ports of the two powers.

Art. 19. The ships of war of his Swedish Majesty and those of the United
States, and also those which their subjects shall have armed for war may with
all freedom conduct the prizes which they shall have made from their enemies
into the ports which are open in time of war to other friendly nations, and the
said prizes upon entering the said ports, shall not be subject to arrest or
seizure, nor shall the officers of the place take cognizance of the validity of
the said prizes which may depart and be conducted freely and with all liberty
to the places pointed out in their commissions, which the captains of the said
vessels shall be obliged to show.

Art. 20. In case any vessel belonging to either of the two states, or their
subjects, shall be stranded, shipwrecked, or suffer any other damage on the
coast or under the dominion of either of the parties all aid and assistance
shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or who may be in danger thereof, and
passports shall be granted to them to secure their return to their own country.
The ships and merchandises wrecked, or their proceeds, if the effects have been
sold, being claimed in a year and a day by the owners or their attorney, shall
be restored, on their paying the costs of salvage, conformable to the laws and
customs of the two nations.

Art. 21. When the subjects and inhabitants of the two parties, with their
vessels, whether they be public and equipped for war, or private, employed in
commerce, shall be forced by tempest, by pursuit of privateers and of enemies,
or by any other urgent necessity, to retire and enter any of the rivers, bays,
roads or ports of either of the two parties, they shall be received and treated
with all humanity and politeness, and they shall enjoy all friendship,
protection, and assistance, and they shall be at liberty to supply themselves
with refreshments, provisions, and every thing necessity for their sustenance,
for the repair of their vessels, and for continuing their voyage; provided
always, that they pay a reasonabl^ (...), and that they shall not in any manner
be detained or hindered from sailing out of the said ports or roads, but they
may retire and depart when and as they please without any obstacle (...).

Art. 22. In order to favor commerce on both sides as much as possible, it is
agreed, that in case a war should break out between the said two nations, which
God forbid, the term of nine months, after the declaration of war, shall be
allowed to the merchants and subjects respectively on one side and the other,
in order that they may withdraw with their effects and movables, which they
shall be at liberty to carry off or to sell where they please, without the
least obstacle; nor shall any seize their effects and much lose their persons
during the said nine months, but on the contrary; passports which shall be
valid for a time necessary for their return, shall be given them for their
vessels and the effects which they shall be willing to carry with them. And if
any thing is taken from them, or if any injury is done to them by one of the
parties, their people and subjects during the term above prescribed, full and
entire satisfaction shall be made to them on that account. The abovementioned
passports shall also serve as a safe conduct against all insults or prizes
which privateers may attempt against their persons and effects.

Art. 23. No subject of the king of Sweden shall take a commission or letters
of marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the United
States of America, or any of them, or against the subjects, people or
inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them, or against the property
of the inhabitants of the said states, from any prince or State whatever with
whom the said United States shall be at war* Nor shall any citizen, subject or
inhabitant of the said United States, or any of them, apply for or take any
commission on letters of marque, for arming any vessel to cruize against the
subjects of his Swedish Majesty, or any of them, or their property, from any
Prince or State whatever with whom his said Majesty shall be at war. And if any
person of either nation shall take such commissions or letters of marque, he
shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 24. The vessels of the subjects of either of the parties coming upon any
of the coasts belonging to the other, but not willing to enter into port, or
being entered into port, and not willing to unload their cargoes, or to break
bulk, shall not be obliged to do it, but on the contrary shall enjoy all the
franchises and exemptions which are granted by the rules subsisting with
respect to that object.

Art. 25. When a vessel belonging to the subject and inhabitants of either of
the parties, sailing on the high sea, shall be met by a ship of war or
privateer of the other, the said ship of war or privateer, to avoid all
disorder, shall remain out of cannon shot, but may always send their boat to
the merchant ship, and cause two or three men to go on board of her, to whom
the master or commander of the said vessel shall exhibit his passport, stating
the property of the vessel, and when the said vessel shall have exhibited her
passport she shall be at liberty to continue her voyage, and it shall not be
lawful to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase or force her
to quit her intended course.

Art. 26. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each
in the ports of the other consuls, vice-consuls, agents and commissaries, whose
functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

Art. 27. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of eight months, or sooner if
possible counting from the day of the signature.

In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles, and have thereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at Paris, the 3d day of April, in the year of our Lord, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Eighty-Three. (Signed) G. PHILIP, Compte de CREUTZ. L. S. B.
FRANKLIN. L. S.


SEPARATE ARTICLE.
THE King of Sweden and the United States of North America, agree that the
present treaty shall have its full effect for the space of fifteen years,
counting from the day o^ the ratification, and the two contracting parties
reserve to themselves the liberty of renewing it at the end of that term.

DONE at Paris, the third of April, in the year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Eighty-Three. (Signed) G. PHILIP Compte de CREUTZ. L. S. B.
FRANKLIN. L. S.


SEPARATE ARTICLES.
Art. 1. His Swedish Majesty shall use all the n^^^ns in his power to protect
and defend the vessels and effects belonging to the citizens or inhabitants of
the United States of North America, and every of them which shall be in the
ports, (...), roads, or on the seas near the countries, islands, cities and
towns of his said Majesty, and shall use his utmost endeavors to recover and
restore to the right owners, all such vessels and effects, which shall have
been taken from them within his jurisdiction.

Art. 2. In like manner, the United States of North America shall protect and
defend the vesels and effects belonging to the subjects of his Swedish Majesty,
which shall be in the ports, havens or roads, or on the seas near to the
countries, islands, cities and towns of the said states, and shall use their
utmost efforts to recover and restore to the right owners all such vessels and
effects which shall be taken from them, within their jurisdiction.

Art. 3. If in any future war at sea, the contracting ^owers resolve to remain
neuter, and as such, to observe the strictest neutrality, then it is agreed,
that if the merchant ships of either party, should happen to be in a part of
the sea where the ships of war of the same nation are not stationed, or if they
are met on the high sea, without being able to have recourse to their own
convoys, in that case the commander of the ships of war of the other party, if
required, shall in good faith and sincerity give them all necessary assistance,
and in such case, the ships of war and frigates of either of the powers, shall
protect and support the merchant ships of the other, provided nevertheless,
that the ships claiming assistance are not engaged in any illicit commerce
contrary to the principles of the neutrality.

Art. 4. It is agreed and concluded that all merchants, captains of merchant
ships, or other subjects of his Swedish Majesty, shall have full liberty in all
places under the dominion or jurisdiction of the United States of America, to
manage their own affairs and to employ in the management of them whomsoever
they please; and they shall not be obliged to make use of any interpreter or
broker, nor to pay them any reward unless they make use of them. Moreover, the
masters of ships shall not be obliged in loading or unloading their vessels, to
employ laborers appointed by public authority for that purpose; but they shall
be at full liberty, themselves to load or unload their vessels, or to employ in
loading or unloading them whomsoever they think proper, without paying reward
under the tit^e of salary to any other person whatever; and they shall not be
obliged to turn over any kind of merchandises to other vessels, nor to receive
them on board their own, nor to wait for their loading longer than they please,
and all and every of the citizens, and people of the United States of America,
shall reciprocal, have and enjoy the same privileges and liberties in all
places under the jurisdiction of the said realm.

Art. 5. It is agreed that when merchandises shall have been put on board the
ships or vessels of (...) of the contracting parties, they shall not be
subjected to any examination; but all examination and search must be before
lading, and the prohibited merchandises must be stopped on the spot before they
are embarked, unless there is full evidence or proof of fraudulent practice on
the part of the owner of the ship or of him who has the command of her. In
which case only he shall be responsible and subject to the laws of the country
in which he may be. In all other cases neither the subjects of either of the
contracting parties, who shall be with their vessels in the ports of the other,
nor their merchandises shall be seized or molested on account of contraband
goods, which they shall have wanted to take on board, nor shall any kind of
embargo be laid on their ships, subjects or citizens of the state whose
merchandises are declared contraband, or the exportation of which is forbidden,
those only who shall have sold or intended to sell or alienate such
merchandises, being liable to punishment for such contravention.

Done at Paris, the third day of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-three. (Signed) G. PHILIP Compte de CREUTZ, L. S. B.
FRANKLIN, L. S.


NOW therefore to the end that the said treaty may with all good faith be
performed and observed on the part of these states, all the citizens and
inhabitants thereof, and more especially all officers and others in the service
of the United States, are hereby enjoined and required to govern themselves
strictly in all things according to the stipulations above recited.

Done in Congress at Princeton, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-three, and of our Sovereignty and Independence the eighth.
ELIAS BOUDINOT, President. Charles Thomson, Secretary.


Definitive Treaty of PEACE between America and Great Britain.
IN the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity.
IT Having pleased the Divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the Most
Serene and Most Potent Prince George the Third, by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick
and Lunenbourgh, Arch Treasurer and Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire,
etc. and of the United States of America, to forget all misunderstandings and
differences that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore, and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony: and having for this desirable and
already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the Provisional
Articles signed at Paris on the 30th November, 1782, by the Commissioners
empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the Treaty of Peace proposed to be concluded between the Crown of
Great Britain and the said United States, but which Treaty was not to be
concluded until the terms of peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain
and France, and his Britannic Majesty should be ready to conclude such treaty
accordingly; and the treaty between Great Britain and France having since been
concluded, his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, in order to
carry into full effect the Provisional Articles above mentioned according to
the tenure thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say, his
Britannic Majesty on his part, David Hartly, Esquire Member of the Parliament of
Great Britain, and the said United States on their part, John Adams Esquire late a
Commissioner of the United States of America at the Court of Versailles, late
Delegate in Congress from the state of Massachusetts, and Chief Justice of the
said state, and Minister Plenipotentiary of the said United States, to their
High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands; Benjamin
Franklin, Esquire late derogate in Congress from the state of Pennsylvania,
President of the convention of the said state, and Minister Plenipotentiary
from the United States of America, at the Court of Versailles; and John Jay,
Esquire late President of Congress, chief justice of the state of New York, and
Minister Plenipotentiary from the said United States at the Court of Madrid, to
be the Plenipotentiaries for the concluding and signing the present Definitive
Treaty: who after having reciprocally communicated their respective full
powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following articles*

1. His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz. New
Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be Free, Sovereign and
independent States; that he treats with them as such, and ^or himself, his
heirs and successors, relin^uishes all claims to the government, property, and
territori^l rights of the same, and every part thereof.

Art. 2. And that all disputes which might arise in future, on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby
agreed, and declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries,
viz* From the north-west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed
by a line drawn due north from the source of St. Croix river to the Highlands,
along the said Highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into
the riv^^ St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the Atlantic ocean, to the
north-westermost head of Connecticut river: thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of north altitude; from thence by a line
due west on said latitude, until it strikes the river ^riq^ois or Ca^araqui;
thence along the middle of the said river into lake Ontario; through the middle
of the said lake, until it strikes the communication by water between that lake
and lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into lake Erie,
through the middle of said lake, until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and lake Hur^n, thence through the middle of said lake to the
water communication between that lake and lake Superior; thence through lake
^uper or northward of the Isles Royal and Philippea^^ to the long lake; thence
through the middle of said long lake and the water communication between it and
the lake of the Woods, to the said lake of the Woods; thence through the said
lake to the most north western point thereof, a^^ ^^om thence on a due west
course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle
of the said River Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost part of
the thirty-first degree of north latitude. South by a line to be drawn due east
from the determination of the line last mentioned in the latitude of thirty-one
degrees north of the Equator, to the middle of the river Apalachicola or
Catahouche; thence along the middle thereof to its junction with the said
river; thence strait to the head of St. Mary's river; -- and thence down along
the middle of St. Mary's river to the Atlantic ocean. ^^ll by a line to be
drawn along the middle of the river St. Croix from its mouth in the Bay of
Fundy to its source and from its source directly north to the aforesaid
Highlands, which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic ocean from those
which fall into the river St. Lawrence, comprehending all islands within twenty
leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying between lines
to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid boundaries between
Nova Scotia on the one part, and East Florida on the other, shall respectively
touch the Bay of Fundy and the Atlantic ocean, excepting such islands as now or
are heretofore have been within the limits of the said province of Nova Scotia.

Art. 3. It is agreed that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy unmolested the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and on
all the other banks of Newfoundland, also in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and all
other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at any
time heretofore to fish. And also that the inhabitants of the United States
shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast of
Newfoundland, as British fishermen shall use (but not to dry (...) the same on
that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all others of his
Britannic Majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen shall
have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors and
creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen Islands and Labrador so long as the same shall
remain unsettled; but so soon as the same or either of them shall be settled,
it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry o^ cure fish at such
settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose, wit^ the
inhabitants, proprietors or possessors of the ground.

Art. 4. It is agreed that the creditors on either side shall meet with no
lawful impediment to the recovery of the full value in sterling money, of all
bona fide debts heretofore contracted.

Art. 5. It is agreed that Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
legislatures of the respective states, to provide for the restitution of all
estates rights and properties which have been confiscated, belonging to the
real British subjects -- and also of the estates, rights and properties of
persons resident in districts in the possession of his majesty's arms, and who
have not borne arms against the United States; and that persons of any other
description shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of the Thirteen
United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested ^ their endeavors
to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights and properties, as
may have been confiscated; and that congress shall earnestly recommend to the
several states, a reconsideration and revision of all act or laws regarding the
premises, so as to render the said laws or acts perfectly consistent, not only
with justice and equity, but with that spirit of ^^^ciliation, which on the
return of the blessings of peace, should universally prevail: And that Congress
shall earnestly recommend to the s^vofral states, that the estates, rights and
properties to such last mentioned persons shall be restored to them, they
refunding to any persons, who may be now in possession, the bona fide price
(where any has been given) which such persons may have paid on purchasing any
of the said lands, rights, or properties since the confiscation.

And it is agreed that all persons who have any interest in confiscated lands,
eiher by debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall meet with no lawful
impediment in the prosecution of their just rights.

Art. 6. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any prosecutions
commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the part which he
or they may have taken in the present war; and that no person shall, on that
account, suffer (...) future loss or damage, either in his person, liberty or
property; and that those who may be in confinement on such charges, at the time
of the ratification of the Treaty in America, shall be immediately set at
liberty, and the prosecutions so commenced be discontinued.

Art. 7. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic
Majesty and the said states, and between the subjects of the one and the
citizens of the other; wherefore all hostilities both by sea and land shall
from henceforth cease; all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty; and
his Britannic majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction or carrying away any negroes or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, and fleets from the said United States,
and from every post, place and harbor within the same, leaving in all
fortifications the American artillery that may be therein, and shall also order
and cause all archives, records, deeds, and papers belonging to any of the said
states, or their citizens, which in the course of the war may have fallen into
the hands of his officers, to be forewith restored, and delivered to the proper
state and persons to whom they belong.

Art. 8. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the ocean,
shall forever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and the
citizens of the United States.

Art. 9. In case that it should happen that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the United States should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said Provisional articles
in America, it is agreed that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

Art. 10. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and
due form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties in the space of
six months, or sooner if possible, to be computed from the day of the signature
of the present treaty. In witness whereof we the undersigned, their Ministers
Plenipotentiary, have in their name, and in virtue of our full powers, signed
with our hands the present Definitive treaty, and caused the seals of our arms
to be affixed thereto.

Done at Paris, this 3d day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-three. (L. S.) JOHN ADAMS. (L. S.) DAVID HARTLY. (L.
S.) B. FRANKLIN.


TREATY of AMITY COMMERCE and NAVIGATION, between his Britannic Majesty and the
United States of America.
By their President, with the advice and consent of their Senate.

HIS Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, being desirous by a
Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, to terminate their differences in
such a manner, as without reference to the merits of their respective
complaints and pretensions, may be the best calculated to produce mutual
satisfaction and good understanding: And also to regulate the Commerce and
Navigation between their respective countries, territories, and people, in such
a manner as to render the same reciprocally beneficial and satisfactory: they
have, respectively, named their Plenipotentiaries, and given them full powers
to treat of, and conclude the said Treaty, that is to say, his Britannic
Majesty has named for his Plenipotentiary, the Right Hon. Wm. Wyndham Baron
Grenville of Wotton, one of his Majesty's Privy Council, and his Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; and the President of the said
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, has
appointed for their Plenipotentiary, the Hon. John Jay, Chief Justice of the
said United States, and their Envoy Extraordinary his Majesty, who have agreed
on, and concluded the following

ARTICLES:
Art 1. There shall be a firm inviolable and universal Peace, and a true and
sincere friendship between his Britannic Majesty, his heirs and successors, and
the United States of America; and between their respective countries,
territories, cities, towns and people of every degree, without exception of
persons or places.

Art. 2. His Majesty will withdraw all his troops and garrisons from all posts
and places within the boundary lines assigned by the treaty of peace to the
United States. This evacuation shall take place on or before the first day of
June, 1796, and all the proper measures shall in the interval be taken by
concert between the government of the United States, and his majesty's governor
General in America, for settling the previous arrangements which may be
necessary respecting the delivery of the said posts: The United States in the
mean time at their dis^r^ton extending their settlements to any part within the
said boundary line, except within the precincts or jurisdiction of any of the
said posts. (...) and traders within the precincts or jurisdiction of the said
posts, shall continue to enjoy, unmolested, all their property of every kind,
and shall be protected therein. They shall be at full liberty to remain there,
or to remove with all or any part of their effects; and it shall also be free
to them to sell their lands, houses, or effects, or to reretain the property
thereof, at their discretion; such of them as shall continue to reside within
the said boundary lines shall not be compelled to become citizens of the United
States, or to take any oath of allegiance to the government thereof, but they
shall be at full liberty so to do, if they think proper, and they shall make
and declare their election within one year after the evacuation aforesaid. And
all persons who shall continue there after the expiration of the said year,
without having declared their intention of remaining subjects of his Britannic
Majesty, shall be considered as having elected to become citizens of the United
States.

Art. 3. It is agreed that it shall at all time be free to his Majesty's
subjects, and to the citizens of the United States, and also to the Indians
dwelling on either side of the said boundary line, freely to pass and repass by
land or inland navigation, into the respective territories and countries of the
two parties on the continent of America [the country within the limits of the
Hudson's Bay Company only excepted] and to navigate all the Lakes, Rivers, and
Waters thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce with each other. But
it is understood, that this Article does not extend to the admission of vessels
of the United States into the sea ports, harbors, bays or Creeks of his
Majesty's said territories; nor into such parts of the rivers in his Majesty's
said territories as are between the mouth thereof, and the highest port of
entry from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona fide between Montreal
and Quebec, under such regulations as shall be established to prevent the
possibility of any frauds in this respect. Nor to the admission of British
vessel from the sea into the rivers of the United States, beyond the highest
ports of entry for foreign vessels from the sea. The river Mississippi shall,
however, according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to both parties;
and it is further agreed, that all the ports and places on its eastern side, to
whichsoever of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to, and used by
both parties, in as ample a manner is any of the Atlantic ports or places of
the United States, or any of the ports or places of his Majesty in
Great Britain.

All goods and merchandises whose importation into his Majesty's said
territories in America, shall not be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the
purposes of commerce, be carried into the same in the manner aforesaid by the
citizens of the United States, and such goods and merchandise shall be subject
to no higher or other duties than would be payable by his Majesty's subjects on
the importation of the same from Europe into the said territories. And in like
manner, all goods and merchandises whose importation into the United States
shall not be wholly prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of commerce, be
carried into the same, in the manner aforesaid, by his Majesty's subjects, and
such goods and merchandise shall be subject to no higher or other duties than
would be payable by the citizens of the United States on the importation of the
same, in American vessels, into the Atlantic ports of the said States. And all
goods not prohibited, to be exported from the said territories, respectively,
may in like manner be carried out of the same by the two parties respectively,
paying duty as aforesaid.

No duty of entry shall ever be levied by either party on peltries brought by
land, or inland navigation into the said territories respectively, nor shall
the Indians passing or re-passing with their own proper goods and effects of
whatever. But goods in bales, or other large packages unusual among Indians,
shall not be considered as goods belonging bona fide to Indians.

No higher or other tolls or rates of ferriage than what are or shall be
payable by natives, shall be demanded on either side; and no duties shall be
payable on any goods which shall merely be carried over any of the portages or
carrying places on either side, for the purpose of being immediately
re-imbarked and carried to some other place or places. But as by this
stipulation it is only meant to secure to each party a free passage across the
portages on both sides, it is agreed, that this exemption from duty shall
extend only to such goods as are carried in the usual and direct road across
the portage, and are not attempted to be in any manner sold or exchanged during
their passage across the same, and proper regulations established to prevent
the possibility of any frauds in this respect.

As this article is intended to render in a great degree the local advantages
of each party common to both, and thereby to promote a disposition favorable to
friendship and good neighborhood, it is agreed, that the respective governments
will mutually promote this amicable intercourse, by causing speedy and
impartial justice to be done, and necessary protection to be extended to all
who may be concerned therein.

Art. 4. Whereas it is uncertain whether the River Mississippi extends so far
to the Northward as to be intersected by a line to be drawn due West from the
Lake of the Woods in the manner mentioned in the Treaty of Peace between his
Majesty and the United States, it is agreed, that measures shall be taken in
concert with his Majesty's government in America, and the government of the
United States, for making a joint survey of the said river from one degree of
latitude below the Falls of St. Anthony to the principal source or sources of
the said river, and also of the parts adjacent thereto; and that if on the
result of such survey, it should appear that the said river would not be
intersected by such a line as is above mentioned, the two parties will
thereupon proceed by amicable negotiation to regulate the boundary line in that
quarter, as well as all other points to be adjusted between the said parties,
according to justice and mutual convenience, and in conformity to the intent of
the said treaty.

Art. 5. Whereas doubts have arisen what river was truly intended under the
name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the said treaty of Peace, and forming
a part of the boundary therein described, tha btuestion shall be referred to
the final decision of Commissioners to be appointed in the following manner,
viz.

One Commissioner shall be named by his Majesty and one by the President of the
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate thereof, and
the said two Commissioners shall agree on the choice of a third; or if they
cannot so agree, they shall each propose one person, and, of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the two original
Commissioners. And the three Commissioners so appointed, shall be sworn
impartially to examine and decide the said question according to such evidence
as shall respectively be laid before them on the part of the British government
and of the U. States. The said Commissioners shall meet at Hal^fax, and shall
have power to adjourn to such other place or places as they shall think fit.
They shall have power to appoint a Secretary, and to employ such surveyors or
other persons as they shall judge necessary. The said Commissioners shall by a
declaration under their hands and seals decide what river is the river S. Croix
intended by the treaty. The said declaration shall contain a description of the
said river, and shall particularize the latitude and longitude of its mouth of
its source. Duplicates of this declaration and of and the statements of their
accounts and of the journal of their proceeding shall be delivered by them to
the agent of his Majesty and to the agent of the United States, who may be
respectively appointed and authorized (...) ^^^age the business on behalf of
the respective governments. And both parties agree to consider such decision as
final and conclusive, so that the same (...) never ^ereafter be called into
question, or made the subject of dispute or difference between them

Art. 6. Whereas it is alleged by diverse British merchants and others his
Majesty's subjects, that debts to a considerable amount, which were bona fide
contracted before the peace, still remaining owing to them by citizens or
inhabitants of the United States, and that by the operation of various lawful
impediments since the peace, not only the full recovery of the said debts has
been delayed, but also the value and security thereof have been, in several
instances impaire^ and lessened, so that by the ordinary course of judicial
proceedings, the British creditors cannot now obtain, and actually have and
receive full and adequate compensation for the losses and damages which they
have thereby sustained: It is agreed, that in all such cases where full
compensation for such losses and damages cannot for whatever reason be actually
obtained, had and received by the said creditors in the ordinary course of
justice, the United States will make full and complete compensation for the
same to the said creditors; But it is distinctly understood, that this
provision is to extend to such losses only as have been occasioned by the
lawful impediments aforesaid, and is not to extend to losses occasioned by such
insolvency of the debtors, or ohter causes as would ^equally have operated to
produce such loss, if the a^id impediments had not existed, nor to such losses
or damages as have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or
wilful omission of the claimant.

For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses and damages,
five Commissioners shall be appointed, and authorized to meet and act in manner
following, viz. Two of them shall be appointed by his Majesty, two of them by
the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate thereof, and the fifth by the unanimous voice of the other four; and if
they should not agree in such choice, then the commissioners named by the two
parties shall respectively propose one person, and of the two names so
proposed, one shall be drawn by lot in the presence of the four original
commissioners. When the five commissioners thus appointed shall first meet, thy
eshall before they proceed to act respectively take the following oath or
affirmation, in the presence of each other, which oath or affirmation being so
taken, and duty attested, shall be entered on the record of their proceedings,
viz. I A. B. one of the Commissioners appointed in pursuance of the sixth
article of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation between his Britannic
Majesty, and the United States of America, do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I
will honestly, diligently, impartially, and carefully examine, according to
justice and equity, decide all such complaints as under the said article shall
be preferred to the said Commissioners; and that I will forbear to act as a
commissioner in any case in which I may be personally interested.

Three of the said commissioners shall constitute a board, and shall have power
to do any act appertaining to the said commission, provided that one of the
commissioners named on each side, and the fifth commissioner shall be present,
and all decisions shall be made by the majority of the voices of the
commissioners then present; 18 months from the day on which the said
commissioners shall form a board, and be ready to proceed to business, are
assigned for receiving complaints, and applications; but they are nevertheless
authorized in any particular cases in which it shall appear to them to be
reasonable and just, to extend the said term of eighteen months for any term
not exceeding six months, after the expiration thereof. The said commissioners
shall first meet at Philadelphia, but they shall have power to adjourn from
place to place as they shall see cause.

The said commissioners in examining the complaints and applications so
preferred to them, are empowered and required, in pursuance of the true intent
and meaning of this article, to take into their consideration all claims,
whether of principal or interest, or balances of principal and interest, and to
determine the same respectively according to the merits of the several cases,
due regard being had to all the circumstances thereof, and as equity and
justice shall appear to them to require. And the said commissioners shall have
power to examine all such persons as shall come before them on oath or
affirmation or books, or papers, or copies, or extracts thereof, every such
deposition, book, or paper, or extract being duly authenticated, either
according to the legal forms now respectively existing in the two countries, or
in such other manner as the said commissioners shall see cause to require or
allow.

The award of the said commissioners or of any three of them as aforesaid,
shall in all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the
claim, and to the amount of the sum to be paid to the creditor or claimant: And
the United States undertake to cause the sum so awarded to be paid in specie to
such creditor or claimant with deduction; and at such time or times, and at
such place or places as shall be awarded by the said commissioners; and on
condition or such releases or assignments to be given by the creditor of
claimant, as by the said commissioners may be directed: Provided always, that
no such payment shall be fixed by the said commissioners to take place sooner
than twelve months from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of this
treaty.

Art. 7. Whereas complaints have been made by diverse merchants and others,
citizens of the United States, that during the course of the war in which his
Majesty is now engaged, they have sustained considerable losses and damage, by
reason of irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels and
other property under color of authority or commissions from his Majesty, and
that from various circumstances belonging to the said cases, adequate
compensation for the losses and damages so sustained cannot now be actually
obtained, had and received by the ordinary course of judicial proceedings: it
is agreed, that in all such cases where adequate compensation cannot, for
whatever reason, be now actually obtained, had and received by said merchants
and others in the ordinary course of justice, full and complete compensation
for the same will be made by the British government to the said complainants.
But it is distinctly understood that this provision is not to extend to such
losses or damages as have been occasioned by the manifest delay or negligence,
or wllful omission of the claimants.

That for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of any such losses and
damages, five commissioners shall be appointed and authorized to act in London,
exactly in the manner directed with respect to those mentioned in the
preceding article, and after having taken the same oath or affirmation
(mutatis mutandis) the same term of eighteen months is also assigned for the
reception of claims, and they are in like manner authorized to extend the same
in particular cases. They shall receive testimony, books, papers and evidence
in the same latitude, and exercise the like discretion and powers respecting
that subject; and shall decide the claims in question according to the merits
of the several cases, and to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. The
award of the commissioners, or any such three of them as aforesaid, shall, in
all cases be final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the claim, and the
amount of the sum to be paid to the claimant; and his Britannic Majesty
undertakes to cause the same to be paid to such claimant in specie, without any
deduction, at such place or places, and at such time or times as shall be
awarded by the said commissioners, and on condition of such releases or
assignments to be given by the claimants, as by the said commissioners may be
directed.

And whereas certain merchants and others his Majesty's subjects complain that
in the course of the war they have sustained loss and damage by reason of the
capture of the vessels and merchandise taken within the limits and jurisdiction
of the states, and brought into the ports of the same, or taken by vessels
originally armed in ports of the said states.

It is agreed that in all such cases where restitution shall not have been made
agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, dated
at Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1793, a copy of which is annexed to this treaty; the
complaints of the parties shall be and hereby are referred to the commissioners
to be appointed by virtue of this article, who are hereby authorized and
required to proceed in the like manner relative to these as to the other cases
committed to them: and the United States undertake to pay to the complainants
or claimants in specie, without deduction, the amount of such sums as shall be
awarded to them respectively by the said commissioners, and at the times and
places which in such awards shall be specified; and on conditions of such
releases or assignments to be given by the claimants as in the said award may
be directed: And it is further agreed that not only the now existing cases of
both descriptions but also all such as shall exist at the time of exchanging
the ratifications of this treaty, shall be considered within the provisions,
intent and meaning of this article.

Art. 8. It is further agreed, that the commissioners mentioned in the two
preceding articles shall be respectively paid in such manner as shall be agreed
between the two parties; such agreement being to be settled at the time of the
exchange of the ratification of this treaty. And all other expenses attending
the said commissions shall be defrayed jointly by the two parties, the same
being previously ascertained and allowed by the majority of the commissioners.
And in the case of death, sickness or necessary absence, the place of every
such commissioner respectively shall be supplied in the same manner as such
commissioner was appointed, and the new commissioner shall take the same oath
or affirmation and do the same duties.

Art. 9. It is agreed that British subjects who now hold lands in the
territories of the United States, and American citizens who now hold lands in
the dominions of his Majesty shall continue to hold them according to the
nature and tenure of their respective states and titles therein; and may grant,
sell, or devise the same to whom they please, in like manner as if they were
natives; and that neither they nor their heirs or assigns shall so far as may
respect the said lands and the legal remedies incident thereto, be regarded as
aliens.

Art. 10. Neither the debts due from individuals of the one nation, to
individuals of the other, nor shares nor moneys which they may have have in the
public funds, or in the public or private banks shall ever in any event of war
or national differences be sequestered or confiscated, it being unjust and
impolitic that debts and engagements contracted and made by individuals having
confidence in each other, and in their respective governments, should ever be
destroyed or impaired by national authority on account of national differences
and discontents.

Art. 11. It is agreed between his Majesty and the United States of America,
that there shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect liberty of navigation and
commerce between their respective people, in the manner, under the limitations
and on the conditions specified in the following articles.

Art. 12. His Majesty consents that it shall and may be lawful during the time
herein after limited for the citizens of the United States to carry to any of
his Majesty's islands and ports in the West Indies from the United States, in
their own vessels, not being above the burden of seventy tons, any goods or
merchandises being of the growth, manufacture or produce of the said states,
which it is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands or ports from the
said states in British vessels; and that the said American vessels shall be
subject there to no other other or higher tonnage duties or charges than shall
be payable by British vessels in the ports of the United States; and that the
cargoes of the said American vessels shall be subject there to no other or
higher duties or charges than shall be payable on the like articles if imported
there from the said states in British vessels.

And his Majesty also consents that it shall be lawful for the said American
citizens to purcase, load and carry away in their said vessels to the U. States
from the said islands and ports all such articles being of the growth,
manufacture or produce of the said islands as may now by law be carried from
thence to the said states in British vessels and subject only to the same
duties and charges on exportation, to which British vessels and their cargoes
are or shall be subject in similar circumstances.

Provided always that the said American vessels do carry and land their cargoes
in the United States only, it being expressly agreed and declared that during
the continuance of this article, the United States will prohibit and restrain
the carrying any molasses, sugar, coffee, cocoa or cotton in American vessels,
either from his Majesty's islands or from the United States to any part of the
world except the United States, reasonable sea stores excepted. Provided also,
that it shall and may be lawful, during the same period, for British vessels to
Import from the said islands into the United States, and to export from the
United States to the said islands, all articles whatever being of the growth,
produce or manufacture of the said islands, or of the United States
respectively, which now may, by the laws of the said states, be so imported and
exported. And that the cargoes of the said British vessels shall be subject to
no other or higher duties or charges, than shall be payable on the same
articles, if so imported or exported in American vessels.

It is agreed that this article and every matter and thing therein contained
shall continue to be in force during the continuance of the war, in which his
Majesty is now engaged; and also for two years from and after the day of the
signature of the preliminary or other articles of peace by which the same may
be terminated.

And it is further agreed, that at the expiration of the said term, the two
contracting parties will endeavor further to regulate their commerce in this
respect, according to the situation in which his Majesty may then find himself
with respect to the West Indies, and with a view to such arrangements as may
best conduce to the mutual advantage and extension of commerce. And the said
parties will then also renew their discussions, and endeavor to agree, whether
in any and what cases, neutral vessels shall protect enemy's property; and in
what cases provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may become
such. But in the mean time their conduct toward each other in these respects,
shall be regulated by the articles herein after inserted on those subjects.

Art. 13. His Majesty consents that the vessels belonging to the citizens of
the United States of America, shall be admitted and hospitably received in all
the sea ports and harbors of the British territories in the East Indies. And
that the citizens of the said United States may freely carry on a trade between
the said territories and the said United States, in all articles, of which the
importation or exportation respectively to or from the said territory, shall
not entirely be prohibited. Provided only that it shall not be lawful for them
in any time of war between the British government and any other power or state
whatever, to export from the said territories, without the special permission
of the British government there, any military stores or naval stores or rice.
The citizens of the United States shall pay for their vessels when admitted
into the said ports no other or higher tonnage duty than shall be payable on
British vessels when admitted into the ports of the United States. And they
shall pay no other or higher duties or charges on the importation or
exportation of the cargoes of the said vessels, than shall be payable on the
same articles when imported or exported in British vessels. But it is expressly
agreed, that the vessels of the United States shall not carry any of the
articles exported by them from the said British territories to any port or
place except to some port or place in America, where (...)^mation touching the
premises; and also to receive in evidence according as they may think most
consistent with equity and justice, all written depositions, where the same
shall be unladen, and such regulations shall be adopted by both parties, as
shall from time to time be found necessary to enforce the due and faithful
observance of this stipulation. It also understood that the permission granted
by this article is not to extend to allow the vessels of the United States to
carry on any part of the coasting trade of the said British territories; but
vessels going with their original cargoes, or part thereof, from one port of
discharge to another are not to be considered as carrying on the coasting
trade. Neither is this article to be construed to allow the citizens of the
said states to settle or reside within the said territories, or to go into the
interior parts thereof, without the permission of the British government
established there; and if any trangression should be attempted against the
regulations of the British government in this respect, the observance of the
same shall and may be enforced against the citizens of America in the same
manner as against British subjects or others trangressing the same rule. And
the citizens of the United States whenever they arrive in any port or harbor in
the said territories, or if they should be permitted in manner aforesaid, to go
to any other place therein, shall always be subject to the laws, government and
jurisdiction of what nature established in such harbor, port or place,
according as the same may be: The citizens of the United States, may also touch
for refreshment at the island of St. Helena, but subject in all respects to
such regulations as the British government may from time to time establish
there.

Art. 14. There shall be between all the dominions of his majesty in Europe and
the territories of the United States a reciprocal and perfect liberty of
commerce and navigation. The people and inhabitants of the two countries
respectively shall have liberty freely and securely and without hindrance and
molestation to come with their ships and cargoes to the lands, countries,
cities, ports, places and rivers within the dominions and territories
aforesaid, to enter into the same, to resort there and to remain and reside
there, without any limitation of time: And also to hire and possess houses and
warehouses for the purposes of their commerce, and generally the merchants and
traders on each side shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for
their commerce; but subject always as to what respects this article to the laws
and statutes of the two countries respectively.

Art. 15. It is agreed that no other or higher duties shall be paid by the
ships or merchandise of the one party in the ports of the other, than such as
are paid by the like vessels or merchandise of all other nations. Nor shall any
other o^ hi^her duty be imposed in one country on the importation of any
articles the growth, produce or manufacture of the other than are or shall be
payable on the importation of the like articles being of the growth produce or
manufacture of any other foreign country. Nor shall any prohibition be imposed
on the exportation or importation of any articles to or from the territories of
the two parties respectively, which shall not equally extend to all other
nations.

But the British government reserves to itself the right of imposing on
American vessels entering into the British ports in Europe a tonnage duty equal
to that which shall be payable by British vessels in the ports of America: And
also such duty as may be adequate to countervail the difference of duty now
payable on the importation of European and Asiatic goods when imported into the
United States in British or in American vessels.

The two parties agree to treat for the more exact equalization of the duties
on the respective navigation of their subjects and people in such manner as may
be most beneficial to the two countries. The (...) ^^ments for this purpose
shall be made at the sa^^ (...) with those mentioned at the conclusion of the
12th article of this treaty, and are to be considered as a part thereof. In the
interval it is agreed, that the United States will not impose any new or
additional tonnage duties on British vessels, nor increase the now subsisting
difference between the duties payable on the importation of any article in
British or in American vessels.

Art. 16. It shall be free for the two contracting parties, respectively to
appoint consuls for the protection of trade, to reside in the dominions and
territories aforesaid, and the said consuls shall enjoy those liberties and
rights which belong to them by reason of their function. But before any consul
shall act as such he shall be in the usual forms approved and admitted by the
party to whom he is sent; and it is hereby declared to be lawful and proper,
that in case of illegal or improper conduct toward the laws or government, a
council may either be punished according to law, if the laws will reach the
case or be dismissed, or even sent back, the offended government assigning to
the other their reasons for the same.

Either of the parties may except from the residence of consuls such particular
places as such party shall judge proper to be so excepted.

Art. 17. It is agreed, that in all cases where vessels shall be captured or
detained on just suspicion of having on board enemy's property, or of carrying
to the enemy any of the articles which are contraband of war: the said vessel
shall be brought to the nearest or most convenient port; and if any property of
an enemy should be found on board such vessel, that part only which belongs to
the enemy shall be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed
with the remainder without any impediment. And it is agreed, that all proper
measures shall be taken to prevent delay, in deciding the cases of ships or
cargoes so brought in for adjudication; and in the payment or recovery of any
indemnification adjudged or agreed to be paid to the masters or owners of such
ships.

Art. 18. In order to regulate what is in future to be deemed contraband of
war, it is agreed, that under the said denomination shall be comprised all arms
and implements serving for the purposes of war, by land or sea, such as cannon,
muskets, mortars, petards, bombs, grenados, carcasses, saucisses, carriages for
cannons, musket rests, bandoliers, gun powder, match, saltpetre, ball, pikes,
swords, head pieces, cuirasses, halberts, lances, javelines, horse-furniture,
holsters, belts, and generally all other implements of war; as also timber for
ship building, tar, or rosin, copper in sheets, sails hemp and cordage, and
generally whatever may serve directly to the equipment of vessels, unwrought
iron and ^ir planks only excepted; and all the above articles are hereby
declared to be just objects of confiscation, whenever they are attempted to be
carried to an enemy.

And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions and other articles not generally contraband may be regarded as such,
renders it expedient to provide against the inconveniences and
misunderstandings which might thence arise: It is further agreed, that whenever
any such articles so becoming contraband according to the existing laws of
nations, shall for that reason be seized, the same shall not be confiscated,
but the owners thereof shall be speedily and completely indemnified; and the
captors, or in their default the government under whose authority they act,
shall pay to the masters or owners of such vessel the full value of all
articles, with a reasonable mercantile profit thereon, together with the
freight, and also the demurrage incident to such detention.

And whereas it frequently happens, that vessels sail for a port or place
belonging to an enemy, without knowing that the same is either besieged,
blockaded or invested; it is agreed, that every vessel so circumstanced may be
turned away from such port or place, but she shall not be detained nor her
cargo, if not contraband, be confiscated, unless after notice she shall again
attempt to enter; but she shall be permitted to go to any port or place she may
think proper: Nor shall any vessel or goods of either party, that may have
entered into such port or place, before the same was besieged, blockaded or
invested by the other, and be found therein after the reduction or surrender of
such place, be liable to confiscation, but shall be restored to the owners or
proprietors thereof.

Art. 19. And that more abundant care be taken for the security of the
respective subjects and citizens of the contracting parties, and to prevent
their suffering injuries by the men of war, or privateers of either party, all
commanders of ships of war and privateers and all others the said subjects and
citizens shall forbear to do any damage to those of the other party, or
committing any outrage against them, and if they act to the contrary, they
shall be punished, and shall also be bound in their persons and estates to make
satisfaction and reparation for all damages, and the interest thereof, of
whatever nature the said damages may be.

For this cause all commanders of privateers before they receive their
commissions shall hereafter be obliged to give before a competent judge,
sufficient security by at least two responsible sureties, who have no interest
in the said privateer, each of whom, together with the said commander, shall be
jointly and severally bound in the sum of fifteen hundred pounds sterling, or
if such ships be provided with above one hundred and fifty seamen or soldiers,
in the sum of three thousand pounds sterling, to satisfy all damages and
injuries, which the said privateer or officers or men, or any of them may do or
commit during their cruise, contrary to the tenor of this treaty, or to the
laws and instructions for regulating their conduct; and further that in all
cases of aggressions the said commissions shall be revoked and annuled.

It is also agreed, that whenever a judge of a court of admiralty of either of
the parties, shall pronounce sentence against any vessel of goods or property
belonging to the subjects or citizens of the other part a formal and duly
authenticated copy of all the proceedings in the cause, and of the said
sentence shall if required be delivered to the commander of the said vessel,
without the smallest delay, ^e paying all legal fees and demands for the same.

Art. 20. It is further agreed that both the said contracting parties, shall
not only refuse to receive any pirates into any of their ports, havens, or
towns, or permit any of their inhabitants to receive, protect, harbor, conceal
or assist them in any manner, but will bring to condign punishment all such
inhabitants as shall be guilty of such acts or offenses.

And all their ships with the goods or merchandises taken by them and brought
into port of either of the said parties, shall be seized as far as they can be
discovered, and shall be restored to the owners or the factors or agents duly
deputed and authorized in writing by them (proper evidence being first in the
court of admiralty for proving the property) even in case such effects should
have passed into other hands by sale, if it be proved that the buyers knew or
had good reason to believe, or suspect that they had been piratically taken.

Art. 21. It is likewise agreed, that the subjects and citizens of the two
nations, shall not do any acts of hostility or violence against each other, nor
accept commissions or instructions so to act from any foreign prince or state,
enemies to the other party; nor shall the enemies of one of the parties be
permitted to invite, or endeavor to enlist in the military service any of the
subjects or citizens of the other party; and the laws against all such offenses
shall be punctually executed. And if any subject or citizen of the said parties
respectively shall accept any foreign commission, or letters of marque, for
arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other party, it is hereby
declared to be lawful for the said party to treat and punish the said subject
or citizen, having such commission or letters of marque, as a pirate.

Art. 22. It is expressly stipulated that neither of the s^^d contracting
parties will order or authorize any acts of reprisal against the other, on
compl^^^^ of injuries or damages, until the said party (...) first have
represented to the other, a statement thereof, verified by competent proof and
evidence, and demanding justice and satisfaction, and the ^^me shall either
have been refused or unreasonably delayed.

Art. 23. The ships of war of each of the contracting parties shall, at all
times, be hospitably received in the ports of the other, their officers and
crews paying due respect to the laws and government of the country. The
officers shall be treated with that respect which is due to the commissions
which they bear; and if any insult should be offered to them by any of the
inhabitants, all offenders in this respect shall be punished as disturbers of
the peace and amity between the two countries. And his majesty consents that in
case an American vessel, should by stress of weather, danger from enemies or
other misfortunes be reduced to the necessity of seeking shelter in any of his
majesty's ports, into which such vessel could not in ordinary cases claim to be
admitted, she shall, on manifesting that necessity to the satisfaction of the
government of the place, be hospitably received and permitted to refit and to
purchase at the market price such necessaries, as she may stand in need of,
conformably to such orders and regulations as the government of the place,
having respect to circumstances of each case shall prescribe. She shall not be
allowed to break bulk or unload her cargo unless the same shall be bona fide
necessary to her being refitted. Nor shall be permitted to sell any part of her
cargo, unless so much only as may be necessary to defray her expenses, and then
not without the ^^press permission of the government of the place. Nor shall
she be obliged to pay any duties whatever except only on such articles as she
may be permitted to sell for the purpose aforesaid.

Art. 24. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers (not being subjects
or citizens of either of the said parties) who have commissions from any other
prince or state in enmity with either nation, to arm their ships in the ports
of either of the said parties, nor sell what they have taken, nor in any other
manner to exchange the same; nor shall they be allowed to purchase more
provisions than shall be necessary for their going to the nearest port of that
prince or state from whom they obtained their commission.

Art. 25. It shall be lawful for the ships of war and privateers belonging to
the said parties respectively, to carry whithersoever they please the ships and
goods taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any fee to the
Officers of the Admiralty, or to any Judges whatever; nor shall the said prizes
when they arrive at, and enter the ports of the said parties be detained or
seized, neither shall the searchers or other officers of those places visit
such prizes (except for the purpose of preventing the carrying of any part of
the cargo thereof on shore in any manner contrary to the established laws of
Revenue, Navigation, or Commerce) nor shall such officers take cognizance of
the validity of such prizes; but they shall be at liberty to hoist sail and
depart as speedily as may be, and carry their said prizes to the place
mentioned in their commissions or patents, which the commanders of the said
ships of war or privateers shall be obliged to show. No shelter or refuge shall
be given in their ports to such as have made a prize upon the subjects or
citizens of either of the said parties; but if forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to
hasten their departure, and to cause them to retire as soon as possible.
Nothing in this Treaty contained shall, however, be construed or operate
contrary to former and existing public treaties with other Sovereigns or
States. But the two parties agree, that while they continue in amity neither of
them will in future make any treaty that shall be inconsistent with this or the
preceding article.

Neither of the said parties shall permit the ships or goods belonging to the
subjects or citizens of the other to be taken within cannon shot of the coast,
nor in any of the bays, ports, or rivers of their territories by ships of war,
or others having commission from any Prince, Republic, or State whatever. But
in case it should so happen, the party whose territorial rights shall thus have
been violated, shall use his utmost endeavors to obtain from the offending
party, full and ample satisfaction for the vessel or vessels so taken, whether
the same be vessels of war or merchant vessels.

Art. 26. If at any time a rupture should take place (which God forbid) between
his Majesty and the United States, the Merchants and others of each of the two
nations residing in the dominions of the other shall have the privilege of
remaining and continuing their trade, so long as they behave peaceably and
commit no offense against the laws; and in case their conduct should render
them suspected and the respective governments should think proper to order them
to remove, the term of twelve months from the publication of the order shall be
allowed them for that purpose, to remove with their families, effects, and
property, but this favor shall not be extended to those who shall act contrary
to the established laws, and for greater certainty, it is declared that such
rupture shall not be deemed to exist while negociations for accommodating
differences shall be depending, nor until the respective Ambassadors or
Ministers, if such there shall be, shall be recalled or sent home on account of
such differences, and not on account of personal misconduct according to the
nature and degrees of which both parties retain their rights, either to request
the recall, or immediately to send home the Ambassador or Minister of the
other: and that without prejudice to their mutual friendship and good
understanding.

Art. 27. It is further agreed that his Majesty and the United States on mutual
requisitions, by them respectively, or by their respective Ministers or
Officers authorized to make the same, will deliver up to justice all persons
who being charged with murder or forgery, committed within the jurisdiction of
either, shall seek an asylum within any of the countries of the other, provided
that this shall only be done on such evidence of criminality as, according to
the laws of the place, where the fugitive or person so charged shall be found,
would justify his apprehension and commitment for trial, if the offense had
there be^^ committed. The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be
borne and defrayed by those who make the requisition and receive the fugitive.

Art. 28. It is agreed, that the first ten articles of this Treaty shall be
permanent, and that the subsequent articles, except the twelfth, shall be
limited in their duration to twelve years, to be computed from the day on which
the ratifications of this Treaty shall be exchanged, but subject to this
condition -- that whereas the said twelfth article will expire by the
limitation therein contained, at the end of two years from the signing the
preliminary or other articles of peace which shall terminate the present war in
which his Majesty is engaged, it is agreed, that proper measures shall by
concert be taken for bringing the subject of that article into amicable treaty
and discussion, so early before the expiration of the said term, as that new
arrangements on that head, may by that time be perfected and ready to take
place. But i^ (...) should unfortunately happen, that his Majesty and the
United States should not be able to agree o^ ^^ch new arrangements, in that
case all the articles of this treaty, except the first ten shall then cease and
expire together.

Lastly. This Treaty, when the same shall have been ratified by his Majesty and
by the President of the United States, by and with the advice and consent of
their Senate, and the respective ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be
binding and obligatory on his Majesty and on the said States, and shall be by
them respectively executed and observed with punctuality and the most sincere
regard to good faith; and whereas it will be expedient, in order the better to
facilitate intercourse and obviate difficulties, that other articles be
proposed and added to this Treaty, which articles from want of time and other
circumstances, cannot now be perfected -- it is agreed, that the said parties
will, from time to time, readily treat of and concerning such articles, and
will sincerely endeavor so to form them, as that they may conduce to mutual
convenience, and tend to promote mutual satisfaction and friendship; and that
the said articles, after having been duly ratified, shall be added to, and make
a part of this Treaty. In faith whereof, we, the undersigned Ministers
Plenipotentiary of his Majesty the King of Great Britain and the United States
of America, have signed this present Treaty, and have caused to be affixed
thereto the Seal of our arms.

Done at London, this Nineteenth day of November, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Ninety Four. GRENVILLE, (Seal) JOHN JAY. (Seal)


CONDITIONAL RATIFICATION, on the Part of the United States, in Senate, June
24, 1795.
Resolved, that the Senate do consent to, and advise the President of the
United States to ratify the treaty of amity, commerce and navigation, between
his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, concluded at London,
the 19th November, 1794, on condition that there be added to the said Treaty,
an article whereby it shall be agreed to suspend so much of the 12th article,
as respects the trade, which his said Majesty thereby consents may be carried
on between the United States and his Islands in the West Indies, in the manner,
and on the terms and conditions therein specified.

And the Senate recommend to the President to proceed without delay to further
friendly negociations with his Majesty on the subject of the said trade, and of
the terms and conditions in question.


