PREMIUMS.
THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, FOR PROMOTING USEFUL
KNOWLEDGE,
IN order the more effectually to answer the ends of their institution, have
agreed to appropriate, annually, a part of their funds to be disposed of in
Premiums to the Authors of the best performances, inventions, or improvements,
relative to certain specific subjects of useful knowledge. The following
premiums, therefore, are now proposed by the Society.

I.
For the best system of liberal education and literary instruction, adapted to
the genius of the government, and best calculated to promote the general
welfare, of the United States; comprehending also a plan for instituting and
conducting public schools, in this country, on principles of the most extensive
utility -- A premium of one hundred dollars.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of January, 1797.

II.
For the most simple, easy and expeditious method of computing the longitude,
from the common lunar observation, -- A premium of seventy dollars.

The particular view of the society, in proposing this subject, is, that the
solution of this most useful problem may, if possible, be rendered so plain and
easy, as to be readily learned by every mariner, even of moderate capacity, who
understands the common rules of arithmetic; and thus be introduced into general
practice.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of January, 1797.

III.
For the best construction or improvement of ship-pumps, -- A premium of
seventy dollars.

Improvements which may be readily applied to the ship-pumps in common use,
will be most likely to be adopted by seamen, and introduced into general
practice.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of January, 1797.

IV.
For the best construction or improvement of stoves, or fire-places, -- A
premium of sixty dollars. The principal end which the society have in view, in
proposing this subject, is the benefit of the poorer class of people,
especially of such as live in towns, or other places where fuel is dear. To
answer this end, the stove should be cheap, and of durable materials; should
afford the necessary degree of a salubrious and durable heat, with the least
expense of fuel possible; and should be capable of being employed both for the
purpose of warming the room, and cooking provisions for the family. -- The
society have been informed, that stoves made of brick are, in many respects,
superior to those made of metal; especially, in the saving of fuel, and
preserving a more equable degree of heat.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of January, 1797.

V.
For the best method, verified by experiment, of preventing the premature decay
of Peach-trees, -- A premium of sixty dollars.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of January, 1798.

VI.
For the best experimental treatise on native American vegetable dies;
accompanied with an accurate account of the vegetables employed -- A premium of
ninety dollars.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of February, 1798.

VII.
For the best construction or improvement of lamps; especially, for lighting
the streets -- A premium of fifty dollars.

Papers on this subject will be received, till the first day of April, 1797.

GENERAL CONDITIONS.
1. Every candidate, along with his performance, is to send to the society a
sealed letter, containing his name and place of abode; which letter shall never
be opened by the society, except in the case of a successful candidate.

2. No performance, invention or improvement, on any of the subjects proposed,
for which a patent or any other reward shall have been obtained, before
presenting it to the society, shall be considered as entitled to the premium.

3. In lieu of the money which shall be awarded by the society, as a premium,
any successful candidate shall have it in his option to receive a gold or
silver medal, or piece of plate, with a suitable inscription, of equal value.

4. The society reserve to themselves the power of giving, in all cases, such
part only of any premium proposed, as the performance shall be adjudged to
deserve; or, of withholding the whole, if it shall appear to have no merit
above what may have been already published on the subject. The candidates may,
however, be assured, that the society will always judge (...)erally of their
several claims.

MR. I. H. DE MAGELLAN, OF LONDON,
HAVING made a donation, to the society, of two hundred guineas, to be vested
in a permanent fund; that the interest arising therefrom may be disposed of, in
annual premiums, to the authors of the best discoveries or most useful
improvements, relating to Navigation, or to Natural Philosophy, mere Natural
History only excepted; -- the following are the rules and conditions, adopted
by the society, for the disposition of the proposed premiums, in conformity to
the intention of the Donor, viz.

I. The candidate shall send his discovery, invention or improvement, addressed
to the President or one of the Vice-Presidents of the society, free of postage
or other charges; and shall distinguish his performance by some motto, device
or other signature, at his pleasure. Together with his discovery, invention or
improvement, he shall also send a sealed letter, containing the same motto,
device or signature, and subscribed with the real name and place of residence
of the author.

II. Persons of any nation, sect, or denomination whatever, shall be admitted
as candidates for this premium.

III. No discovery, invention or improvement shall be entitled to this premium,
which has been already published, or for which the author has been publicly
rewarded elsewhere.

IV. The candidate shall communicate his discovery, invention or improvement,
either in the English, French, German, or Latin language.

V. All such communications shall be publicly read or exhibited to the society,
at some stated meeting, not less than one month previous to the day of
adjudication; and shall at all times be open to the inspection of such members
as shall desire it. But no member shall carry home with him the communication,
description or model, except the officer to whom it shall be entrusted: nor
shall such officer part with the same out of his custody, without a special
order of the Society for that purpose.

VI. The society having previously referred the several communications, from
candidates for the premium then depending, to the consideration of the twelve
counselors and other officers of the society, and having received their report
thereon, shall, at one of their stated meetings, in the month of December,
annually, after the expiration of this current year (of the time and place,
together with the particular occasion of which meeting, due notice shall be
previously given, by public advertisement) proceed to the final adjudication of
the said premium: and after due consideration had, a vote shall first be taken
on this question, viz. "Whether any of the communications, then under
inspection, be worthy of the proposed premium?" If this question be determined
in the negative, the whole business shall be deferred till another year: But if
in the affirmative, the society shall proceed to determine, by ballot, given by
the members at large, the discovery, invention or improvement most useful and
worthy. And that discovery, invention or improvement which shall be found to
have a majority of concurring votes in its favor, shall be successful. And
then, and not till then, the sealed letter accompanying the crowned
performance, shall be opened and the name of the author announced as the person
entitled to the said premium.

VII. No member of the society who is a candidate for the premium then
depending, or who has not previously declared to the society, either by word
or writing, that he has considered and weighed, according to the best of his
judgment, the comparative merits of the several claims then under
consideration* shall sit in judgment, or give his vote, in awarding the said
premium.

VIII. A full account of the crowned subject shall be published by the Society
as soon as may be, after the adjudication, either in a separate publication, or
in the next succeeding volume of their transactions, or in both.

IX. The unsuccessful performances shall remain under consideration, and their
authors be considered as candidates for the premium, for five years next
succeeding the time of their presentment; except such performances as their
authors may, in the mean time, think fit to withdraw: And the Society shall
annually publish an abstract of the titles, object or subject matter of the
communications so under consideration, such only excepted as the society shall
think not worthy of public notice.

X. The letters containing the names of authors whose performances shall be
rejected, or which shall be found unsuccessful after a trial of five years,
shall be burnt before the society without breaking the seals.

XI. In case there should be a failure in any year, of any communication worthy
of the proposed premium, there will then be two premiums to be awarded in the
next year. But no accumulation of premiums shall entitle an author to more than
one premium for any one discovery, invention or improvement.

XII. The premium shall consist of an oval plate of solid standard gold, of the
value of Ten Guineas. On one side thereof shall be neatly engraved a short
Latin motto suited to the occasion -- together with these words, The premium of
I. H. De Magellan, of London, established in the year 1786. And on the other
side of the plate shall be engraved these words, Awarded by the A. P. S. to
(...) for his discovery of (...) A. D. (...) President. And the seal of the
Society shall be annexed to the said golden plate, by a ribbon passing through
a small hole near the lower edge thereof.

Republished by order of the society, SECRETARIES.
W. BARTON. JOHN BLEAKLEY.

Philadelphia, May, 1796.
Printers of Newspapers and other periodical publications, in the United States
and in Europe, are requested to republish the above notification.


