FRONTISPIECE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION OF DR. WRIGHT'S LIFE OF CHRIST.

New York Published by Birdsall and M^^^l 17^^.



THE NEW AND COMPLETE LIFE OF OUR BLESSED LORD AND SAVIOR, JESUS CHRIST: That
Great EXAMPLE, as well as SAVIOR of MANKIND.

-- CONTAINING -- A MORE COMPLETE, AUTHENTIC, AMPLE, ACCURATE, INSTRUCTIVE,
UNIVERSAL, and FULL ACCOUNT, than was ever before Published, of all the Real
Facts, relating to the EXEMPLARY LIFE, MERITORIOUS SUFFERINGS, and TRIUMPHANT
DEATH of Our GLORIOUS REDEEMER, PARTICULARLY HIS INCARNATION, NATIVITY,
GENEALOGY, BAPTISM, PRESERVATION, CIRCUMCISION, PRESENTATION, EARLY
TRANSACTIONS, DIVINE MISSION, FASTING, MINISTRY, TEMPTATION, DOCTRINES, CALLING
AND APPOINTMENT OF THE APOSTLES, MIRACLES, PARABLES, TRAVELS, HUMILITY,
CHARITY, PATIENCE, MEEKNESS, SUFFERINGS, TRANSFIGURATION, PASSION, INSTITUTION
OF THE SACRAMENTS, CRUCIFIXION, BURIAL, RESURRECTION, APPEARANCE, and
ASCENSION, etc. etc.


-- TO WHICH IS ADDED -- A New, Complete and Authentic HISTORY of the Lives,
Transactions, Sufferings, and Deaths, of HIS HOLY APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS,
DISCIPLES, And other eminent Persons and Primitive CHRISTIANS, who first
propagated the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, and laid down their Lives in the Glorious
Cause of JESUS CHRIST; particularly St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, St. John,
St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Andrew, St. James the Great, St. Philip, St.
Bartholomew, St. Thomas, St. James the Less, St. Simon, St. Jude, St. Matthias,
St. Barnabas, St. Stephen, Timothy, Silas, Mary Magdelene, Mary sister of
Lazarus, Mary of Cleophas, Mary of Selome, Trophimus, Tychimus, Tertius, Linus,
Onesiphorus, Stephanus, Phebe, Sosipater, Clement, Ananias, Nicholas,
Nicodemus, Joseph, Philemon, Priscilla, Titus, etc.


-- ALSO -- A New, Useful, and Interesting Account of the MESSIAH's great
Forerunner JOHN the BAPTIST; And likewise the Life of the Blessed VIRGIN MARY:
TOGETHER WITH A Faithful Account of the Successors of the APOSTLES, for Three
Hundred Years after the Crucifixion, in the five great Apostolical Churches.

COMPREHENDING The Whole Doctrine of Christianity, the Evidences fairly stated
upon which it is founded, and the manner of its Establishment in different
Parts of the World. -- Including a COMPLETE DEFENSE of CHRISTIANITY, containing
Plain and Satisfactory Answers to all the Objections made against our Holy
Religion, by Jews, Turks, Atheists, Deists, Infidels, and Free-Thinkers of the
present Age, who strive to level Mankind with the Brute Creation; whereby the
Religion of the great REDEEMER of Mankind is proved to be Genuine and truly
Divine.

The whole interspersed with PRACTICAL IMPROVEMENTS, and USEFUL REMARKS,
Familiarly Adapted to every Capacity, and designed to Promote, in every
Christian, the necess^^y PRACTICE of FAITH and REPENTANCE, as the only
appointed Means whereby GOD can be reconciled with Man.

This Complete WORK being the Result of long Study and Experience, and not a
hasty Performance, has been regularly digested and collected, not only from the
EVANGELISTS, EPISTLES, etc. but also from JOSEPHUS, the most judicious
ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORIAN, and other BOOKS as well as MANUSCRIPTS (ancient and
modern) of UNDOUBTED AUTHORITY, it will therefore comprise a great VARIETY of
the most Important, Valuable and Curious MATTER relating to the LIFE and DEATH
of our BLESSED SAVIOR and his APOSTLES, etc. not to be found in any other Work
of the Kind whatever.

By PAUL WRIGHT, D. D. AUTHOR of the CHRISTIAN'S NEW and COMPLETE BRITISH
FAMILY BIBLE: -- of the NEW and COMPLETE EDITION of FOX's ORIGINAL BOOK of
MARTYRS; -- and of the NEW EDITION of the Whole BOOK of COMMON PRAYER, with
NOTES, and other necessary ILLUSTRATIONS; -- All of which respective Works are
universally approved of in every Respect, by the Public in general, who have
perused the Numbers already published.

EMBELLISHED with the most elegant, valuable, and numerous set of LARGE
COPPER-PLATE PRINTS ever Published in a Work of this Kind: finely engraved from
the original Drawings of HAMILTON, CHALMERS, WEST, SAMUEL WALE, Esquire. etc. by
the best American ARTISTS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY TERTIUS DUNNING AND WALTER W. HYER, NO. 73,
MARKET-STREET.

1795.

INTRODUCTORY PREFACE To CHRISTIAN READERS.
IT is a real fact, evident beyond contradiction, that every individual should
acquire a thorough knowledge of the Life and Death of our blessed Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, who was crucified for our sins, rose again for our
justification, and now sits at the right hand of GOD, making intercession
for us. If Christians seek a noble example of conduct to copy after we would
recommend to them the glorious and benevolent transactions OF THE GREAT CAPTAIN
OF OUR SALVATION; One, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, suffering his divine
essence to be clothed with mortality, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross; that mankind by the merits of his redemption, through
faith, might enjoy everlasting happiness throughout eternity in the realms
above. The Life and Death of our Holy REDEEMER, with other matters herein
contained, is a Work, if properly executed, of the utmost consequence to this
Christian land, and is the most valuable of all histories; but it is a
circumstance which will be readily allowed, by the impartial and disinterested,
and which has been long much lamented by many, that no complete and perfectly
authentic Work of this kind has yet been published, whereby persons of every
capacity may gain a thorough knowledge of the important subject. Hitherto,
works of this sort have been published in too small a compass, and likewise in
too small sizes, which are by no means so elegant, so convenient, or so well
adapted to the importance of so valuable a work, which should not be cut short
and mangled to suit any private purpose whatever. Some of these publications
have been compiled by persons whose names, characters, and private sentiments,
would have done no honor to a work of the kind, and were therefore ushered into
the world under the names of fictitious persons who never existed; and others
of them have been so wretchedly executed, that Christian people have only
parted with their money, without having their expectations at all answered. To
remedy all these defects, by which the PUBLIC have been long materially
injured, I was applied to by my numerous friends to publish this NEW AND
COMPLETE LIFE OF OUR LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, the diligent labor of many
years, and which, by the blessings of God, I have now committed to the press,
in order that it may be of real benefit and use to pious and sincere Christians
of every denomination. I have been particularly urged to treat this important
subject at Large in the most copious and satisfactory manner, and to cause it
to be beautifully printed in FOLIO, on an excellent large new Letter, which I
am persuaded is the most elegant and best size for the purpose, and what will,
I doubt not, be approved of by an indulgent Public, in preference to any other
form. It is calculated to convey divine knowledge to all ranks of people,
rectify errors which too many are apt to run into, represent real religion in
its native colors, as taught by CHRIST himself, and enable even the most
ignorant Christian to give an account of the faith that is in him, when called
upon on any occasion. The sacred writings of the Evangelists, etc. have not
only been carefully consulted, and the respective accounts systematically
arranged, so as to make this work a complete Harmony of the Gospels, but
profane authors of undoubted authority, who were co-temporaries with the
Evangelists and Apostles, have furnished us with a variety of useful
particulars relating to our Blessed SAVIOR, not included in the Scripture
History. The evidence which Josephus bears to different parts of our REDEEMER'S
LIFE, has also been faithfully preserved, together with an account of the
Jewish customs, offices, and sects; every other writer (ancient and modern) on
the subject, has also been diligently perused; and no trouble or expense spared
to render this work, in every respect, the most complete and perfect of the
kind: being happily calculated to convey to the inquisitive mind a perfect
knowledge of our holy religion, to promote (...) in the merits of our Blessed
REDEEMER, and to recommend (...) practice of every Christian virtue. The
Chronological and Geographical parts are likewise minutely attended to, and the
errors which others have fallen into, are most carefully avoided. In this
Preface, I shall only mention a few things more; and may they be attentively
considered by all persons of both sexes, old and young. Let it be your care to
make the evidences of Christianity the subject of your serious reflection and
converse, wherein such marks of truth and divinity are to be found. The subject
of the Life of our Blessed REDEEMER, is of the utmost consequence to every one,
and demands our most serious regard; for, as the great Apostle says, Christ
has suffered for us, leaving an example to us, that we might follow his steps:
He declares himself the Way, the Truth, and the Life: He not only redeem^ our
souls from death to life, but enlightens and leads all his faithful followers
in the paths of safety, to a happy eternity. The answers which I have given to
Atheists, Deists, and Infidelity in general, I hope will be found of the most
satisfactory nature to my numerous readers, and such as will build them up in
their most holy faith. The examples of the holy Apostles, Evangelists,
Disciples, and other eminent persons and primitive Christians (also given in
this work) will likewise afford great instruction to every reader; and the
practical improvements and doctrinal remarks, interspersed throughout the
whole, will be carefully applied to the faith and duty of every Believer.

PAUL WRIGHT, Author of the Christian's Complete British Family Bible, etc.

THE NEW AND COMPLETE LIFE OF OUR BLESSED LORD AND SAVIOR, JESUS CHRIST:
CONTAINING THE MOST AUTHENTIC AND FULL ACCOUNT OF ALL THE WONDERFUL
TRANSACTIONS, SUFFERINGS, AND DEATH OF OUR GLORIOUS REDEEMER: WITH THE LIVES,
ACTS, AND SUFFERINGS, OF HIS HOLY APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS, DISCIPLES, etc.
INCLUDING THE LIVES OF ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST, THE VIRGIN MARY, AND MANY OTHER
EMINENT PERSONS AND PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANS, NOT TO BE FOUND IN ANY OTHER WORK OF
THIS KIND.
CHAPTER I.
Concerning the State of Religion, etc. in the World in General, and in the
Roman Empire and the Jewish Nation in particular, at the Time of our REDEEMER's
Birth. Including an Account of the various Sects amongst the Jews, and other
particulars, by way of Introduction.

IT is generally acknowledged, by the most learned and judicious chronologers,
that the GREAT REDEEMER was born in the four thousandth year after the creation
of the world, and four years before the vulgar era. This mistake is supposed
to have arisen from the low state of learning, when the birth of CHRIST was
first fixed as the epoch from which the whole Christian world reckoned their
time. This being upwards of five hundred years after the birth of CHRIST, and
there being no authentic records, to fix the the time with exactness and
precision, a mistake of four years was at first made, and has been ever since
continued. The year in which the SAVIOR of the world was born, was the
thirty-third of Herod, king of the Jews, after his taking Jerusalem; and the
twenty-sixth of the emperor Augustus, after the victory of Actium; which,
concluding the contest between him and Mark Anthony, put him in possession of
the whole Roman empire. It was now about seven hundred and fifty years since
the building of Rome. The Romans had carried their victorious arms through the
surrounding nations, and by their justice, clemency, and moderation, risen to
the highest pitch of glory and renown: but by the pride, luxury, and frequent
quarrels of their great men, the empire was sinking from its ancient greatness;
the commonwealth was at an end; and the senate had been forced to submit to a
master. Though the state had made a violent struggle for liberty, in the murder
of Julius Caesar, great quarrel^ succeeded, and the whole empire was subjected
to authority of Augustus. This was a prince of a very amiable disposition: he,
by his wise management, put an end to all contention, and governed the empire
with such justice, prudence, and moderation, as made him highly esteemed by his
subjects. He not only settled the affairs of the state so as to preserve all
things quiet at home, but had the like success throughout the remoter parts of
the vast empire: for a general peace prevailed through all the world, when our
Great Redeemer, the heavenly Prince of peace, was born.

THE Jewish nation was, at this time, groaning under the tyranny of Herod the
Great; who, though an old man, declining in his health, and just bordering on
the grave, had so little thought of his latter end, that he reigned with such
cruelty and tyranny, as justly rendered him the abhorrence of his subjects. A
late writer has asserted, that the Jews were, at this time, grievously
oppressed by the Roman power, but as Herod was, for the most part, in favor
with the emperor Augustus, and had liberty from him to rule as he pleased, and
even, on slight grounds of complaint, to put his own sons, Alexander and
Christobolus to death; it must certainly be the oppression of Herod, and not of
Augustus (who was a prince of a contrary character) whom the Jews groaned
under. Herod was a prince of Idumean decent, whose ancestors had been
proselytes to the Jewish religion. He had no right to the regal authority, but
was imposed o^ the Jews by the Roman power, when there was a contest between
Hyrcanus and Aristobolus, two brothers of the Asmonian family, for the royal
dignity. The (...) took the advantage of this, and Herod was declared king of
the (...) the senate, and three years after, assisted by the Roman arms i^ the
taking Jerusalem: and from that time he reigned over the Jewish nation, in
subjection to the Romans, about thirty-five years. Herod was a prince of a
martial disposition, but as he knew he had no legal right to the crown, he was
guilty of the highest injustice and cruelty to keep possession of that dignity
which he had by unlawful means obtained; and never was at rest till he had
procured the death of every prince who was related to it. Having thus erected
his throne on murder, treachery, and all kinds of wickedness, his reign was
such as might be expected from such a beginning. For though he rose to great
opulence and power; though he was possessed of all that his ambition aspired
to; yet he was constantly disturbed by domestic divisions, and troubles of
various kinds, which rendered him most deplorably unhappy in the midst of
prosperity. Though he was successful in his wars, and constantly augmenting his
dominions; though in the sumptuous buildings he erected, and in his grandeur
and magnificence, in all respects, he exceeded his predecessors, Solomon only
excepted; yet his reign was one series of plots, jealousies, cruelties, murder,
and every thing that is shocking to human nature.

THE state of religion in the world, at the time of our Redeemer's birth, was
such as stood in the greatest need of a teacher sent from God. The various
nations around the globe were immersed in the darkness of idolatry and
superstition. And though the unity of God, and the immortality of the soul had
been taught by Socrates and Plato, yet their sentiments were dark and confused,
very little known amongst the vulgar, and very little depended on amongst the
more learned. The Jews only retained the worship of the true God. Their
temple-worship was the same as established by Solomon; and the law and the
prophets were weekly read in their synagogues; but they had, in a great
measure, made the moral law void by their traditions, and their temple-worship
was much declined from the primitive glory of its institution. The second
temple had now stood upwards of four hundred years. It was vastly inferior, in
magnificence and grandeur, to that which was built by Solomon. It wanted the
ark of the covenant, the Divine Presence, the Urim and Thummim, the holy fire
upon the altar, and the spirit of prophecy. It was first profaned and plundered
by Antiochus Epiphanus. It had lately been dishonored by the impious boldness
of Pompey; and soon after by Crassus, another Roman general, who rapaciously
seized those vast treasures which Pompey's piety and modesty had spared. In a
few years after came Herod, who having obtained the grant of the kingdom at
Rome, besieged and took the city and temple. And though, in order to insinuate
himself into the affections of the people, he did all in his power to preserve
the temple from being plundered, and a few years after expended vast sums in
repairing and beautifying it, yet, as he obtained the regal dignity by the
favor of the Romans, he was always careful to please and oblige them; and
accordingly profaned the temple with a golden eagle, which was fixed upon the
great porch at the entrance of that fabric, in order to court the favor of the
emperor Augustus. This gave great offense to the Jews, who were scrupulously
exact in the observance of the minutest rituals, but scandalously careless in
the weightier matters of the law: and while, on every trifling occasion, they
were ready to cry out, The Temple of the Lord! The Temple of the Lord! they had
so little regard to the divinity which dwelt within, that they made this holy
place a market for trade and merchandise; and filled the sacred apartments with
dealers, merchants, money changers, and usurers. And such were the injustice
and extortion they practiced in the holy place, it was justly observed, that
the house which God had appointed for an house of prayer, they had converted
into a den of thieves.

HOWEVER little religion there was amongst the Jews, they were very forward and
open in their profession, and there were ^al parties amongst them who violently
opposed each other. Those who are mentioned in the gospels are the Pharisees,
the Sadducees, the Herodians and the Samaritans; of each of these it may be
proper to give some account. The Pharisees were the greatest of all the Jewish
sects; and by their pretenses to extraordinary purity, and the show they made
in things external, they drew the bulk of the common people after them. They
maintained a kind of priestly pride, and solemn stiffness in their deportment,
doing every thing in their power to attract the notice, and gain the veneration
of the multitude. A trumpet was founded before them when they gave alms to the
poor; they made long prayers at the corners ^f steets, and in the markets,
taking every occasion to exhibit the utmost ostentation of pi^ty and devotion.

BUT the distinguishing character of the Pharisees, was their zeal for the
traditions of the elders, which they constantly maintained, were of equal
authority with the written law, as they were received from God himself by Moses
when he was forty days on the mount. These traditions were multiplied to such
an enormous number, that they were sufficient to fill twelve folio volumes: and
these men pretending to an exact and rigorous observance of the law according
to these traditions, would fain have themselves looked upon more holy than
others, and therefore separated themselves from those whom they esteemed great
sinners and profane persons, and refused to eat or drink with them. They looked
with contempt on the common people, and the constant language of their looks
and behavior was, Stand by! Come not near me! I am holier than thou! They were
scrupulously exact in the performance of the minutest rituals, and prided
themselves in their punctuality in paying tithes of herbs, while they neglected
the weightier matters of the law. They presumed so far as proudly to mention
their good deeds in their prayers, and proposed them as the grounds of the
divine acceptance; though, at the same time, while they maintained the fair
outward show of piety and goodness, they were privately guilty of great and
scandalous vices. This sect of the Pharisees, in process of time, swallowed up
all the other sects amongst the Jews; and, at present, it is by the traditions
of the Pharisees, and not by the law and the prophets, that the Jewish religion
is formed.

JOINED with the Pharisees in the gospels, are the Scribes and the Lawyers, who
were not distinct sects or parties amongst the Jews, but men professing
learning, and chiefly followers of the Pharisees in their religion; for the
learning of the Jews principally consisting in the knowledge of the Pharisaical
traditions, and the interpretation of the scriptures by them, it is no wonder
that the twelve folio volumes, above mentioned, found employment for great
numbers of these men.

ANOTHER noted sect amongst the Jews, at the time of our great Redeemer's
birth, was the Sadduc^es: These, at their first separation, differed only from
the Pharisees in their refusing to receive the tradition of the elders, and
abiding by the written law; but in process of time, they degenerated into an
universal skepticism; and like our modern Deists, they neither believed there
existed good or evil spirits, or that there would be a resurrection, or a
future state. As to the Herodians, it is not so precisely known what their
distinguishing tenets were; but as their doctrine is called in the gospel, The
leaven of Herod, and as their party takes its name from that prince, it is to
be supposed their particular opinions were derived from him: now as, from his
general character and conduct, we may conclude that the doctrine of the
Sadducees would be very agreeable to him, as it delivered him from the fears of
an hereafter, and as it is well known that as soon as he was securely settled
on his throne (having cut off all the heirs of the Asmonian family) he began to
introduce Pagan customs amongst the Jews; It is very likely that the Herodians
held nearly the same sentiments as the Sadducees, and that they approved the
conduct of Herod, in the introduction of the Heathen superstitions.

IT is necessary, lastly, to give (...) account of the Samaritans: These people
were not of Jewish extraction, but were the offspring of those Heathen nations
whom the king of Assyria sent to dwell in the land of Israel, in the room of
the ten tribes who were carried away captive. Those people when first planted
in the land, were grievously annoyed by lions; and supposing that this
misfortune arose from their being ignorant of the worship of the god of the
land (for the Heathens supposed that every land had its peculiar deity) they
applied to Esarhaddon, the grandson of the king who carried them captive, and
he sent them an Israelitish priest, who taught them the worship of God
according to the law of Moses. They now took the God of Israel into the number
of their deities, and worshipped him in conjunction with the gods of the
nations from whence they came. Hence, when the Jews returned from the
Babylonish captivity, and, by the permission and assistance of Cyrus king of
Persia, were building their temple, the Samaritans, as they in part professed
the same religion, proposed an alliance with them, and offered their assistance
in carrying on the work. This the Jews abruptly refused, which gave such
offense to the Samaritans, that they took all possible pains to obstruct them
in the undertaking; and, by corrupting the officers of Cyrus, prevailed so far,
that the work was interrupted for a considerable time. After some years, the
Jews obtained a fresh decree from Darius, the third Persian king from Cyrus,
and the temple was finished and dedicated. But the city of Jerusalem lay in a
ruinous condition, and the Jews remained under great contempt and various
discouragements, for about sixty years. At the end of this time, Divine
Providence appeared for them, and raised them up a friend in the person of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, the Ahasuerus of the Scriptures. This prince, having
exalted a Jewish young lady, named Esther, to be his queen, was a constant
favourer of the Jews; and sent Ezra, a priest of great learning and piety, from
the Persian court, to reform the abuses, and settle the disorders that had
arisen amongst them. And, in a few years afterward, by the interest of the
queen, he sent his cup bearer, Nehemiah, to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, and
continue and perfect the reformation which Ezra had begun. In the carrying on
of this work, the Jews met with great opposition from the Samaritans; and hence
there arose a mortal hatred between the two people. The Samaritans, in the
contest, were chiefly supported by Sanba^^at, the governor of Samaria; who
having married his daughter to Manasseh, the son of the Jewish high priest,
prevailed so far on Darius Nothus, the successor of Artaxerxes that he obtained
from him a grant to build a temple on mount Gerizim, near Samaria; and to make
his son-in-law high priest thereof. This was accordingly effected, and
introduced a change in the Samaritan religion: for whereas they had, till now,
only worshipped the God of Israel, in conjunction with their deities, they now
conformed themselves to the worship of the true God only, according to the law
of Moses, which was daily read in their new temple: from this time, the cities
of Samaria became places of refuge for those Jews who had been guilty of such
crimes as exposed them to punishment, and thither they fled to escape the arm
of justice. Hence, in process of time, arose a mongrel people, betwixt the Jews
and Samaritans. The quarrel between them and the regular Jews continued, and
their hatred to each other remained at its highest pitch. And though John
Hyrcanus, the son of Simon Maccabeus, destroyed their temple, yet they
continued a separate worship from the Jews. They acknowledged the authority of
no other Scripture than the five books of Moses, which they kept in a character
peculiar to themselves, said to be the old Hebrew character, which was in use
amongst the Jews before the Babylonish captivity. Though they were remarkable
for their strictness in the observance of the rules of the law, yet they were
more detestable to the Jews than were the Heathen nations. When Jerusalem was
destroyed by the Romans, about seventy years after the birth of CHRIST, when
the temple was burnt, and the whole nation dispersed, the Samaritans remained
in possession of their country, and there they continue to this day.

SUCH was the state of religion amongst the Jews at the time of the birth of
CHRIST; nor were their morals in any respect superior. Their religion chiefly
consisted in externals, and by their traditions, they explained away most of
the excellent precepts of the moral law. Their great men were privately guilty
of the most scandalous vices; nor can it be supposed that the common people
were more regular in their conduct, or that they should escape the general
corruption which universally prevailed in the land.

CHAPTER II.
Of the Promises and Predictions, in the various ages of the World, relating to
the Dignity, Character, Office and Birth, of our Great and Glorious REDEEMER.

THE great King of the universe, having in his eternal counsels, determined to
send his only Son, at an appointed period of time, to accomplish the salvation
of lost, undone sinners; he was graciously pleased, in the various ages o^ the
world, to give such intimations of this great event, as were consistent with
the nature of his moral government, and the designs of his grace: and that his
offending creatures might not group in darkness and distress, without any hope
of his mercy, or knowledge of the way in which he would accept his rebellious
subjects, and restore them to his favor, he was pleased, as soon as sin had
entered into the world, to give our first parents some hope of their
restoration; and in passing sentence on the serpent who had seduced them, he
declared that the seed of the woman should bruise his head; which, though it
could not give them a clear idea of the nature of their deliverance, nor of the
glorious person who should accomplish it, yet it might be sufficient to quiet
their minds, and inspire them with a distant hope. What further discoveries of
the divine will, in the redemption of sinners by the Son of God, were made to
the antediluvian patriarchs, are not clearly revealed in the word of God; but
from the prophecy of Enoch, recorded by the apostle Jude, it may be concluded,
that the world was not ignorant of this great event; for the patriarch, who
could so clearly declare, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
saints to execute judgment on all mankind, cannot be supposed to be totally
ignorant of the great person who was to sit in judgment: and the hard speeches
which he charges ungodly sinners with speaking against God, may have no
indirect reference to the scorn, contempt, and reproach, which our great
redeemer suffered from the ungodly and unbelieving Jews. What further
discoveries of the Redeemer were made to the patriarch Noah, and his
descendants, after the flood, are not to be learned from the volume of
inspiration; but there we learn, that Abraham was called from his idolatrous
countrymen, by a divine manifestation, learnt the uncorrupted worship of the
true God, and informed that in his seed all the nations of the world should be
blessed. That this patriarch had full expectation of some exalted person, who
was to rise out of his family, and that the notion of this prevailed amongst
his descendants, are evident from the blessing which Jacob, at his death,
pronounces on his son Judah, Genesis xlix.10. The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the people be. The scepter not departing from Judah, is
here a prediction; but the coming of Shiloh at an appointed time, is mentioned
as a thing already known. There is no mention directly made of our exalted
Savior, amongst the moral precepts of the law; but it is universally allowed,
that the various rituals of the Jewish religion were typical of his exalted
person, his offices, and the great atonement he made to divine justice, when he
made his soul an offering for sin* and Moses could declare to Israel in plain
terms, A prophet shall the Lord thy God raise unto thee from amongst thy
brethren like unto me, and it shall come to pass that whomsoever shall not hear
that prophet, he shall be cut off from amongst his people. During the conquest
of Canaan, the anarchy and confusion which succeeded in the time of the Judges,
and the reign of Saul, we hear nothing of the Messiah. But the royal prophet
David, in his psalms, gives a very lively and spirited account of a full belief
in this great descendant of his; and in a language peculiar to himself,
describes the glories of his reign, his death, and triumphant resurrection: for
having a clear and full view of the Messiah's kingdom and reign, he, in poetic
rapture, could cry out, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. But clearer, and stronger still, our
great Redeemer blazes forth in the prophecies of Isaiah, who writes more like
an historian than a prophet, and minutely particularizes the great events which
attended the birth, life, and death of the Savior of sinners. Full of
prophetic fire, the great Isaiah could cry out, A virgin shall conceive and
bear a son, and call his name Immanuel. And having a clear view of his
sufferings and death, he could add, He was led like a sheep to the slaughter;
and as a lamb before her shearers is dumb; so he opened not his mouth. He was
taken from prison and judgment; who shall declare his generation? For the
transgression of my people was he smitten. He made his grave with the wicked,
and the rich, in his death. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by
his stripes we are healed. The succeeding prophets were very clear and express
in their descriptions of the kingdom of the Messiah. The prophet Jeremiah
particularly mentions the thirty pieces of silver, for which he was sold; and
the prophet Daniel pointed out the particular time when he should make his
appearance in the world. Seventy weeks, says the angel, are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy city; to finish the transgression, to make an end of
sin, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness; to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy.
From these plain and frequent declarations of their prophets, the Jews had a
full and clear expectation of the coming of the Messiah; and they had an old
tradition amongst them, which was generally received, and supposed to come from
Elias, that the Messiah should appear in the four thousandth year of the world,
which accordingly came to pass. Nor was the expectation of our Redeemer's birth
confined only to the Jews; a tradition prevailed amongst the Eastern nations,
that a great king was to be born to the Jews, who would be worthy to be
worshipped: which is manifest from the wise men coming to Jerusalem, to enquire
after this glorious person, having seen his star in the East, and being
desirous not only to see the young king, but to present their offerings before
him. Nor must it be omitted, that amongst the oracles of the Sibyls, at the
time of our Savior's birth, in such high repute at Rome, are various
predictions of the times of the Messiah; and the poet Virgil, who wrote in the
beginning of Augustus, composed his Pollio, which contains the predictions of a
heavenly child soon to be born, whom he calls the Son of God, and describes his
kingdom in a manner which is parallel to several sublime passages in the
prophet Isaiah, descriptive of the glorious Redeemer of mankind.

CHAPTER III.
The Angel appears to Zacharias in the Temple, and foretells the Birth of John
the Baptist, the Forerunner of our Great REDEEMER. Zacharias doubting, is
struck dumb for a Sign. The salutation of the Virgin Mary. Her visit to her
Relation Elizabeth, the Wife of Zacharias. The Birth and Circumcision of John
the Baptist Zacharias's mouth is opened; his prophecy.

THE happy time being near at hand, fixed by the Triune God, for our great
Redeemer to make his appearance in the world, called in Scripture, The fullness
of time, it pleased the Eternal King of heaven and earth, to give notice to
mankind, that this exalted person would soon be manifested, and the benefits
arising from his mission obtained. God had declared by his prophets, that
before his Son appeared in the world, A messenger should go before his face, to
prepare his way. This messenger was further described under the character of
the prophet Elijah; and in another place he was called The voice of one crying
in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make straight, in the
desert, a high way for our God. In the accomplishment of those prophecies, it
was necessary that John the Baptist, the forerunner of our great Redeemer,
should first be born; and, accordingly, the Angel Gabriel was sent from heaven
to give notice of the birth of this great herald of the Lord of life. The
persons destined to be parents to this extraordinary man, were Zacharias, a
pious priest, and his wife Elizabeth; who were both of the family of Aaron, and
blameless in the observance of the law. But, though they had lived from their
youth in the married state, they were not blessed with any offspring, and were
both so far advanced in years, that according to the course of nature, no issue
could be expected from them. The priests that officiated in the temple of
Solomon, were divided into twenty-four courses; every course began its service
on the Sabbath Day, and continued all the week. Only four of these courses
returned from the Babylonish captivity; the rest were either extinct, or
tarried behind. But, that the number of twenty-four might still subsist, each
course divided itself into six; the new ones taking upon themselves the names
of those who were wanting. Zacharias was of the course of Abia, one of the new
ones in this sub-division, and the eighth in the order of the twenty-four. It
was the lot of this aged priest to burn incense in the holy place, and while
the smoke of the incense ascended, the people, according to custom, were
praying in the outward court. As the good priest stood by the altar of incense,
the angel appeared in view, all bright and glorious, as a native of the sky.
Zacharias, at the sight of the heavenly messenger, was filled with terror and
dismay; but the angel, with condescending goodness, thus addressed him: Fear
not, Zacharias; for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear the
a son, and thou shall call his name John. And thou shall have joy and gladness,
and many shall rejoice at his birth: for he shall be great in the sight of the
Lord, and shall neither drink wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled
with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb. And many of the children of
Israel shall he turn unto the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord. As Zacharias was one of the pious Jews who waited for the
consolation of Israel, doubtless he had often prayed that he might live to see
the Messiah come, which was the prayer that the angel assured him was heard;
but that his wife Elizabeth should bear a son, who should be the forerunner of
the Redeemer of Israel, seemed a thing so extraordinary, and out of the course
of nature, that the priest could not believe it, though asserted by an angel;
and therefore replied to the heavenly messenger: Whereby shall I know this? For
I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. The bright commander of
the angelic squadrons, seemed displeased that Zacharias should question the
truth of his prediction; and therefore proceeded to let him know his dignity,
and the high place he occupied in the heavenly world; and the consequential
impossibility that he should deceive him. Know, said he, that I am Gabriel that
stand in the presence of God, and am sent from heaven, to speak unto thee, and
to show thee these glad tidings. But, as thou have presumed to call in question
the truth of the heavenly message, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak,
until th^se things shall be performed: for though thou have not believed my
words, they nevertheless are true, and shall be performed in their season. The
priest, astonished at the vision, stayed longer in the holy place than usual;
at which the people, who waited without for his benediction, were much
surprised: at last he came to them, but found the prediction of the angel
awfully fulfilled; for when, according to the course of his office, he was to
bless the people, he could not speak; but signified to them by signs, that he
had seen a vision, which was the cause of his dumbness; and, the week of his
administration being accomplished, he returned to his house. Soon after this,
his wife Elizabeth found herself with child, but made a secret of her
conception for the first five months, contenting herself with giving God thanks
in private, for his great goodness in taking away the reproach of her
barrenness; and revolving in her mind, with wonder and praise, the unsearchable
counsels of God, and his great goodness to the children of men.

SIX months after this, the angel Gabriel, the same who had appeared to the
prophet Daniel, and foretold the very time of our Redeemer's birth, and had
lately predicted to Zacharias the birth of his forerunner, was sent from the
heavenly regions, to the city of Nazareth, to an amiable and virtuous virgin,
named Mary, supposed to be about fifteen years of age. She was of the house and
lineage of David, and was espoused to a good man, supposed to be a widower, and
pretty far advanced in years, named Joseph, who was also of the royal line of
David. The husband had not taken home his wife, but she remained a virgin at
her father's house; and while, as supposed, at her private devotions, the angel
appeared to her arrayed in heavenly brightness; and, with a condescending
smile, saluted her in terms of the highest respect: Hail Mary, he cried, thou
art highly favored; the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst women. The
pious maid was not more surprised at the blaze of heavenly glory which shone
around her, than at the salutation of the celestial messenger, to whom she
knew not how to reply. When the angel rejoined, with looks and accents of such
kindness, and heavenly goodness, as dissipated every fearful apprehension. Fear
not, Mary; for thou have found favor with God. And behold thou shall conceive
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name JESUS; he shall be great and
shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give him the
throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end. The holy maid, not immediately
recollecting that the prophet Isaiah had, in his predictions of the Messiah
said, Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son: and being conscious of her
purity, did not, like Zacharias, require a sign; but modestly inquired how her
pregnancy could be effected in her virgin state. How, said she, can this be,
seeing I know not a man? To which the angel, with condescending goodness,
replied, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee: therefore also, that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the son of God. And though the holy maid had not required
a sign, whereby she might be assured of the certainty of an event so wonderful,
and contrary to the established order of nature, the heavenly guest was pleased
to give her this satisfaction: And behold, said he, thy cousin Elizabeth, she
has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month with her
who was called barren: for with God nothing shall be impossible. This reply was
accompanied with such a manifestation of the Divine Presence, that it removed
every fear, and filled the wondering maid with heavenly gladness, which she had
not known before. The expectation of the MESSIAH was general at this time
throughout the Jewish nation, and strong were the desires of Judah's daughters
for the honor and happiness of being the mother of the Redeemer of Israel; and
the holy maid, it may be expected, had ardently wished for this great blessing;
so that, with growing joy and exultation, she immediately replied to the bright
archangel, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy
word.

SOON after the departure of the angel, the holy virgin, regarding with joy of
heart what the heavenly messenger had related concerning her relation and
friend, went to the hill country of Judea, to pay a visit to her cousin
Elizabeth. It is supposed that Zacharias lived at Hebron, the city of David,
before he went to Jerusalem, formerly inhabited by giants, but taken by Joshua;
and, when the land was divided, given to the tribe of Judah; which city was
about seventy miles from Nazareth. The joy that inspired the blessed virgin,
gave her such a flow of spirits, that she lightly tripped over the mountains;
and as soon as she arrived at the house of her dear relative, the pious matron
was filled with divine illuminations, and so affected at the sound of the
maiden's voice, that the evangelist informs us, the babe leaped in her womb.
And, being filled with heavenly rapture, she addressed the wondering maid in
the same language which she had lately heard from the angel, Blessed art thou
amongst women; to which she added, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb: and
still continuing full of heavenly ardour, she exclaimed, And whence is this to
me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me! she then proceeded
immediately to inform her of her happy pregnancy, For to, said she, as soon as
the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb
for joy. And then, in full assurance of the fulfillment of the divine
predictions respecting them both, she added, And blessed is she that believes,
for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the
Lord. The divine flame of holy*love and joy, which glowed in the heart of the
pious matron, soon catched in the bosom of the holy virgin; who, confirmed
beyond all possibility of a doubt, in the truth of the angel's prediction, by
what she had now heard from her dear relation, proceeded with a heart full of
gratitude and holy joy, to bless, and praise, and magnify the name of the Lord,
for his great goodness to her, in appointing her to be the mother of the
Messiah.

AFTER three months stay with her dear relative, the virgin Mary returned to
her own city Nazareth; and being now the fourth month, her pregnancy plainly
appeared; which gave great concern to Joseph, her espoused husband. But though
he apprehended she had been seduced, yet having a sincere affection for her,
and being of a kind and compassionate disposition, he was not willing to
proceed to the severity of the law; which in this case, was no less than her
being stoned to death at the door of her father's house. But as he had just
reason to suppose that her honor could not be vindicated, and being a strict
observer of the law, he was not willing to take her to his bed; but stood
determined to break the marriage contract as privately as possible. While with
great vexation and trouble, he was ruminating on these things, the angel of the
Lord appeared to him in a dream, and informed him of the nature of his wife's
pregnancy; giving him, at the same time, full satisfaction concerning her
innocence. Fear not, said the heavenly vision, Joseph thou son of David, to
take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her, is of the
Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name
JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sins. It was with unspeakable
joy, that the good man received this information; and, not hesitating a moment
respecting the truth of the heavenly message, he took the lovely maid home to
his house. But the evangelist informs us, that he knew her not, till she had
brought forth her first born Son.

WHILE these things were in agitation at Nazareth, Elizabeth the wife of
Zacharias the priest, and relative of the favored virgin, having completed the
full time of her pregnancy, was delivered of a son. The reproach of her
barrenness being thus removed, her neighbors and friends rejoiced with her;
the whole family smiled at the event, and every heart was glad. On the eighth
day, when they attended on the sacred rite of circumcision, the relations
proposed that he should be named Zacharias, after his father; but the mother
informed them that his name must be John. All the guests wondered at this,
because it was a name never known in the family, and for the decision of the
affair, they applied to the father. The good man being dumb since the
appearance of the angel who predicted the birth of the child, could not inform
them, but made signs for a writing table, and wrote, His name is John. The
relations wondered at this, but more at observing the old man's dumbness to
cease from that moment, whose voice, rising clearer and stronger for having
been so long suppressed, raised loud strains of joy and gladness, and lofty
praises to the God of Israel, for his great goodness, in remembering and
visiting his people; and, full of prophetic rapture, turning to his infant son,
And thou child, said he, shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways; to give knowledge of
salvation unto his people; by the remission of their sins, through the tender
mercy of our God; whereby the day spring from on high has visited us, to give
light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our
feet into the way of peace. Such were the circumstances which attended the
birth of the forerunner of our great Redeemer; the report of which soon spread
through the hill country of Judea, and various were the conceptions of the
people concerning the future greatness of the child. The infant soon grew
strong and robust, he was remarkably simple and abstemious in his diet, plain
and careless in his dress, and addicted to solitude and contemplation. Sacred
history gives us no information what afterward became of his parents; but
there is a tradition that the mother fled into the deserts with her infant son,
to preserve him from the rage of Herod; and that the father was slain in the
outer court of the temple, by the orders of that tyrant; and is that Zacharias
which Christ mentions, whose blood was shed between the temple and the altar.

CHAPTER IV.
The Birth of CHRIST, with all the various Circumstances that attended it, viz.
An Angel brings the News thereof to the Shepherds; the heavenly Host praise
God; the Shepherds, finding it to be as the Angel had said, glorify God; and
the Circumcision of CHRIST.

THE great King of the creation and righteous Governor of the universe, having
fixed in his eternal counsels, both the time and the place where his only son
was to be born; so ordered the affairs of the world, as to bring his great
predictions and gracious designs to pass. And as he overrules the counsels of
princes, and determines the actions of men, so as to answer the wise ends of
his government, and accomplish the designs of his grace; so in this present
instance, there is a remarkable manifestation of divine wisdom and power
cooperating to bring about this great event. The holy Virgin and her husband
dwelt at Nazareth; and, according to the prophet's prediction, the Messiah was
to be born at Bethlehem, which was at a considerable distance; but to bring the
great prediction to pass, Divine Providence so ordered it, that about three
years before the time of our Redeemer's birth, a decree passed at Rome, by the
order of the emperor Augustus, that a survey should be taken, and a register
made, of the persons estates and wealth, contained in his vast empire. This
survey seems not to have been taken with an immediate design of taxation, but
rather from views of ambition, or that the emperor might know the number and
riches of his subjects; for there were no taxes gathered by the Romans till
eleven or twelve years after this, when Archelius the son of Herod, was deposed
for his tyranny and oppression, and Judea reduced into the form of a Roman
province; for Herod, and the rest of the tributary kings, received the taxes of
their subjects, and paid such tribute to Rome as was stipulated between them
and the emperor. This survey, having been carried through various provinces and
kingdoms which were subject to Rome, in the two years past, was now making in
Judea; and every family received orders from Herod to repair to their own city,
to give an account of their real or personal estates, and there to be
registered. Joseph and Mary his wife, being both of the family of David, were
obliged, on this occasion, to take a journey to the ancient city of Bethlehem.
The evangelists Matthew and Luke have inserted in their Gospels, the genealogy
of JESUS CHRIST, in which there is so great a variation, that it is with reason
concluded, that Matthew gives us the genealogy of Joseph, and Luke of the
Virgin Mary; that it may appear they were both of the house and lineage of
David; one rising through Solomon, and the other through Nathan, another son of
that prince. Though the holy Virgin was great with child, and near the time of
her delivery, she could not be excused from this long journey. The town of
Bethlehem was crowded on this occasion; every inn, and every house of
hospitable entertainment was full; the extraordinary persons who are the
subjects of our present attention, made no great appearance in the world, and
could not command the best accommodations: and while those, whose superior
affluence commanded respect, took up the best apartments of the inns, the
mother of the great Messiah was content to lodge in a stable; and there, having
accomplished the full time of her pregnancy, she was delivered of her heavenly
son. Some have supposed, that, as she had conceived by the mighty power of God,
she brought forth her son without pain, or common assistance. The stable in
which our great Redeemer was born, is said to be a cave cut out of a rock; and
it is not unlikely that he was born in the night. In this situation the holy
virgin, having brought forth her son, wrapped the infant in swaddling clothes,
and, having no better accommodations, laid him in a manger. What an amazing
instance of condescension was this! The Son of the Eternal God! The Heir of all
things! The Darling of the skies! Who was worshipped by angels, and held in
veneration equal with heaven's Great Supreme; to become man; to take human
nature upon him in its most helpless and feeble state; to lay aside his starry
crown, and all the glories of his heavenly dignity, and become a suckling
child! One would have thought, that when the great King of the universe
condescended to become man, and appear in this world, that he would have been
received by the inhabitants of the earth with tokens of the highest regard; and
that every thing great and good, every thing grand and noble, would have been
prepared to honor and accommodate the mighty prince. It might have been
particularly expected, that the nation which he chose for his residence, that
people whom he condescended to make his countrymen, would have received him
with the highest acclamations, and warmest tokens of honor and respect. But
how contrary to this were the councils of heaven! how opposite to this, the
appearance of our great Redeemer! When great princes are born, the city of
their birth rings with acclamations, and the illuminated night shines like the
day. But when our exalted Redeemer was born, all was silent, all was still. Not
the poor peasant, who first draws breath in the homely cottage, steals into the
world less unobserved, than did the Son of God. He, in all probability was born
in the night, perhaps without light, or by the glimmering of a winking taper.
When great princes are born, they are wrapped in fine linen, and adorned with
mantles of purples fringed with gold: the floors of their apartments are
decorated with splendid carpets, the windows are adorned with noble hangings,
and they lie on a bed of state, which shines with crimson and with gold. But
our great Redeemer, and Savior of mankind, the greatest Prince that ever was
born into the world, received no honor, no tokens of respect; was received
with no demonstrations of joy; had no splendid apartment, no rich decorations:
but was brought forth in a stable, without any person to put on the poor habit
prepared for him, but his virgin mother, who herself wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger: but though our glorious Redeemer was
received, by the inhabitants of the earth, with no tokens of respect, or
demonstrations of joy; though he was brought forth in the incommodious limits
of a stable, and his companions were the beasts of the field; he was not
neglected or disregarded by the bright natives of the heavenly world. A
squadron of shining cherubs was dispatched from the eternal throne, to proclaim
the great event, to congratulate the wondering world on their great Deliverer's
birth, and proclaim the approach of the exalted Prince of peace. But this
report was to be made; not to the great Sanhedrim; not to the learned doctors
of the law; not to the chief priests and elders: but to a company of poor
shepherds, who were watching their flocks by night, in the fields of Bethlehem.
The rays of heavenly glory which attended this shining train, breaking through
the darkness of night, alarmed and terrified the artless swains. But one of the
angels called to them from on high: Fear not, for behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people: for unto you is born this
day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall
be a sign unto you, ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying
in a manger. No sooner had the angel uttered these words, than the rest of the
squadron, who attended him down the skies, appeared; a flood of light illumined
the whole concave of heaven, and angels songs were heard on earthly ground.
Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will toward men, was the
strain they sung. And, having ended the celestial concert, they vanished out
of sight. Soon as the angelic host was departed, the wondering shepherds
repaired to Bethlehem, to seek the heavenly infant, whose birth had in this
glorious manner been related. And, as the angels had declared, they found the
holy child, attended only by his virgin mother, and his supposed father Joseph;
the babe was wrapped in the meanest clothes, and laid in a manger. These
circumstances answering so perfectly to the heavenly declaration, confirmed the
affected shepherds, who, with the most ardent joy, adored the holy infant, and
related to his wondering parents, what a glorious appearance they had seen, and
what great things the angels had related concerning the child. The Shepherds
then, with exultation and joy, returned to their flocks, declaring to all men,
the great things which they had seen, and praising God for his condescending
goodness, in this unexpected manifestation of his great designs, to persons so
low and inconsiderable in the world. When the shepherds were departed, the
virgin mother of the Lord of life recollected, with adoration and praise, the
various concurring testimonies of the divinity of her son; and treasured them
up in her heart, with full expectation of being accomplished in him, which had
been predicted by the prophets concerning the Redeemer of Israel.

WHEN the eighth day was arrived, since the birth of the holy child, he was
circumcised in conformity to the command of the law of Moses; and received the
name of JESUS, according to the direction of the angel, who predicted his
conception and birth.

CHAPTER V.
CHRIST presented in the Temple. The Adoration of the Eastern Sages. The
Departure of the Holy family into Egypt. The murder of the Innocents. The Death
of Herod, and CHRIST's return to Nazareth.

THE holy Virgin and her pious husband Joseph, having performed all that the
law required in the sacred rite of circumcision, and it being necessary, that
the heavenly infant should, at the end of forty days, be presented in the
temple; it is reasonable to suppose, that they remained at Bethlehem till those
days were accomplished; for Jerusalem was but about six miles from Bethlehem,
but a much greater distance from Nazareth, the place of their residence. The
days of her purification being fulfilled, the virgin mother, according to the
rules prescribed by the law, accompanied by her husband, brought her young son
to the temple: she waited in the outer court, while the two turtle-doves,
which, conformable to her mean condition, she had brought for her offering,
were presented by the priest as an oblation to the Lord; she was then admitted
into the inner court, where the priest received the blessed infant from his
mother's arms, and presented him to the Lord, at the altar of burnt offering;
and received the five shekels, which the law exacted of every family, without
regard to their circumstances, for the redemption of a firstborn son. The God,
whom Israel expected, then suddenly came to his temple: and the glory of the
latter house was greater than the former.

WHILE these sacred rites were performing, a pious and venerable old man came
into the temple, whose name was Simeon: he had long waited, and earnestly
prayed for the redemption of Israel; and it had been revealed to him, by the
spirit of God, that before he died, he should see the exalted Messiah.
Accordingly the spirit which now directed his steps to the temple, impressed on
his mind a clear and strong conviction, that the infant, now presenting at the
altar, was this glorious person. Full of heavenly transport, he took the holy
blessed infant in his arms and addressed the throne of that God, who had thus
highly favored him, in such language as this: Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people: a light to
enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. It may be supposed,
that these words were heard with wonder and joy, by the parents of the holy
child: for it must certainly seem strange to them, that the good old man should
be acquainted with the great things which concerned the heavenly infant; and
they doubtless had reason to wonder how he came by the information: but turning
to the virgin mother, he added, Behold, this child is set for the fall and
rising again of many in Israel. In these remarkable words, the venerable old
man prophesied the opposition which the Gospel of CHRIST should meet with in
the world; and showed that the destruction of many would be the consequence of
their final unbelief and disobedience; yet, at the same time, many would rise
out of that dreadful condition, into which they were fallen by their sins, by
being enabled to believe in the Son of God, and apply to their souls the
benefits of his great salvation. The holy prophet proceeded further to inform
the mother of our Lord, that her son should be set up as a mark, at which the
unbelieving and disobedient should level all the darts of their infernal fury;
and that the sorrows that she would feel on that account, would be exceedingly
cutting, and painful: Yea, said he, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul,
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. The prophecy was remarkably
fulfilled, when the holy Virgin, about thirty-three years after this, stood by
the cross, and, in all the bitterness of grief, beheld the sufferings of her
expiring son. Various have been the conjectures concerning this good old man
Simeon; but who he was, is not decided with any degree of certainty. Some have
supposed him to be a priest; others have imagined he was Simeon the Just, a
great person who bore an excellent character amongst the Jews; others have
concluded him to be the son of Hillel, a famous doctor in the Sanhedrim. But,
as the evangelists are silent in these particulars, they must be left without
any further enquiry.

THE testimony of this great person was confirmed by that of an aged matron,
named Anna, whom the evangelist calls a prophetess; and declares, that she
departed not from the temple, but served God, with fastings and prayers, night
and day. The meaning of which is, that she had dedicated herself to the service
of God, and constantly attended on his worship in the temple. She had been
married in her youth, and lived seven years with her husband: after his death,
she continued in a state of widowhood, and was now far advanced in years. She
came into the temple, while the aged Simeon held our great Redeemer in his
arms; and, filled with heavenly rapture, blessed and praised the Lord for his
infinite mercy, in remembering his people; and spoke of the heavenly child to
all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Every thing which the law
required concerning the redemption and presenting the holy child, being
performed, Joseph and his family returned to Galilee, and dwelt in their own
city Nazareth. But, it is supposed that they did not long remain there, but
settling their affairs, they soon returned to Bethlehem, and, with the heavenly
infant, dwelt there.

WHILE the holy family dwelt at Bethlehem, there came to Jerusalem, a company
of eastern philosophers, or wise men. There had been a tradition spread all
over the eastern nations, that a great king was to be born to the Jews, who
would gain the empire of the world. This tradition is supposed to have arisen
from the Jews, who were scattered throughout the various nations of the East;
and Zoroaster, the reformer of the Persian religion, said to be a servant to
the prophet Daniel, copied into his book several passages out of the Old
Testament, and cannot be supposed to have omitted the famous prophecies
concerning the kingdom of the Messiah. At the time of our Redeemer's birth, a
remarkable star, or luminous appearance, was seen in those countries, which
induced the learned men of those times to conclude, that this splendid luminary
denoted the birth of that extraordinary person: and so fully were they
satisfied that their conclusion was true, that a company of learned men
actually came to Jerusalem on this errand. Whether they were princes, priests,
or philosophers; how many there were in number; from what country they came, or
how many days they arrived at Jerusalem after the birth of CHRIST, are
questions which have puzzled the learned in all ages, but have never yet
obtained a satisfactory answer. However, it is a certain matter of fact, that,
when Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, in the days of Herod the king, there
came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born king
of the Jews? For we have seen his star in the East, and are come to worship
him. The appearance of these persons, the report, and the inquiry they made,
alarmed and terrified the jealous old tyrant: for though by reason of his
years, and ill state of health, he could not expect long to hold the crown; he
could not bear the thought of a prince being born that was destined to that
high dignity. And, as it had been his constant practice to murder every one who
had a greater right to the crown than himself, he soon concluded, that the
young child, when found, should add to the number of those murders he had been
guilty of, to rear his throne, and to support it: but he craftily concealed his
wicked design, spoke to the strangers fair, and summoned the Sanhedrim to
answer their enquiry, where the Messiah was to be born. He soon received their
answer, and was informed, that Bethlehem in Judea, was the place where CHRIST
was to be born: for thus it was written by the prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in
the land of Judah, art not the least amongst the princes of Judah: for out of
thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel. The gloomy
tyrant, satisfied with this reply, sent for the noble strangers; and seeming
well pleased with the event, diligently inquired after every circumstance which
might throw light on the affair; and sent them to Bethlehem, desiring them,
when they had found the child, to return to Jerusalem, and direct him to the
place of his abode; and he pretended, that he would wait on him himself, and
appoint him such honors as his high dignity required. The wise men received
this intelligence with great satisfaction, and gladly set out for Bethlehem;
when, to their unspeakable joy, they saw, going before them, the same luminous
appearance which they had seen in their own country: this glorious star stopped
at Bethlehem, and stood directly over the house where the heavenly infant was.
Thus directed by divine wisdom and power, they approached the sacred babe with
adoration and joy, and having fallen down and worshipped him, they presented
their offerings of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. But when they departed, they
returned not to Jerusalem, but went to their own country another way; for the
Lord had warned them in a dream, not to return to Herod with the information he
desired.

HERE may be observed the particular care of Divine Providence, in the
preservation of the holy child; for Herod, who was one of the most crafty
tyrants that ever existed, did not act in this case with his usual
circumspection. He had no other notion of the Messiah, but that of his sitting
up a temporal kingdom, and supposed that this child would drive both himself
and his family from the throne; and on this account he had resolved to put the
infant to death. But is it not strange that he should not have went himself, or
sent some of his officers, or spies along with the wise men, and prevented the
escape of his destined prey? The character and conduct of Herod in almost every
case, is contrary to this: but the great Governor of the universe, when he
pleases can cast confusion on the councils of princes, and preserve the
innocent from their wicked designs.

WE are not to suppose, that the satisfying the curiosity of these noble
strangers, was the only end which Providence had in view, when it directed
them, in this extraordinary manner, to the place of our Redeemer's birth, and
inspired them with such sentiments concerning him. Several great and important
ends were answered by this visit; it showed to succeeding generations, beyond
the possibility of a doubt, that there was an expectation, amongst the heathen
nations, that a great king would at this time appear amongst the Jews; and it
is manifest from hence, that there were prophecies amongst the Gentiles, which
inspired them with a constant hope, that some great things would be done for
mankind, by this exalted person. And it is to be supposed, that these great
men, when they returned to their own country, published abroad through various
nations, the tidings of what they had seen: and filling the world with the
expectations of the kingdom of the Messiah, prepared the various nations for
the reception of his glorious gospel. Thus, while the Jews continued in the
blindness of obstinacy and unbelief, vast multitudes of the Heathens received
the gospel, rejoiced in the truth, and dwelt under the benign influence of the
great Sun of Righteousness. It may further be noted, that the coming of these
philosophers to Jerusalem at this time, on such an errand, produced the
determination of the Jewish council, that it was the language of the prophets,
that Bethlehem was destined by heaven to be the place of our Redeemer's birth.
And it may further be observed, that the seasonable presents made to the holy
family, by these beneficent and learned strangers, enabled the good man to
support his family in Egypt, where they soon after this were sent by divine
direction, to escape the murdering fury of that execrable tyrant Herod.

THE wise men being departed to their own country, the angel of the Lord
appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his
mother; and flee into Egypt, and be there until I bring thee word: for Herod
will seek the young child to destroy him. Joseph immediately obeyed the divine
command, and, for the greater security set out from Bethlehem in the night: and
taking a journey of near two hundred miles, he settled with his family in
Egypt, and there he remained till the tyrant was dead. Herod, in the mean time,
having waited for the return of the wise men in vain, and knowing he was hated
by the Jews, was so jealous, discontented, and wicked, that he mistrusted every
body of plotting against him; and, perhaps, concluding, that the Jews might
conceal this child till a proper opportunity should offer for them to bring him
forth, was full of rage, and actuated by the most infernal cruelty, sent his
soldiers to Bethlehem, and the adjacent country, with orders to kill all the
young children that were under two years old. The troops too punctually
executed the orders of the detested tyrant; and it is asserted by historians,
that fourteen thousand young children fell in this bloody massacre, and Judah's
streams ran infant blood. The horrid cruelty of this transaction is such, that
it is almost sufficient to stagger our belief. But if we consider the conduct
and character of the man, that he was grown old in murder and cruelty; that he
reared his throne in blood; that he was guilty of the most horrid murders to
support it; and at this very time, was most deplorably miserable by quarrels in
his family, and was constantly apprehensive of plots against his life: if we
consider that he had no friend he could trust, but was jealous of all about
him, and thought his own sons conspired to poison him; but we shall not wonder
at any degrees of wickedness, which such a man, in such a situation, might be
capable of committing. But this horrid scene, as it might be expected, was soon
followed by peculiar and distinguished vengeance, which burst on the impious
tyrant, and laid him low in death. In the utmost agonies of mind, and the
acutest torments of body, he soon after this expired. He ordered the execution
of his own son but five days before his death, and he commande^ all the
nobility of the Jewish nation to b^ put to death, as soon as it was known that
he had ceased to breathe. But the persons whom he trusted to execute this last
order, not being so wicked as himself, the noble prisoners were set at liberty.

THIS affecting and terrible slaughter of the innocents, is pathetically
described by the evangelist, in referring to a passage in the prophet Jeremiah.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, in Rama
was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning; Rachel
weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not.

Joseph receiving his Instructions from an Angel (...) fly with JESUS and Mary
into Egypt.


The FLIGHT into EGYPT. Matthew. Chapter II Vr. 14

When he (...) ^ook the young child and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypt.



SOME time after the tyrant was dead, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph,
in Egypt, in a dream, and commanded him to take the young child and his mother,
and go into the land of Israel: at the same time informing him, that they were
dead who sought the young child's life. The good man, without hesitation,
obeyed the heavenly vision, and returning to his native country, designed to
have settled in Judea, probably at Bethlehem. But when he heard that Archelaus,
the son of Herod, succeeded his father in Judea, and he being a prince of a
cruel disposition, Joseph judged it imprudent to settle in his dominions; and
hearing that Antipas, another of Herod's sons, but more mild and peaceable in
his temper, was governor of Galilee, he, by divine direction, went thither, and
took up his abode at Nazareth, the former place of his residence, that it might
be fulfilled, the evangelists inform us, which was spoken by the prophet, He
shall be called a Nazarene.

THE adversaries of our religion have not neglected to remark, that there is no
such prophecy as is here referred to; but very probably, it might be in some
prophecy which is not transmitted to us: or, if the very word^ are not to be
found, the thing intended, is the frequent language of the prophets; for,
whenever CHRIST is mentioned in the gospels, as called a Nazarene, it is always
looked upon as a term of reproach; and how applicable this is to the language
of the prophet Isaiah, He was despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief; we hid as it were our faces from him; he was
despised, and we esteemed him not.

CHAPTER VI.
The Infancy of CHRIST and his disputing with the Doctors in the Temple.

THE account of our Lord's childhood and youth is very slightly touched on in
the sacred writings. How he was employed from his infancy, till he arrived at
thirty years of age, is not to be found in any authentic history. This period
includes the greatest part ^f his life, which is absolutely unknown to the
Christian world. St. Luke, who is the most particular in his account of our
Lord's younger years, only tells us, that the child grew, and waxed strong in
spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him. And, speaking of
his life at his father's house at Nazareth, he informs us, that he was subject
to his parents, and that he increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with
God and man.

BUT, notwithstanding the silence of the sacred writings, we are not to suppose
that the heavenly youth was subject to the common frailties of humanity, the
follies of childhood and youth. It may naturally be concluded, from what is
above declared, that the holy child was remarkable for a native grandeur and
majestic modesty in his deportment; that his temper was the most amiable, not
peevish and pettish, but all meekness, kindness, condescension, and goodness;
and that his mind was peculiarly turned to seriousness and contemplation. It is
reasonable to suppose, that he was possessed of the most amazing faculties and
powers of mind; a strong retentive memory; a lively imagination; a prodigious
understanding; a penetrating judgment; and a remarkable solidity and
sedateness, which led him to the most sincere and regular piety, and spiritual
exercises of every kind. It is reasonable to suppose, that he spent much time
in private retirement, and in divine meditations, and spiritual converse with
his heavenly Father; and that he behaved, in every respect, in such a manner to
his friends and relations, as made him the most amiable child, in the age in
which he lived. It cannot be learned from the evangelists that he had a liberal
education; every account we have of the condition of his parents in the world,
conspires to prove that they were in low circumstances. Joseph was by trade a
carpenter. JESUS abode with his parents till his public ministry commenced,
and, no doubt, worked with his supposed father at his trade. He is called in
one place in the gospels, the carpenter; and in another the carpenter's son: so
that it may be concluded that he had no other learning than what his parents
themselves taught him, and what he might gather at the synagogue by attending
to the reading of the law and the prophets. But it may be learned from the
words of the evangelist above quoted, that the favor of God toward him was
very apparent, and that the holy Spirit with which he was filled, appeared in
his early youth. The wonderful advances he made in wisdom, the visible strength
and steadiness of his mind, and the seriousness of his countenance, beyond what
ever was seen before in one so young, were plain vindications of his divinity,
and were every day improving and increasing.

IT was the general custom of the Jews to take a journey to Jerusalem, and
annually attend the feast of the passover. The parents of our Great Redeemer,
with their numerous relations and friends, when the holy child was twelve years
old, went to the capital of the kingdom on this occasion. Whether the child
JESUS had been at Jerusalem before, is not certainly known: it is generally
concluded that he had not. Having remained seven days with them, during their
attendance at the temple, he separated himself from the company, and, when they
set out on their return to their own country, stayed behind. They proceeded on
their first day's journey, and did not miss him till night, supposing he might
be in company with some of their relations, who had been at the holy city on
the same occasion with themselves, and were now returning. But inquiring
amongst all their kindred and friends, they learnt that he was not in the
company. Full of anxiety and distress, they returned to Jerusalem; and searched
every place in the city where he was likely to be found. Two days they sought
him in vain. On the third day, they found him in the outer court of the temple,
amongst the learned doctors of the law, both hearing them, and asking them
questions.

IN the outer court of the temple, called the court of the people, were several
chambers belonging to the priests; and here the doctors of the law assembled at
the feast of the passover, and at other times, to teach the people; and not
only expounded the Mosaical institutions, but debated with one another,
concerning the difficulties that occurred. Such youths as applied themselves to
learning, were permitted to converse with the assembly; and received such
instructions as were necessary to enable them to pursue their respective
studies. At this assembly of the doctors, Jesus presented himself, and not only
gave attention to their debates, and proposed such questions, as naturally
arose from the subjects under consideration; but propounded several difficult
questions of his own, which, when the doctors could not clear up, he expounded
himself to the satisfaction and surprise of all present. The learned doctors,
with the utmost astonishment, heard the young child manifest such wisdom and
deep understanding, as not only exceeded men, but such men as were deputed the
most learned and judicious amongst them. No doubt there was something
remarkably majestic and amiably divine in his appearance; and as he led the
discourse himself, we may reasonably suppose, that the question which he
debated with the doctors, had reference to some prophecy concerning the
Messiah; which he threw such light upon, and explained in such a manner, as
raised the admiration and astonishment of all that heard him. It is certainly
very strange, that the admiration which the holy child excited in this public
assembly, by his understanding and pertinent answers, did not excite some
further inquiry after him. But, it is to be supposed, that the coming of such
mean persons as Joseph and Mary, who appeared to be his parents, very much
abated the regard which the learned doctors of the law would otherwise have had
for so wonderful a child; but things which appear low in the world, are always
despised by those lazy inquirers after truth, who seek the praise of man, and
are only candidates for popular applause.

JOSEPH and Mary, who had been seeking the holy child with the utmost
apprehensions and concern, found him in this situation with equal surprise and
joy. And there is no doubt but JESUS, when he perceived the approach of his
parents, arose and went with them immediately; taking this occasion to withdraw
himself from the admiring assembly. His mother was very much affected with the
appearance of her son, and the place and company in which she had found him.
She gently asked him, Why he had left them in this manner? rather inquiring
into the reason of his staying behind, than designing to blame or chide him:
for, no doubt, she perceived that he was under divine direction; yet proceeding
to inform him, that her husband and herself had been extremely concerned for
him, and had sought him three days with the utmost anxiety and grief. The holy
child, with the most amiable meekness, informed her, that they need not have
wearied themselves with seeking him, nor their minds with anxiety and care, for
he was under the protection of his Father, on whose business he had been
employed. The expressions which the heavenly child used on this occasion, were
not clearly understood by his wondering parents; but his mother, on this, as on
every other remarkable occurrence in the life and conduct of her son, took
notice of his words, and treasured them up in her heart: and the child JESUS,
having given this early and remarkable instance of his diligence and ready
obedience in the work in which he was to be hereafter employed, now proceeded
to give an open and manifest instance of his duty to his parents; for he
returned with them to Nazareth, and was subject to them as before. Here he
remained till he arrived at the age of thirty years, and made wonderful
improvements in wisdom and knowledge, being favored by God in an extraordinary
manner, and highly esteemed, reverenced, and loved by all that knew him.

THERE is nothing expressly recorded in the evangelists, relating to our Lord's
life and conversation, from twelve years old, to the time when he entered on
his public ministry, which was at the age of thirty; but from several passages
of Scripture, various circumstances may be collected. It is plain, from his
parents seeking him amongst his relations and acquaintance, when he was left
behind at Jerusalem, that he was of a familiar, friendly disposition; that he
had no objection to company and conversation, and that he lived in familiarity
and friendship with his neighbors and relations: it is also evident, that,
though the learned doctors, and the people in the temple, were filled with the
highest admiration at the abilities and knowledge of JESUS, when a child; and,
though afterward, he, no doubt, gave to his mother and some few particular
friends, plain proofs of his heavenly wisdom; yet his conversation with the
common people was such, as cast a veil over his divinity; and the general
course of his conduct and converse with the common people was such, that no
noise was made about him, nor any great things expected from him in the Jewish
nation, nor even in his own city. And it is to be supposed, that his mean
appearance in the world, not a little contributed to prevent his being remarked
and esteemed for those excellent qualities, which must certainly be apparent in
him; for we find he was afterward reproached in his own city, for pretending
to teach them, when they knew the meanness of his extraction, and his
illiterate education: Whence, they cried, has this man this wisdom, and these
mighty works? Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother named Mary,
and his brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are
they not all with us? Whence then has this man all these things.

AND it may further be remarked, that the blessed JESUS did not give himself
any airs of superiority amongst his brethren and friends; but meekly
condescended to attend to the meanest employment, assisting the necessities of
his parents with his labor, and not being desirous of popular applause. For as
it is to be supposed, that he weekly attended on the reading the law and the
prophets in the synagogue, was it not surprising that he could hear the
erroneous expositions, which, no doubt were frequently made, and remain silent
at Nazareth, after he had disputed with the learned doctors in the temple, and
silenced the wise men of Jerusalem? Herein appears the most profound humility,
and the most consummate wisdom of our Lord, in concealing his superior
knowledge and understanding, when he might have gained the admiration and
applause of his townsmen, and have been justly revered and esteemed by all. It
is supposed that Joseph did not live till CHRIST began his public ministry,
because he is not mentioned in the Gospels, after John began to baptize. Some
of the ancient writers have pretended to inform us what was the particular sort
of carpentry which Joseph carried on: they say, it was making plows, yokes, and
instruments of husbandry for his neighbors. And it is not unlikely, that our
Lord lived with his mother, and assisted her in carrying on the trade, after
her husband's death: and hence, it is supposed, he is called by St. Mark, The
carpenter, the son of Mary.

CHAPTER VII.
Of the Death of Elizabeth, and the Murder of Zacharias. The preaching of John
the Baptist; his office, and Manner of Living: He baptiseth in Jordan, and
rebukes the Pharisees. CHRIST is baptized, and receives a Witness from
Heaven. John the Baptist imprisoned and beheaded by Herod, at the instigation
of Herodias.

WE must now pass over, in the history of the life of CHRIST, a period of
eighteen years; all the account the evangelists give of our Lord, during this
time, is, that he dwelt at Nazareth, and was subject to his parents. But,
having passed over this time in silence, all the evangelists agree in giving
the history of his entrance on his public ministry, and the preparatory
preaching of his great forerunner John the Baptist.

WHEN our Lord was about fourteen years of age, the emperor Augustus died,
after a reign of about forty years. Great was the grief of the whole empire, at
his death, for he was a prince of such a disposition, and reigned with such
wisdom, justice, and goodness, as gained him the love of his subjects. He was
succeeded by Tiberius, the son of his wife Livia, by a former husband. Tiberius
was admitted to a share in the government two or three years before the death
of Augustus, and now succeeded without opposition. He was a prince of a
disposition vastly different to that of his predecessor, and governed the
empire in such a manner, as rendered him justly hated by his subjects.
Archelaus, the son of Herod the Great, had been deposed from the government of
Judea about three years before the death of Augustus, and that country was
reduced into the form of a Roman province. Rufus, who was governor of Judea,
when the emperor died, was recalled in the second year of Tiberius, and
Valerius Gratus was sent to succeed him. He, having continued in Judea about
eleven years, was recalled, and succeeded by Pontius Pilate, a man of a fierce,
irreconcilable spirit, and of a cruel, covetous disposition, too much like his
master Tiberius.

HEROD Antipas, the son of Herod the Great, was tetrarch of Galilee; which
dignity he had enjoyed twenty-eight years. His brother Philip was tetrarch of
Iturea; and Lysanias of Abilene. The dignity of the high priesthood was vested
in Caiphas, the son-in-law of Annas, who formerly had held that high office,
and now was reverenced by the people as high priest, and probably assisted his
son-in-law in the execution of the sacred duties of the priesthood.

SUCH was the state of the Jewish nation at the time of the opening of the
glorious gospel; for in the first year of the government of Pontius Pilate, the
word of God came unto John, the Son of Zacharias, in the wilderness. The sacred
writings have been silent, with regard to the manner in which this
extraordinary man passed the former time of his life; but there is an ancient
tradition, that Elizabeth, hearing of the terrible slaughter which that
execrable tyrant Herod made among the young children at Bethlehem, fled into
the wilderness, to secure her child from his murdering cruelty and rage: and
there attended him with all the care and tenderness of an affectionate mother.
The child was about eighteen months old at the time of her flight, and about
forty days after her abode in the desert, she died. His father Zacharias, next
time he officiated in the temple, was slain by Herod, because he would not
discover the place of his son's retreat. The helpless infant, being thus
deprived of all assistance from his parents, the Lord, who had a great work for
him to accomplish, had mercy on him; and sent an angel to be his defender and
support, till he was able to provide for himself. Whether this tradition is
true or false, cannot be ascertained; but it is a certain fact, asserted by the
evangelists, that he abode in the desert till the day of his showing unto
Israel.

SOME learned men, who have been at great pains in endeavoring to fix the
precise time when the prophet John began his public ministry, have fixed it to
the month of October, and at the time of the proclamation of a year of jubilee.
They say, that his preaching began on the great day of atonement, when the
high priest went into the holy of holies. This was a particular day of
penitence, and, it is said in the law, whosoever did not afflict his soul,
should be cut off from the people. This day is supposed to answer to our
nineteenth of October, and was the day whereon, by the solemn sounding of
trumpets, the thirtieth jubilee of the Jews was proclaimed, which was the last
they ever saw.

THIS extraordinary person, in his appearance, and his way of life, very much
resembled the ancient prophets, particularly Elijah, to whom he had been
compared in prophecy. The coarseness of his clothing, and the hardness of his
fare, were very remarkable: his garment was made of camel's hair, probably the
sackcloth so often mentioned in the sacred writings, to be worn by penitents
and mourners; and his food, the wild productions of the wilderness: locusts and
wild honey, were his only provisions, and his drink, the clear cold water which
bubbled from the mossy spring. In this situation, he began the work of God, and
preached in the wilderness of Judea, Repent! for the kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. The remarkable austerity of his life, and the air and appearance of the
old prophets, which he assumed, commanded reverence from the people; and his
whole demeanor, being so particularly adapted to the doctrine of repentance
which he taught, engaged the attention of the public. Nor is it any wonder,
that great notice should be taken of so remarkable a person, at a time when the
whole nation earnestly expected the appearance of the Messiah. And as he
preached the necessity of repentance, because the kingdom of heaven was at
hand, and had a commission from God, to baptize in water, those who confessed
their sins, and adhered to his ministry, great numbers of all ranks, sects, and
characters, surrounded him in the desert, and, confessing their unworthiness
and sinfulness, were baptized by him in the river Jordan.

JOHN, when he began his ministry did not come to Jerusalem, or the adjacent
cities of Judea, but continued about the banks of the noted river Jordan,
which, on many accounts, seemed proper to favor the designs of his preachings;
for there had been so many wonderful things transacted near this sacred stream,
that it naturally prepared the minds of the people to expect something
extraordinary. Near the banks of this river it was that the prophet Elijah, who
was the type of John the Baptist, was taken in a fiery chariot up to heaven;
and what could be more natural, than to see the great person, who was the Elias
spoken of by Malachi, discover the spirit and power of that great ancient
prophet, near the stream which formerly was divided by the stroke of his mantle.

A circumstance which greatly surprised the Baptist, was the great numbers of
Pharisees and Sadducees who attended his ministry, and came to his baptism. The
Pharisees, he knew, pretended to the highest degree of sanctity and holiness of
life; and the Sadducees believed there would be no future state of rewards and
punishments. It was therefore surprising, that either of these parties should
seek after remission of sins, for the former pretended to have no sins that
required pardon, and the other nothing to expect after death, as the
consequence of them. Nor can we suppose that John, when he began his ministry,
expected to see the whole nation so much affected with his threatenings as was
really the case; for he knew that the common people had a great dependence on
God's covenant with Abraham, and expected to find favor with the supreme
Governor and Judge of the universe, on that account: to check their daring
presumption, and discourage every hope of divine favor, while they lived
ungodly and immoral lives, he addressed them in this alarming language, O
generation of vipers! who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring
forth fruits therefore worthy of repentance, and begin not to say we have
Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to
raise up children to Abraham. And now the axe is laid unto the root of the
tree: every tree therefore, which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down
and cast into the fire. The Baptist thus demolished every hope of divine
acceptance arising from the covenant God made with Abraham; and proclaimed to
the world, that the glories of his kingdom would shortly be revealed, and a way
of acceptance opened, to which a hearty and sincere repentance of sin was a
necessary preparative. The awful manner in which this great man pronounced
these solemn truths, alarmed and terrified the nation; and a mixed multitude
crowded around him, full of anxiety and trouble, inquiring what they should do.
In answer to this, he informed them, that an hearty and sincere repentance of
their sins, should be accompanied with acts of mercy and benevolence. He that
has two coats, said he, let him impart to him that has none; and he that has
meat, let him do likewise. Amongst the multitudes which surrounded this
wonderful man, were numbers of publicans, who were collectors of the Roman
taxes. They were, on that account, odious to the Jews, and had rendered
themselves more so, by injustice and extortion. As theirs was a particular
case, they applied to him for particular advice, and his answer was, Exact no
more than that which is appointed you. Similar to their case, was that of the
soldiers; who being men trained up to cruelty, slaughter, and all the terrors
of war, and whose pay was so scanty, that they were very apt to plunder for
subsistence; they were exceedingly terrified at the awful vengeance denounced
by the prophet; and, with the utmost seriousness and concern, inquired of him
what they should do; to which he replied, Do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely, and be content with your wages.

THE Baptist commenced his preaching six months before CHRIST was baptized, and
vast multitudes resorted to him from Jerusalem, from other parts of Judea, and
even from Galilee, deeply affected with his discourses, dreading divine
vengeance, and confessing their various vileness, they were baptized by the
holy man in the river Jordan. He was now generally known and acknowledged for a
prophet, and so universal was his reputation, that we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, of some brethren at Ephesus, and Apollus of Alexandria, who had
received the baptism of John; which proves, that he was resorted to from
foreign countries; and the dawn of the Sun of righteousness was seen beyond the
limits of the land of Israel.

THOUGH John received his baptism from heaven, we are left in the dark
concerning the name or names in which he baptized: the administration of that
ordinance, in the sacred names of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, seems
particular to the institution of it by JESUS CHRIST himself.

THIS constant and unremitting course of preaching, delivered with holy
vehemence, and the utmost force of expression, accompanied with a manifest
innocence of life, and a noble zeal in the cause of God, which reproved vice
and error, however flattered, (...) however highly exalted, so far prevailed on
the people, that they would willingly have persuaded themselves that John was
really the Messiah; for it is very probable, that the vision which Zacharias
had seen in the temple, the coming of the Eastern sages to Jerusalem, the
prophecy of Simeon, the discourses of Anna, the perplexity of Jerusalem, and
the cruelty of Herod, were fresh in the minds of the people, and by them
applied to the Baptist. They were ready to acknowledge him the Redeemer of
Israel; and put the question plainly to him, Whether he were the Christ? A
deputation of priests and Levites was sent from Jerusalem, to ask him the
question in form; to which he abruptly replied, I am not the Christ. They then
proceeded to enquire whether he were the prophet Elijah; to which he answered,
I am not. They then enquired whether he were one of the ancient prophets; to
which he replied in the negative. Who then art thou, they enquired, and what
answer may we give to them that sent us? What say thou of thyself? To which
he replied, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make straight the
way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. The priests and Levites then
enquired, why baptizest thou then, if thou be neither CHRIST, nor Elias, nor
one of the ancient prophets? to this the Baptist answered, I baptize with
water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know not: he it is, who coming
after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to
unloo^^: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; whose fan is
in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat
into his garner, but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.

WHILE John remained at Bethabara, beyond Jordan, our great Redeemer thought
proper to leave his retirement at Nazareth, and repairing to his forerunner,
who was baptizing in the river, he proposed himself a candidate for his
baptism. He, who was perfectly pure and holy, could not stand in need of the
baptism of repentance, but being willing to honor the institution, he offered
himself to John, proposing to be baptized. John, by a prophetic spirit, knew
the Lamb of God, acknowledged his superiority, and would have declined the
task. I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me! cried the holy
man. Jesus calmly replied, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness. Our great Redeemer did not think proper to explain
the case, and lay down the reasons why it was necessary for him to submit to
that institution; but, by this reply, gave the Baptist to understand, that the
divine will required it to be done; it having a tendency to promote the great
end for which they both came into the world. The good man's scruples being
removed, the Son of God descended into the stream, and received the sacred rite
at the hands of the holy prophet. The exalted Redeemer ascending from the
water, kneeled down on the banks of Jordan and prayed with great fervency to
his heavenly Father. As this holy rite was preparatory to his entering on his
public ministry, no doubt he prayed for the assistance of the Holy Spirit, in
the great work which lay before him. His prayers were heard: a flood of
heavenly glory immediately illuminated the whole concave of the sky, and the
Eternal Spirit, arrayed in beamy light, whose whiteness exceeded the new fallen
snow, appeared in the shape of a dove, hovering over the head of the Savior of
mankind: at the same time, a voice, awful as the thunders of heaven, yet soft
and pleasing as the most delightful music, proclaimed to the wondering
multitude, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. This manifest
testimony from heaven, of the divinity of JESUS, was received with wonder and
joy by the Baptist: For he that sent him to baptize with water, the same had
said unto him, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on
him, the same is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And, confirmed by this
appearance and heavenly voice, beyond all possibility of a doubt, he
immediately cried out to the astonished beholders, This is he of whom I spoke.
He that comes after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me; and of
his fullness have we all received grace for grace: for the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. No man has seen God at any
time: the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him.

JOHN continued baptizing and preaching at Bethabara, near the banks of the
river Jordan, at which place JESUS came to him, whom when the prophet saw, he
cried out, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world; and on
every occasion and opportunity that offered, the holy man pointed out the
Redeemer of Israel, and proclaimed him to mankind.

JOHN, after this, continued preaching and baptizing: his discourses were
delivered with such freedom and plainness, and at the same time with such
energy and spirit, as gave him a commanding influence over the minds of his
hearers. Full of the Spirit of God, he regarded not the frowns of the mighty,
nor sought the praises of man. With holy boldness, impartial freedom of speech,
and the high authority of a teacher sent from God, he reproved the vices and
miscarriages of all orders of men. He spared not the hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, the profaneness of the Sadducees, the extortion of the publicans,
the rapine of the soldiers, nor the lewdness and incest of Herod himself. That
prince, who was tetrarch of Galilee, had taken to wise a princess, whose name
was Herodias; she was daughter of Aristobulus, one of the sons of Herod the
Great, by his queen Mariamne. Her father was put to death by the old tyrant,
when he was in so much perplexity and distress, on account of the troubles and
quarrels in his family. This princess was afterward married to Herod Philip,
tetrarch of Itur^a, her father's brother; she had now eloped from her husband,
and lived with Herod Antipas. This prince was affected with the powerful
plainness, and authoritative simplicity of the preaching of the Baptist, and
frequently attended on his ministry. The prophet, as he spared no vice, nor man
who was guilty of it, however esteemed or exalted, warmly expostulated with him
on the wickedness and lewdness of his life, and sharply reproved him for his
incestuous marriage. The haughty queen was so offended at the boldness of the
prophet, that she demanded his death. The king would have complied with her
request, but was afraid of an insurrection amongst the people; for John was
highly esteemed and reverenced by all men: Herod therefore endeavored to
gratify her revenge, by casting the Baptist into prison. Here the holy man
remained several months, and his public ministry ceased.

WHILE he was thus in confinement, he heard of the miracles which JESUS daily
wrought, and his public ministry and preaching. But our Redeemer not having
taken such steps as the Jewish nation expected from the Messiah (for the
prevailing notion was, that this great person, whenever he appeared, would set
up a temporal kingdom, and reign over all the earth) the Baptist seemed not to
be thoroughly satisfied with his proceeding. His choosing a company of
illiterate fishermen to be his disciples, and avoiding all popularity and
applause, seemed not to promise the rising of his kingdom. The good man
therefore sent two of his disciples to the Son of God, to enquire into the
meaning of these things, not directly, but rather seeming to hesitate whether
he were the Messiah or not: Art thou he that should come, or look we for
another? It happened when these disciples came to our Lord, he was employed in
publishing his gospel, healing the sick, casting out devils, and restoring
sight to the blind. He did not therefore think fit to return a direct answer to
the question of John, but referred him to the works he performed, and the
miracles he wrought: Go and tell John, said he, what things you have seen and
heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have the gospel preached unto them.

JOHN continued long in prison, and was mortally hated by the incestuous queen:
but it was not in the power of the enraged princess to procure his death. At
length an opportunity offered, and the prophet fell a victim to her vengeance.
Herod the tetrarch of Galilee, with whom she lived in adultery and incest, made
a great feast for the celebrating his birthday, to which he invited his
courtiers, the chief officers of his army, and the nobles and great men of the
country. At this entertainment a young damsel, named Salome, the daughter of
the queen Herodias, by her former husband Philip, entertained the noble
company, and dignified the royal feast by her skill and graceful dexterity in
dancing. This gave so much satisfaction and pleasure to the company, especially
to the king, that he promised, with an oath, to give her whatever she desired;
and assured her, that her request should not be denied, were it for half of his
kingdom. The young damsel was not willing to make so important a demand without
the advice of her mother. The enraged princess, having now an opportunity to
accomplish her revenge on the prophet, to whom she bore a mortal hatred,
commanded her daughter to demand the head of John the Baptist. This request the
damsel soon presented at the throne. The king, as he little expected such a
demand, was very much concerned; yet, as he had given his oath, and was not
willing to seem little in the eyes of his guests, he gave immediate orders that
John should be beheaded in private, in the castle where he was confined. The
orders were immediately executed, and the bloody head of the prophet was
brought into the banqueting room, and given to the damsel. She took the cruel
present to her mother, who beheld, with much satisfaction, the full
gratification of her great revenge. Thus fell this great and illustrious
person. His disciples hearing of his death, came to Herod, and begged the body
of their master: they buried it in a decent sepulcher, and knowing that John
had always esteemed JESUS to be the Messiah, they came and informed him of this
mournful event.

CHAPTER VIII.
CHRIST, after his Baptism, is driven by the Spirit into the Wilderness, where
he fasteth forty Days; during which time he is tempted of the Devil several
ways, but overcomes him in all of them: Afterward Angels administer unto him.

OUR blessed Savior, having been baptized in the river Jordan, and having
received the testimony of God, in the most manifest and glorious manner, amidst
vast numbers of spectators, declaring him to be the Son of the most High, now
prepared to begin his public ministry, and enter upon the great work for which
he came into the world.

JORDAN, in which our great Redeemer was baptized, was the most considerable
river in the land of Canaan, and ran almost from the northern to the southern
boundaries of the Holy Land. It ran a great way through the wilderness of
Judea, which was not called a wilderness because it was quite uninhabited, but
because it was more wild, uncultivated, and less inhabited than the rest of the
country. The river Jordan, like the Nile, overflowed its banks at one season of
the year: it was much infested with lions, and other wild beasts, who, being
driven out of their dens by the rising of the waters, spread themselves over
the country; hence the allusion in the prophet, he comes like a lion from the
swellings of Jordan.

THE exalted Savior of mankind, when he began his public ministry, did not
seek to aggrandize himself, or court the honor or applause of men. It might
have been expected, that, preceeded by his forerunner the Baptist, and with a
blaze of divine glory round his head, he would have went to Jerusalem, the seat
of power, and made known himself and his pretensions, to the great men of the
kingdom. But the meek and lowly JESUS, shunning every thing that was grand and
noble, retired to the desert. The evangelist Mark informs us, that he was
driven of the Spirit into the wilderness: it is not to be supposed, that he was
driven by any irresistible power, but by the influence of that Holy Spirit
which descended on him at his baptism, and always resided in him. The design of
this retirement, no doubt, was, that by solitude, contemplation, and spiritual
converse with his heavenly Father, he might prepare himself for the great work
which lay before him; and by baffling the temptations of the evil spirit, might
triumph over the grand enemy of mankind in our stead, and point out to us the
duty of withstanding his temptations. It behoved him in all things to be like
to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest: for in
that he has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. That part of the wilderness into which the holy JESUS retired, is
supposed to be about four miles from the river Jordan, and twenty from
Jerusalem. It was in every respect, a dismal and uncomfortable situation, dry,
barren, and waste, surrounded by vast craggy mountains, frequented by wild
beasts, solitary, dreary, and forlorn.

IN this dreadful retreat, our great Redeemer remained forty days (the same
time which Moses was in the Mount, when he received the law) amidst the
howlings of beasts of prey, and the constant temptations of wicked spirits,
who, no doubt, used all their arts to interrupt his meditations and disturb his
peace. The desert was barren and dry, it produced nothing to eat; nor was there
any water to allay the thirst. The Son of God fasted forty days, being
supported by divine power; at the end of which time, he felt the calls of
nature, and the painful sensations of hunger and thirst. What our Lord suffered
from the temptations and delusive arts of the wicked spirits, during his forty
days abode in the desert, is not particularly recorded; but it seems at the end
of that time, he was attacked by the prince of apostate angels himself. It is
not to be supposed but a spirit, so subtle and vigilant, must be fully
acquainted with the late manifestation of divine glory, which had, at Christ's
baptism, declared him the Son of God; nor could he be ignorant of the
circumstance attending his birth, and the various testimonies of his life. But
the great adversary of mankind, though he must certainly be convinced that he
was an extraordinary person, seems not to be fully satisfied, that he was the
Son of God; and to prove this important point, took this opportunity when he
was afflicted with hunger and thirst, to ply him with his temptations. The wily
tempter approached the holy JESUS, very likely in human shape, and, knowing the
extremity of his hunger, expostulated with him, why he would endure such
hardships, when it was in his power, so easily to find relief. If thou be the
Son of God, said he, command that these stones be made bread. This temptation,
seeming so kind and harmless, was the more dangerous: the crafty fiend
designing to allure our great Redeemer to some superfluous acts of his divine
power, to supply his present necessity, which might have been contrary to an
entire resignation and obedience to the will of his heavenly Father: but our
Lord repelled this insinuating temptation, by quoting the words of Moses, which
implied, that God, when he pleases, can, by extraordinary means, supply the
wants of his creatures, and provide food for the support of the human race. Man
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.

THE crafty fiend, repulsed in his first open attempt on the blessed JESUS,
proceeded to a second trial to ensnare our exalted Savior; in order to which,
it is asserted by the evangelist, that he took him to the holy city, and set
him upon the pinnacle of the temple. Our great Redeemer must be hurried through
air to the distance of twenty miles: it is supposed he was set upon some spire
on the south side of the temple; probably on that part which was called Herod's
tower, which was built upon the edge of a rock, under which was a valley of
prodigious depth. Josephus writes, that he that was on the top of this tower,
and looked down to the valley beneath, his head would immediately swim, and
grow dizzy! nay, it was farther than his very eyes could reach the bottom. At
this giddy height, the crafty tempter set the blessed JESUS, and thus addressed
him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall
give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee
up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Thus, by a partial and
mutilated quotation from the Psalms, the great adversary of mankind attempted
to draw aside and overcome their only Savior; the words, to keep thee in all
thy ways, were not to the artful tempter's purpose, and therefore were craftily
omitted. The tendency of this temptation seems to be the exciting our Lord to
presume too much upon the divine protection, in his present state of humility
and submission; and as he depended on the word of God, when he was in danger of
being famished in the wilderness, the tempter quoted the same word to assure
him, that God would send his angels to preserve him, though he should leap from
that stupendous height. And, perhaps, the malicious fiend might secretly hope,
that, if the Lord could be prevailed upon to make the experiment, he would be
dashed to pieces with the fall, and all the apprehensions of the infernal
powers, on his account, would then have been at an end. But the blessed JESUS
was not thus to be overcome: he stood fixed on the immovable basis of humility
and meekness, and replied to the insinuating tempter, in the words of Moses, It
is written again, said he, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. By which we
are to learn, that it is not lawful to try the goodness of God, or the reality
of his paternal care in our preservation, by putting ourselves into unnecessary
danger, or making wild and extravagant experiments of his protection.

THE grand adversary of mankind, though twice repulsed with shame, yet scorned
to give up the contest; but rallying all his powers of deception, stood
prepared to make one more bold effort. The evangelist informs us, that from the
pinnacle of the temple, the devil took our Lord to the top of an exceeding high
mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
The crafty deceiver here thought to work upon our Savior's ambition; and,
doubtless, by the powers of bold enchantment, he filled the wide-stretched
landscape with vast palaces, cities, temples, towers, fleets, and armies,
chariots, warriors, foaming steeds, and all the mighty powers of sovereign
greatness: which pointing in order to our Redeemer's view, all these things,
said he, will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. To this
boldness and blasphemy, the holy JESUS gave a sharper rebuke than he had done
to the other temptations, and plainly manifesting his divinity, while he
assumed a commanding authority, worthy the Son of God, Get thee hence Satan, he
cried, for it is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

THE frighted fiend now could stand no longer; he had received such a defeat,
as convinced him that all further attempts were vain: his eyes were dazzled
with the divine glory which shone around the Son of God; and it may be supposed
that he fled murmuring to his subject fiends, complaining of his sad defeat,
and giving them instructions, to use all their infernal arts, to influence the
minds of men, fill them with rage against their only Savior, and prevent their
believing in him, and receiving his glorious gospel.

THE grand deceiver, thus defeated, and fled, a squadron of bright cherubs
descended from the heavenly world, congratulating the exalted Savior of
mankind on his victory, and administering to his necessities, such supplies
from the celestial regions, as enabled him to pursue the great work which he
was now to enter upon.

CHAPTER IX.
CHRIST begins his Public Ministry. His first Miracle at Cana. He goes to
Jerusalem, at the Passover; performs several Miracles; clears the Temple of the
Traders; and holds a Conference with Nicodemus.

IT was during the retreat of our great Redeemer into the desert, and his abode
there, that the Jewish Sanhedrim sent the deputation of priests and Levites to
John the Baptist, as before related; and he having openly and honestly informed
them, that he was not the Messiah, they returned to Jerusalem.

THE next day after their departure, the Son of God, having defeated the
cunning, and disappointed the wiles of the great enemy of mankind, returned
from the wilderness, after an abode there of forty days, and came to Bethabara,
where John was baptizing. The holy Baptist, knowing that the great design of
his coming into the world, was to prepare the way for, and lead the people to
the Messiah; no sooner saw the exalted Savior of mankind, than he pointed him
out to the people as the object of their highest regard and reverence: Behold,
he cried, the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world! And that it
might not be supposed, that he declared him to be such a dignified person,
without sufficient grounds, he proceeded to inform the attentive multitude,
that he had received a full assurance of this truth at the time when he
baptized him, by the appearance of the Holy Spirit, in the shape of a dove,
visibly resting on his head, John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit
descending like a dove, and it abode upon him, and I knew him not; but he that
sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see
the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost; and I saw and bare record, that this is the Son of God. After
this public declaration of his great forerunner, JESUS departed; but returning
the next day to the banks of Jordan, the Baptist being there with two of his
disciples, he no sooner beheld the holy JESUS, than he repeated and confirmed
his former declaration, which was made to the multitude, Behold the Lamb of
God. It is probable these disciples were absent when JESUS was baptized, and
the Spirit descended on him, while a voice from heaven declared him the Son of
God. This plain and positive declaration of their master, excited their
curiosity, and filled them with a strong desire to be further informed. To this
end, they followed JESUS, no doubt desiring to be acquainted with this
extraordinary person. Our great Redeemer, knowing their intentions, turned
toward them, and, with that condescending kindness and complacency so natural
to him, took them with him to his house. We are informed, by the evangelist
John, that one of these disciples was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter; the
name of the other is not mentioned, some suppose it was the evangelist himself.
They, by this invitation, gained an opportunity of conversing with the Savior
of mankind, and that conversation, joined with the declaration of their master,
the Baptist, fully convinced them of the truth of his mission, and they
esteemed and reverenced him as the great Messiah, the long-expected Redeemer of
Israel.

SOON after this, Andrew found his brother Peter, and with the utmost joy and
elevation of heart, brought him to JESUS. The Lord immediately called him by
his name, and informed him, that he should hereafter be called Cephas, which
is, by interpretation, a stone, or rock. The day following, Philip, an
inhabitant of the town of Bethsaida, was so happy as to come in company with
the great Redeemer; JESUS commanded him to follow him, which that disciple
immediately obeyed: perhaps he might not be unacquainted with the character of
the Son of God; or if he was, the call of the great Savior of sinners was
accompanied with such manifestations of divine power, that he gladly obeyed.

SOON after this, Philip came in company with Nathaniel, an inhabitant of the
town of Cana in Galilee: Nathaniel is thought by some to be the same person who
was afterward called Bartholomew. Philip told him, that they had found the
Messiah, that great person foretold by Moses and the prophets; and that his
name was JESUS of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph. Nathaniel well knew that,
according to the ancient prophecies, the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem:
and that he was to belong to the family of David; and as Nazareth was a very
low and vulger place, he could not believe that so exalted a person should
dwell in such a contemptible city, and expressed his surprise, by inquiring,
can any good thing come out of Nazareth! In answer to this, Philip referred him
to the person he had mentioned, and desired him to go with him, and see whether
what he had reported was not evident from the plain marks of superior greatness
and divinity which appeared in this extraordinary man. Nathaniel, however mean
and despicable his opinion of Nazareth might be, would not give way to his
prejudice so much, as to be prevented from embracing so happy an opportunity,
and therefore accompanied by Philip, went to visit the Savior of Israel. His
ingenuous and candid disposition, would not permit him to reject the
pretensions of JESUS without examination and trial; and, being introduced by
his friend, and presented to the Lord, the stranger immediately heard his
heavenly lips pronounce this honorable character, applied by our great
Redeemer to Nathaniel; Behold, an Israelite indeed, ^n whom is no guile. The
good man was very much surprised to hear a person he had never seen before,
address him in this manner, and for his satisfaction in this mysterious point,
inquired of our Redeemer, how he came to know him so well, as to be able to
give such a description of his character? JESUS, with a condescending smile
replied, that, before Philip called him, he saw him under the fig tree. It is
reasonable to suppose, that Nathaniel had been under the fig tree, at his
private devotions; and doubtless, had expressed such sentiments, in the
effusions of his pious heart, as entitled him to the noble character which our
Redeemer had given him; and it is plain that he perceived, from CHRIST's answer
to his inquiry, that he knew what was done, where he was not present, and was
fully acquainted with the thoughts of the heart; therefore, with the fullest
conviction of mind, and the utmost surprise and joy, he cried out, Rabbi, thou
art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Our Redeemer, approving his
faith, proceeded to inform him, that he should hereafter see fuller and clearer
proofs of his divinity; Because I said, I saw thee under the fig tree,
believe thou? Thou shall see greater things than these. I say unto you,
hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man.

OUR Lord having thus given manifest proofs of his divinity, and called five
disciples, was the third day after, with his mother and them, invited to a
marriage feast at Cana, a small town, not far distant from Nazareth. His
mother, it may reasonably be supposed, was either a relation, or intimate
friend of the married pair; and it happened, at the supper, that they were
scarce of wine: she had often, no doubt, been witness of the supernatural power
that attended her son, and as she would willingly have every thing so
conducted, that there might be no reproach fall on her new-married friends, she
applied to him, perhaps, expecting that he would work a miracle for their
supply. JESUS, upon receiving the information from his mother, replied, with a
kind of gentle rebuke, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet
come: intimating by this, that the time for his working miracles in Galilee was
not yet approached, but his business lay in other parts of the kingdom. His
mother does not seem by this reply, to have given up her hopes of his doing
something for her friends in this necessity; and, therefore, she ordered the
servants punctually to perform whatever he commanded: nor was she mistaken in
her supposition; for our Lord kindly condescended, by his miraculous power, to
relieve his friends, and to convince his new disciples of the divinity of their
master. He ordered the servants to fill six water-pots, each containing about
twenty gallons, with water; the servants obeyed, and filled them up to the
brim. The whole, in a moment, was changed into the most excellent wine; Bear,
said our exalted Redeemer, to the governor of the feast: the governor, ignorant
of the miracle, and highly pleased with the delicious flavor and richness of
the wine, which was much superior to what they had drank before, applied to
the bridegroom, and, in the hearing of the company, informed him, that he had
acted contrary to the common custom of feasts. Every man at the beginning, said
he, does set forth good wine; and, when men have well drank, then that which is
worse; but thou have kept the good wine until now. The bridegroom, doubtless,
was much surprised at this account, and upon inquiry, found that this excellent
wine was produced by JESUS, in a miraculous manner. This miracle was the first
which our blessed Savior performed; by it he honored the institution of
marriage, convinced his disciples that he, in reality, was the Son of God, and
the Savior of Israel, and spread his fame over all the country around.

IT must be acknowledged, that the enemies of our religion, who diligently
watch for every opportunity to cast contempt on the great Author of it, have
presumed to censure and ridicule this first miracle of our Lord. They represent
the affair, as though the evangelist had reported our Savior to have
miraculously produced this wine, after the company had plentifully drank, and
hence would insinuate, that he was a friend to drunkenness. They might,
however, have sp^^ed their mirth, if they had considered that the words of the
governor of the feast, before quoted, do not imply that any of the company were
intoxicated, but only that it was the custom at such feasts, to bring the best
wine first. Besides, our self-conceited and impudent cavillers, might have
given themselves time to consider, that, though the Jewish marriage-feasts
lasted seven days, our Lord did not order all this wine, which he miraculously
produced, to be drank at that solemnity: nor is there one circumstance in the
account of this feast, which gives the least intimation that any of the company
were intoxicated; and it must be supposed that, when they had discovered the
miracle, they would have so much reverence for the divinity of the person of
our Lord, as would prevent them from making such bad use of his wine,
especially in his presence. Nor can it be inferred, from the quantity of wine
which our Lord thus miraculously produced, that he would connive at
intemperance, and furnish the means of excess: it rather ought to be concluded,
that, by this miracle, he intended to make a seasonable and valuable present to
his friends, which might serve for their use, when the solemnity of the feast
was over. And, it may further be observed, that by converting so large a
quantity of water into wine, our Lord prevented all objections that CHRIST
overturning the Tables, etc. of the Money changers in the Temple at Jerusalem.
might have been raised against the miracle being true; for a small quantity of
wine might have been easily procured to carry on the deception, when so large a
quantity could not: so that, if it be admitted that these water-pots were ever
so large, there can be no objection raised against the design of the miracle;
nor can it be charged with giving indulgence to intemperance, any more than the
plenty which the all-bountiful Creator showers upon the vineyard and the field:
so that, notwithstanding the objections and cavils which may arise from false
wisdom, this first miracle of our Lord appears to be, in every respect, worthy
of God, and beneficial to man.

THE passover, an annual feast of the Jews, kept in commemoration of their
preservation, when the Egyptian firstborn were slain by a stroke from heaven,
being at hand, and our Lord designing to be present at the feast, he departed
from Cana, and taking Capernaum in his way, he went to Jerusalem. He no sooner
arrived at the chief city of the Jews, but he went to the temple, and probably
it being the eve of the feast, he found the sacred apartments full of traders,
money changers, and merchants, who sold such things as would be wanted at the
ensuing festival. The holy JESUS was filled with indignation, to see the holy
place thus profaned; and immediately applied himself to correct the abuse:
accordingly, he made a small whip, or scourge, and assuming the air and
fervency of the ancient prophets, he drove this mercenary train out of the
temple; awed by his majestic all-commanding appearance, they ran before him in
a tumult: the oxen and sheep afrighted, fled, and the owners after them,
overthrowing the tables of the money changers, and pouring out their money upon
the ground, none daring to make resistance: the sellers of doves he also urged
to depart, commanding them all for the future, to take care how they made the
temple of God an house of merchandise. The Jews perceiving a promiscuous throng
of people and cattle driving out of the temple in the utmost astonishment and
terror, and afterward finding that JESUS had put them all into this hurry and
confusion, by commanding them to depart from the temple, and had drove them
before him; they probably summoned a council, and demanded of him in form, by
what authority he did this; at the same time, requiring him to give them a
sign, which should prove that he did it by a divine commission. Our Lord, on
this occasion, only referred them to the miracle of his own resurrection,
Destroy, said he, this body, and I will raise it up in three days. The rulers
of the Jews, mistaking his meaning, concluded his words had reference to the
noble and magnificent temple built by Herod, and were very much surprised at
the assertion; Forty and six years, said they, was this temple in building, and
will thou rear it up in three days? But though this answer of our Lord
confounded the great men amongst the Jews; the disciples of JESUS remembered a
passage in the Psalms, which was clearly applicable to this part of our
Redeemer's conduct, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. And, as this
prediction of our Lord was delivered in the style of the ancient prophets,
whose prophecies were sometimes not understood till they were fulfilled; this
saying of their master came fresh into their minds, after his resurrection, and
confirmed them in their belief of the truth.

THOUGH the blessed JESUS refused to work any miracles in the presence of the
rulers of the Jews, and strove not to make himself known to the great and
mighty in Jerusalem; ye^, at this time, he wrought several wonderful works
amongst the common people, and, by exerting the mighty power invested in him,
confirmed the truth of the doctrines he taught, and proved that he was a
teacher sent from God, and that great person so long expected to be the
Redeemer of Israel.

OUR Lord continued performing several wonders amongst the common people,
during the time of the passover, and many of them believed on him; for they
were fully convinced of his divine mission, by the miracles which they saw him
perform. But JESUS knowing the secret of men's hearts, and not wanting any
information concerning them, he was able to form a just conception of the
nature of this belief; and knew how unlikely it was to stand the day of trial,
on account of the weakness and fickleness of mankind. In consequence of this
knowledge, he did not think it proper to run the hazard of the inconstancy of
the multitude, or trust himself too much in their hands: for this reason, he
avoided conversing too freely with them, or making more full and clear
discoveries of his divinity, and the end of his coming into the world; for he
knew how likely it was, that great numbers should desert his cause, when he
came to be publicly opposed to the great Sanhedrim, by the Scribes and
Pharisees, the chief priests and elders, and all the great men of the nation.

BUT the wonder and astonishment excited by the miracles which JESUS had
performed, were not confined to the common people: the wide spreading report
had reached the ears of Nicodemus, a man of great eminence amongst the Jews; he
was one of the great Sanhedrim, and in great honor and esteem at Jerusalem. He
had heard the account of the miracles which JESUS had wrought, and he believed
it, and being a person of an ingenious, inquisitive mind, he wanted to be
further informed.

IT is to be supposed, that he was not ignorant of the general expectation of
the Jewish kingdom, respecting the appearance of the Messiah: and he ardently
wished to see the accomplishment of the ancient prophecies, in the appearance
of that great person. And, as the general opinion was, that the Messiah, when
he came, would set up a temporal kingdom, and exalt the Jewish nation over all
the kingdoms on the earth, it is to be supposed that the great men amongst the
Jews, as well as the common people, strongly desired the approach of this happy
event.

NICODEMUS was convinced by the miracles which JESUS performed, so wonderful in
their nature, so salutary in their effects, so worthy the character of the Son
of God, so kind and advantageous to man, so happily adapted to the confirmation
of the doctrines he taught, so perfectly agreeable to the attributes of God,
and conformable to the predictions of the ancient prophets concerning the
Messiah, that these mighty works must proceed from a divine original, and that
no power less than Omnipotence could produce them. But very likely some
considerable scruples might arise in the mind of this ruler in Israel, when he
considered the obscurity of the birth, and the meanness of the appearance of
the person who performed these wonderful works. This, in every respect, being
so contrary to that magnificence and grandeur in which the Jewish nation
expected the Messiah, to appear, might cause great scruples to arise in the
mind of Nicodemus, and fill his soul with perplexity and doubt: but he being a
person of judgment and discernment, as well as probity and honor, would not
suffer his prejudices to prevent him from fairly and impartially inquiring
after truth, in an affair of such importance, and therefore determined to have
an interview with JESUS himself. He did not think it advisable to wait on our
Lord in public; for he thought he might be reproached by the rulers and great
men amongst the Jews, and therefore concluded to make this visit in private;
and that it might be the more so, he chose to make it in the night.

HE accosted our Redeemer with a confession of his conviction of the truth and
reality of the miracles he had performed; and that they could not be produced
by enchantment, or any infernal assistance; but the nature of them proved them
to be produced by the mighty power of God, and confirmed the doctrines JESUS
taught to be divine: Rabbi, said he, we know that thou art a teacher come from
God; for no man can do those miracles that thou do, except God be with him.
It does not by this salutation appear, that Nicodemus was convinced that JESUS
was the Messiah; that was the point which he wanted to be more fully
demonstrated, and hoped, by this interview, to receive some satisfaction
concerning it. Our Lord did not think proper to satisfy the scruples of this
ruler of Israel concerning this, but took the opportunity to instruct him in a
matter of greater importance, and lead him into an acquaintance with the nature
of his religion: in order to this, he began with introducing the first great
doctrine of the gospel, respecting its operations on the mind of man; Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God. Our Savior, by these remarkable words, may be supposed to inform the
ruler of Israel, that though the luster of his miracles had forced him to
acknowledge, that he had received his commission from on high, yet he could not
discern, that he really was the Messiah, nor understand the spiritual nature of
his kingdom, without the operation of a supernatural power, which must produce
such a change in his soul, as might fitly be described by being born again.
Nicodemus, being an utter stranger to this doctrine, and thinking our Lord's
words had no figurative allusion, but had reference to a natural birth, was
very much surprised at the assertion; for he could not imagine that the seed of
Abraham stood in need of any second birth, to render them the children of God,
and the heirs of his kingdom; and therefore hastily and earnestly inquired, How
can a man be born when he is old; can he enter a second time into his mother's
womb, and be born? Our Lord then proceeded to inform him, that his words had
not a natural, but a spiritual meaning, Except a man be born of water and the
Spirit, said he, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus might learn, from
these words, that his apprehensions were gross and wide from the purpose; for
if it were possible for a man to be born a second time of his earthly parent,
he would not thereby become so holy and pure, as would render him sit for the
kingdom of God; but the birth our Redeemer had reference to, was of a spiritual
nature, which, by producing that faith which have a lively and powerful
influence on the heart and life, might prepare the possessors of it for the
divine acceptance: That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is
born of the Spirit is Spirit. Whatever is born of woman, partakes of the
imperfections and sinfulness of human nature; but that which is born of the
Spirit, is pure and holy, and prevails over those things which render mankind
unfit to be partakers of the kingdom of God, by implanting a new and powerful
principle of action, and working an entire renovation in the soul, which may
very fitly be compared to a new birth. Nicodemus, still continuing full of
hesitation and surprise, our Lord proceeded to inform him, that the thing would
not appear so mysterious, when rightly understood, as his prejudices induced
him to think it was, but might, as to the probability of it, be illustrated by
a familiar simile; Marvel not, says he, that I said unto thee, ye must be born
again. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell from whence it comes or whither it goes; so is every one
that is born of the Spirit: The meaning of these words seems to be, that,
though the entire renovation of heart, which Christ's religion required, might
seem impossible to the blind eyes of carnal men, it might nevertheless be true:
for in the natural world, there are many things of so fine a texture, that we
cannot discern them with our eyes, but it is very manifest that they exist, and
they are very great and powerful in their effects. The wind is a thing
altogether invisible, no man can behold its body or trace its motion, even when
it blows with the greatest violence; yet that there is such a thing is
sufficiently evident, and the effects of it are universally known: thus,
therefore, that regeneration, or renovation which is wrought in the heart of
man, by the powerful agency of the Spirit of God, though, in itself, it be
invisible, and not at all discernible by the sight or sense; yet, in its
effects, it is a great and plain thing, and really as great and manifest a
change in the nature and disposition, the desires and pursuits of the soul, and
conducing as much to all the purposes of divine and eternal life, as the birth
of man does to this mortal life.

THOUGH these arguments were plain, and not to be evaded or denied, yet,
Nicodemus retained his prejudices; this system of spiritual religion was
contrary to his apprehensions, nor could he see how the children of Abraham
could stand in need of a renovation and change, equal to that which the infant
finds, when born, to fit them for the kingdom of God; and therefore, the ruler
of Israel inquired, How can these things be? To which our great Redeemer
replied, that it was strange he should be so hard to be instructed, Art thou a
master in Israel, and know not these things? Art thou a teacher of others,
and yet unable to discern things which I have so plainly revealed? Our Lord
then proceeded to inform him that he was certain of the truth of what he had
advanced concerning the new birth, and therefore it ought to be received; but
if these plain and easy truths, relating to the spiritual nature of the
Messiah's kingdom, were so slowly received by men of the first eminence and
understanding in the nation, how would they be able to comprehend the more
sublime and noble doctrines of the gospel, which he was come to preach to the
sons of men. Our Redeemer further proceeded to inform Nicodemus, that it was
the indispensible duty of mankind to attend to his ministry, because he came
with superior credentials, and higher authority than ever man had before him.
Moses had never ascended into heaven, but received his law from the top of
mount Sinai: none of the ancient prophets had descended from the blessed
abodes, to teach mankind; whereas the Son of God came down from heaven, fully
commissioned from above: he had been favored with the clearest and most
extensive view of spiritual things, and was fully acquainted with the deepest
recesses of the divine councils; nay, at this very time, is present with God in
heaven, and at one comprehensive view, beholdest the extent of the universe; he
is conscious to all the gracious intentions of the King of heaven toward the
human race, and, of consequence, must be superior in authority and dignity to
Moses, or any other person who has appeared in the world.

OUR great Redeemer, before the conference concluded, took occasion to set the
inquiring ruler to rights, respecting the kingdom of the Messiah, concerning
which he so much wanted to be informed. He gave him to understand, that the
nation in general, were greatly mistaken in their views of that exalted person
setting up a temporal kingdom, and assuming the authority and command of an
illustrious and powerful conqueror; on the contrary, this divine teacher
explained to Nicodemus, that it was conformable to the language of the ancient
prophecy, as well as the councils of heaven, that the Messiah, when he appeared
in the world, should be poor and despised; that he should assume no titles of
honor, but be exposed to a variety of misery, poverty, and wretchedness; and,
of consequence, his kingdom must not be a temporal, but spiritual kingdom; and
the deliverance, which he came to procure for his people, was not from temporal
evils, but eternal wrath. This deliverance he proceeded to inform the noble
Pharisee, must be procured by his sufferings and death, by which, whosoever
believed on him, would be reinstated in the divine favor, and made eternally
happy: but whosoever refused to receive him as their Savior, and persisted in
their obstinacy and unbelief, would certainly perish for ever, and justly fall
into so severe a condemnation, because their unbelief would not arise from want
of evidence of the truth of his mission, but from their own inveterate
prejudices, and the habitual wickedness of their hearts and lives. He that
believes on him is not condemned, said he, but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the only begotten
Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

THIS excellent and pathetic discourse of our Lord, had an effect on Nicodemus
proportionable to the importance of it; he not only believed that JESUS was a
teacher sent from God, but was convinced that he was that great person who was
to be the Redeemer of Israel. He constantly defended him in the council; and
when JESUS was put to death, by the impious rage, and unexampled cruelty of the
Jews, he, in conjunction with Joseph of Arimathea, begged the body of our Lord,
of the Roman governor, and bestowed on him the honor of a decent funeral, when
all the rest of his disciples had forsaken him.

CHAPTER X.
CHRIST converses with the woman of Samaria, and reveals himself unto her: he
heals the nobleman's son at Cana, while he lay sick at Capernaum. He repairs to
Capernaum, and having called more disciples, he preaches in Galilee, and
delivers his sermon on the Mount.

THE feast of the passover being ended, JESUS departed from Jerusalem, and went
to some of the obscurer parts of Judea; probably he might retire to the bank of
the river Jordan, where he had been baptized, and had received the honor of
the divine approbation, and the testimony of a voice from heaven, that he was
the Son of God. The holy JESUS, remained here a considerable time, and his
disciples baptized great numbers of people, while his fame was spread through
several parts of the country.

JOHN the Baptist was not yet cast into prison, but continued preaching and
baptizing, probably at Bethabara, the place, of his former residence. Some of
the Jews, hence took occasion to dispute with the disciples of John, about the
propriety of this, and wanted to be informed, whether the baptism of JESUS was
not superior to that of their master. Not being willing themselves to decide
this controversy, or answer so important a question, they applied to the
Baptist himself. The prophet took occasion to remind them* how often he had
declared, that the person they mentioned, was (...) Messiah, whom God had sent
into the world, to accomplish the designs of his grace, in the salvation of
sinners; and that himself was no more than a messenger to prepare the way
before this illustrious person. He likewise proceeded to inform them, that his
own ministry now was on the decline, and would soon be at an end; He must
increase, said he, but I must decrease. The holy man continued his testimony
concerning CHRIST, by giving his inquiring disciples to understand that he was
above all; and as much superior to him, as the heavens were above the earth;
and though, comparatively speaking, no man received his testimony, though he
was low and despicable in the eyes of mankind, yet he was in the highest
estimation in the heavenly world; that he was the well-beloved of his Father,
and the heir of all things, both in heaven and earth; that the fullness of the
divine Spirit dwelt in him, and it was of the utmost importance to mankind to
hear, believe in, and obey him. And then the holy man concluded his ministry
with these remarkable words, He that believes on the Son has everlasting
life; but he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him.

SOON after this, the holy Baptist departed from the banks of Jordan, and
leaving the wilderness of Judea, repaired to Galilee, and often visited the
court of Herod, who seemed to attend to his precepts, and take delight in his
company and conversation: but, as the Baptist was too strictly virtuous to
flatter that prince, he took occasion severely to reprimand him, on account of
his cohabiting with the princess Herodias. This roused the rage of that haughty
woman, who, on that account, procured his imprisonment and death, in the manner
before related.

IN the mean time, the blessed JESUS continued in the wilderness of Judea;
great multitudes resorted to him, attended on his divine instructions, beheld
the miracles he wrought, and were baptized by his disciples. His popularity
daily increasing, it excited the envy of the Pharisees, on which account, our
Lord thought proper to retire into Galilee, and there continue that great work
which he had so successfully begun.

IN this journey, he passed through Samaria, and being fatigued with
traveling, and overpowered with the heat of the day, he sat down to rest by
the side of a noted well, near the city of Sychar (which was reported to be
given by the patriarch Jacob to his son Joseph) while his disciples repaired to
the city to purchase provisions.

BEFORE their return, a woman came from the city to draw water at the well, and
JESUS being thirsty, asked her to give him to drink. The woman, knowing him to
be a Jew, was very much surprised at this request; for the hatred between the
Jews and Samaritans, which had commenced four hundred years before this time,
still continued, and was, on all occasions carried on by each party: How is it,
said she, that thou, being a Jew, ask drink of me, who am a woman of
Samaria? For the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Little did the
woman think, that no less a person than the Son of God, requested this small
favor at her hands: had she been acquainted with his high dignity, she would
certainly, without hesitation, have granted his request. But JESUS, perceiving
her delay, proceeded to let her know, that he was well able to make her the
most noble and beneficial return for the favor he asked. If thou, said he,
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink:
thou would have asked of him, and he would have giving thee living water.
The woman surprised to hear such a declaration, and no doubt, perceiving
something awfully majestic, and divinely amiable in the countenance of our
Lord, without attending to his first request, was touched with a curiosity to
know who this stranger was, and how he could come at the water he spoke of:
Sir, said she, thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep; from
whence then have thou that living water? Art thou greater than our father
Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and
his cattle? JESUS replied to this question, Whosoever drinks of this water
shall thirst again; but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him, a
well of water springing up unto everlasting life. Thus this divine teacher,
from the circumstances of sitting by the side of a well, and the woman
preparing to draw water, described, in the most beautiful allegory, the
efficacy and effects of divine grace, and at the same time represented the
plenitude and perpetuity of its happy consequences, which remain to an eternal
duration. But the woman, still understanding the words of our Lord in their
plain literal sense, requested him to give her a draught of the water he spoke
of, that she might thirst no more, nor have occasion to come daily to that well
to draw. Our Redeemer then turned the discourse in such a manner, as gave him
an opportunity of letting the woman understand, that he was acquainted with her
former and present way of life, and all her circumstances and affairs. Sir,
says she, I perceive that thou art a prophet: and being convinced of his
superior knowledge, she desired his opinion of a question which was a matter of
contention between the Jews and Samaritans, whether the temple at Jerusalem, or
mount Gerizim was the place where God would be worshipped: Our Fathers, said
she, worshipped in this mountain: but ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place
were men ought to worship. Our Lord, in answer to her inquiry, informed her,
that the time would soon approach, when the worship of God would not be
confined, either to that mountain or Jerusalem; but the great King of the
universe, would be willing to accept all true spiritual worshippers, without
any regard to the place where they worshipped. God, said he, is a Spirit; and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. The woman
replied to this, that she supposed this point would be settled by the Messiah,
who was shortly expected to come, both by the Jews and the Samaritans. I know,
said she, that the Messiah comes, which is called Christ: when he is come, he
will tell us all things. To this JESUS directly replied, I that speak unto thee
am he.

JUST at the moment when JESUS had told the woman that he was the Messiah, the
disciples returned; and finding their master in close conversation with one
that was a native of Samaria, and of consequence an enemy to the Jews, and to
the temple worship at Jerusalem, they were very much surprised: but the woman,
having heard JESUS call himself the Messiah, left her pitcher at the well, and
ran to the city, to publish the glad-tidings, that the Redeemer was then
sitting at Jacob's well, and had told her all the secret transactions of her
life. This declaration filled the listening Samaritans with the highest
astonishment, and at the same time raised their curiosity to see this
extraordinary person, whom Moses and the prophets had foretold, and of whose
appearance, there was at that time, so universal an expectation.

DURING this interval, the disciples set before their Lord the provisions which
they had been procuring, and requested him to eat; but he seemed little to
regard their entreaties, having turned his thoughts to divine meditations: but
being further urged, he replied, that he had meat to eat which they knew not
of; and gave them to understand, that it was meat and drink to him to do the
will, and proceed in the work of his heavenly Father: then looking about him,
and seeing the Samaritans coming in crowds from their city; he said to his
disciples, Say ye not that there are yet four months, and then comes the
harvest? Behold, I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for
they are white already to harvest; and he that reapeth receives wages, and
gathers fruit into life eternal, that both he that sows and he that reapeth
may rejoice together. By this our Lord instructed his wondering disciples, and
let them know that the conversion of these Samaritans, who were now in great
crowds surrounding him, was a greater satisfaction to him, than the pleasure he
could receive from the refreshment he might have experienced in partaking of
their provisions: he let them know, that to gather this spiritual harvest, and
finish the work of his heavenly Father, was his proper food; and adding, for
the encouragement of his disciples, that as they had labored with him in this
harvest of souls, so should they be partakers in the eternal harvest of joy,
which would be the reward of their diligence in the work of God.

THE words of the woman had taken such an effect on the inhabitants of the
city, that many of them believed that JESUS was certainly the Messiah; and when
they crowded about him with wonder and joy, their first request was, that he
would condescend to go to their city, and take his abode amongst them. The
kind, indulgent Savior of sinners was so favorable to them, that he complied
with their petition, and staid with them two days. This time he spent in
preaching the kingdom of God, and instructing them in the nature of his
religion. Such success attended his ministry, that a great number of the
inhabitants of the city believed on him, and declared unto the woman at his
departure, Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we have heard him
ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World.

OUR Lord, having thus favored the Samaritans with his heavenly instructions,
he left the city of Sychar, and continued his journey to Galilee: and though he
did not expect much honor or esteem amongst his countrymen, he would not
neglect giving them an opportunity of receiving his heavenly doctrine. He had
performed several miracles at Jerusalem, during the late feast of the passover,
at which many of the inhabitants of Galilee were present: his preaching amongst
them, in consequence of this, was at first attended with great success, and he
dwelt some small time at Cana, where he had turned the water into wine, and
both himself and his doctrine were kindly received.

WHILE he abode at that city, a nobleman of Capernaum, having heard of the many
miracles he performed, came to him, and addressed him with the utmost reverence
and respect; at the same time humbly beseeching him to come to Capernaum, and
heal his son, who lay at the point of death. Our Lord was so compassionate, as
to comply with the latter part of the request, but thought proper to give the
concerned parent to understand, that there was no necessity for him to take a
journey to Capernaum to effect this cure; for that great Being, who was present
in all places, could perform his mighty works, without personally appearing at
the place where the miracle was wrought: JESUS, therefore dismissed the father,
with a declaration that his son was restored to health, but refused to
accompany him to his city: Go thy way, said he, thy son lives. The nobleman,
not doubting the truth of what our Lord had declared, departed to his house;
but, before his arrival, he was met on the road by his servants, who brought
the joyful news, that his son was perfectly recovered. The father inquired, at
what time they perceived the first alteration in him; the servants replied,
Yesterday, at the seventh hour, the fever left him. By this, the joyful father
perceived, that his son recovered immediately as JESUS had spoken the words,
thy son lives; and was fully convinced, that this cure was performed by the
mighty power of God. This amazing instance of divine power and goodness, fully
convinced the nobleman, and all his family, not only that JESUS was a true
prophet, but that he was the Messiah, that great deliverer of his people, so
long expected in the world.

SOME short time after this, JESUS departed from Cana, and went to Nazareth,
the place where he had been brought up, and where he had dwelt till he entered
on his public ministry. There, as had been his constant custom, he went to the
synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and attended on the reading of the law and the
prophets. After the passages appointed for the service of the day were read,
JESUS took the book from the hand of the person who officiated, and opened it
on this celebrated prediction of the Messiah, in the prophecy of Isaiah, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel
to the poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance
to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them
that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

IT is the opinion of some learned and judicious commentators, that our Lord
read this passage in native Hebrew, which was then a dead language, and as it
was known by his townsmen, that he was not learned, it excited their
admiration, especially when he expounded it with such clearness of judgment,
and beauty of expression; and what the more raised their astonishment, he
applied it to himself: but as he had performed no miracles in their city, they
seemed to be offended: perhaps they imagined, that the place of his nativity
should have claimed his first regard, and that his friends and townsmen should
have been the objects of his peculiar care; and as it appeared, that with a
word, he could heal the sick or diseased, at a distance, it is very likely,
they thought that there should not have been one sick, lame, or blind person,
at Nazareth. That they really entertained such sentiments as these, is plain
from our Savior's own words, Ye will surely say to me, Physician, heal
thyself; whatever we have had done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country:
they seem to have hinted to our Lord, that it was unkind in him to heal the
nobleman's son at Capernaum, and take no notice of the sick and diseased at
Nazareth; which being the place of his nativity and residence, should have been
a larger sharer in his benevolence and care, than those cities which were
unknown to him, and therefore could have no claim on his goodness. To this
insinuation, our Lord thought fit to reply, by giving them an account of the
conduct of the two great prophets Elijah and Elisha, who were directed by the
God of Israel, to exert those miraculous powers, which he had given them, in
favor of Heathens, when many of the people of Israel stood in need of their
assistance. I tell you of a truth, said he, many widows were in Israel in the
days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
great famine was throughout all the land; but unto none of them was Elias sent,
save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And many
lepers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus the prophet; and none of them was
cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. No sooner had our Redeemer spoken these
words, than the synagogue was in an uproar; the whole assembly foamed with
rage, and was the more unruly and turbulent, because none of them knew how to
reply; but forgetting the solemnity of the Sabbath, they seized the Savior of
the world, and took him by force, to the brow of the hill on which their city
stood, thinking to have thrown him down, and dashed him to pieces; but no
sooner were they come to the place where they intended to have put their cruel
designs in execution, than they were impressed with awe; and each looked on the
other, none daring to make the horrid attempt. Our Redeemer perceiving the
consternation which they were in, departed from amongst them, and none presumed
to detain him.

OUR Savior being thus treated by the blind, outrageous fury of his townsmen,
and the cruel usage he had received, he removed his place of residence, and for
some time abode at Capernaum. This was the capital city of Galilee, and was
built on the borders of the lake of Genesareth.

IT may not be improper in this place, to give a short account of this lake. It
is called, in the Old Testament, the sea of Chinnereth; but, in the
Evangelists, it has three several names: it is called the sea of Galilee, from
the province where it was situated; the sea of Tiberias, from a city of that
name on its western shore; and the lake of Genesareth, from the name of a
considerable part of Galilee, extending along its western shore. According to
Josephus, it was twenty-two miles in length, and five in breadth: the bottom
being of gravel, rendered the water both clear and good tasted: it was said to
be softer than either fountain or river water, and at the same time so cold,
that it would not grow warm, though exposed to the rays of the sun in the
hottest season of the year. The river Jordan runs through this lake, and it
abounds with plenty of excellent fish, and some sorts that are not to be found
in any other place.

THE countries surrounding this lake, according to the above mentioned
historian, were fertile and populous, especially the two Galilees, which
contained a great number of towns and villages, the least of which included
fifteen hundred souls. On the east side, were the cities of Chorasin,
Bethsaida, Gadara, and Hippon; on the west, Capernaum, Tiberias, and Tarrichea.
From all these advantages, it was a common saying amongst the Jews, that God
had a peculiar love to the sea of Galilee: and if we consider, that, added to
the abovenamed privileges, it was so often favored with the presence of our
great Redeemer, we must allow that the observation was just; for frequent were
his excursions on these waters, while he dwelt at Capernaum; and once he
honored them with his presence, and worked a miracle in their streams, after
he had risen from the dead.

IT was the divine will, that JESUS should spend a considerable time in
preaching, and working miracles, to confirm the truth of his divine mission,
and instruct his disciples in the doctrine which they were afterward to preach
through all the nations of the world. He did not choose to take up his abode at
Jerusalem, because he knew the opposition which he would meet with from the
Scribes and Pharisees, the chief priests and rulers, and the great men of the
nation. The ambition and envy of these men would never have suffered so
celebrated a teacher as JESUS CHRIST, to have resided amongst them. Our Lord
therefore chose to reside at Capernaum, where he had lately, by restoring the
nobleman's son, procured himself friends, and he was sure of a kind reception.
Nor is it unlikely, that so great and benevolent a miracle should be generally
known in the city, and not have influenced the minds of the inhabitants in
favor of our Redeemer, while it prepared them for the reception of his
heavenly doctrine. This city seemed a place highly convenient for the execution
of his great and benevolent designs; for it being the capital of the country,
and nearly bordering on the lake, it was frequently crowded with merchants and
traders; who, on their return to their respective countries, might spread the
report of what they might be eye and ear witnesses of; and by this means, the
miracles and doctrine of the Savior of the world, might be related in distant
places. It was in the city of Capernaum, and the adjacent cities and villages
bordering on the lake, that our great Redeemer spent two out of three years of
his public life; most commonly going to Jerusalem at the public feasts, but
soon returning. He frequently preached in the synagogues on the Sabbath Day,
not only in Capernaum, but in the other cities of Galilee; and often the
country villages, the fields, the mountains, the plains, and the waters of the
lake were blessed with his presence; and his heavenly doctrine was learned by
the attentive multitudes who followed him, to hear his words and see his
wondrous works.

IT was in one of these excursions, that he called Simon, and Andrew. These
disciples were following their occupation of fishing on the lake: they had
known him before, and immediately followed him. Soon after, he saw James, and
John, who were busy in the same employment: he called them also, and they
readily obeyed. Perhaps, they might have been acquainted with our Redeemer on
the banks of Jordan; or if not, his call was accompanied with such a
manifestation of divine power, that all their scruples were overcome, and with
a joyful readiness and elevation of mind, they followed the Savior of the
world.

ACCOMPANIED by these disciples, our blessed Redeemer took a tour through
several cities, towns, and villages in Galilee: the time he spent in this
progress, is not particularly noted by the evangelists, but we are told, that
he wrought a great number of miracles, that he healed the diseases of those
that applied to him, and performed such wonderful works, that his fame drew
great multitudes of people after him, not only from Galilee, but the remoter
parts of Judea, and even from beyond Jordan: nor was the fame of the wonders he
performed, confined to the land of Israel, for the inhabitants of Syria brought
their sick into the province of Galilee, to be healed by the Savior of mankind.

THE blessed JESUS, perceiving himself followed by a vast multitude of people,
who all crowded around him, with the utmost earnestness and attention, ascended
a mountain that was near at hand, and placing himself on an eminence, while all
the people stood on the sides of the hill, he addressed the listening throng
from thence; and with the most intelligent simplicity and plainness, joined
with the most powerful heart-affecting energy, he inculcated in them the moral
precepts of his religion.

HE began his divine discourse, with the doctrine of happiness, a subject which
had claimed the first attention of the schools of the philosophers, and the
wise men of the age; and a subject, which, in its own nature, claims the
consideration of every intelligent being, and the more so, as the wisest of
mankind have differed very much in their definitions what true happiness is, as
well as the means by which it is to be attained. The Jews in general, concluded
it to consist in opulence, grandeur, and glory: on that account they wished to
see the Messiah's kingdom, because they supposed it would be a temporal
dominion, and that a golden scepter, instead of a scepter of righteousness,
would be the scepter of his kingdom; and so prevailing was the opinion of the
temporal reign of the Messiah, that the disciples themselves retained this
notion, till after his resurrection, and probably were induced to follow him at
first, by the expectation of high honors and rewards.

THE blessed JESUS, therefore, thought fit to show his hearers in general, and
his disciples in particular, their mistakes in so important a point, and let
them know, that happiness did not consist in the abundance of things possessed,
nor in the opinion which the world might form concerning them, but in an entire
resignation of mind to the will of God, who is perfectly wise and good, who
orders and disposes all things with the utmost accuracy and exactness, so as to
promote the best interest of his people; and an acknowledgment of his superior
wisdom, and our own blindness and folly, tends to the ease and quiet of our
minds, when we are oppressed and afflicted, and cannot discern the wise ends of
his dispensations. Blessed, said our great Redeemer, are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And though the sense of our own meanness
and unworthiness might excite us to mourn, and fill us with sorrow of heart,
the divine teacher informed his hearers, that this was a true sign of
succeeding happiness: Blessed, said he, are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. Our exalted Redeemer further proceeded to inform his attentive
hearers, that true happiness did not consist in the gratification of their
inordinate passions and inclinations, but in the suppressing of them, and
keeping them within the bounds of reason and religion. Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful, for
they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
The divine teacher then proceeded to observe, that happiness did not consist in
what the world calls conquest and glory; for tyrants and conquerors, who
disturb the peace, and destroy the comforts of mankind are most deplorably
miserable: but true happiness falls to the share of those who are lovers of
peace, and seek to promote kindness, benevolence, and all the social affections
amongst men; for they imitate the perfection of heavenly goodness, which so
conspicuously shines in their Maker, and will therefore be called his children.
Blessed are the peace makers, said our exalted Redeemer, for they shall be
called the children of God. And if these holy and amiable persons, should not
at first find that happiness, which they are entitled to as heirs of heaven;
though they should be reviled and persecuted by the wicked of this world;
though they should be deprived of their comforts, and undergo the severest
trials; yet the great Savior of mankind pronounces them blessed. Blessed, said
he, are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Solid contentment and true happiness, the heavenly teacher
informs us, are not to be expected from the praise of men, nor from the noise
of popular applause, but will hereafter be the portion of those who are falsely
reviled for their integrity and uprightness, and their steady attachment to
truth; such persons measurably partake of the sufferings of CHRIST: and it was
by these persecutions, and the contempt of the world, that the prophets have
been in all ages distinguished. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; for so
persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

SUCH were the declarations of the Son of God, with reference to the happiness
of man; after which, the blessed JESUS addressed himself to his disciples, and
pointed out their duty as preachers of the gospel, designed by the sovereign
Ruler of all things, to teach his will, and lead others in the paths of eternal
happiness. But, as the doctrine which he had advanced was so directly contrary
to the traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, our Redeemer thought it
necessary to inform his disciples, that he had no intention to destroy the
moral precepts contained in the law and the prophets, but to fulfill and confirm
them. Nothing is more firm, and fixed on a more immovable basis, than the great
precepts of morality: these, being copied from the perfections of God, must
remain fixed and immovable: the eternal laws of righteousness cannot be
altered; heaven and earth will pass away, but the moral law of God will always
remain the same. This our great Redeemer strictly enjoined his disciples to
enforce in the strongest manner, both by precept and example; and gave them
several instances in which the Scribes and Pharisees had interpreted the moral
law in too loose and careless a manner. He then condescended to assist their
devotions, by teaching them that excellent form of Prayer, which is called by
his name, and is in constant use amongst Christians.

OUR Father which art in Heaven. The great Creator and Preserver of men, may
be, with the highest propriety, called our Father; for it is to his almighty
power, that we owe our existence; he is, in a peculiar and distinguishing
manner called the Father of spirits, because he alone is the author of all
spiritual existence. The form of our bodies owes its original, to his
boundless, unerring wisdom, and all our active powers are the produce of his
all-creating goodness. Nor is it only by right of creation, that the eternal
God may justly claim the title of our Father; but the same endearing
appellations is due to him on account of our daily preservation: he watches
over us, with the care of a Father, and we are constantly made sharers in the
benefits of his paternal tenderness and protection. But there is still another
and more emphatical sense, wherein God is the Father of his people: it is by
the almighty power of his spirit, that they are regenerated; and this great
work is frequently, in the New Testament, styled being born of God: by this it
is, that poor, lost, undone sinners, are formed anew, so that, partaking of his
divine nature, they become his children indeed, and are permitted to lift up
their eyes to the great King of the universe, and call him their Father. In the
former sense, God is the Father of the creation, and a parent to all his
creatures, good or bad: but in the latter sense, he is a Father only to his own
people, who are converted by his almighty power and spirit, enabled to believe
in his Son, and to live such lives as are consistent with the rulers of his
gospel. Father, is the most grand and magnificent title which can be found in
the whole compass of nature, and it conveys the most honorable and lovely idea
that can be formed in the human mind: it is particularly happy in marking the
essential character of the true God, who is the great Father of the universe.
This noble and tender appellation not only displays him as the first cause of
all things, but gives us a beautiful and lovely idea of his tenderness and
care, which he extends over all his creatures, whom he nourishes with an
affection, and protects with a watchfulness and care, vastly superior to an
earthly parent. We are permitted and encouraged to call the eternal God our
Father, to encourage our hope in his goodness, and mercy, in granting us every
request that is not improper to be bestowed: for a father would not deny a
petition to a child, if it was in his power to give, and the petition was fit
to be granted: and at the same time, our being permitted to call God our
Father, should raise in us an holy emulation, by exciting us to consider what
sort of children we ought to be, who claim so high and honorable a relation.
And our being exhorted to call God our Father, in the plural number, ought to
put us in mind that we are all brethren, the children of one common parent, and
that we should love one another in sincerity, and sincerely and fervently pray
for the good of each other.

WHICH art in Heaven. By these words, we are commanded to express the glory,
majesty, and power of the great God: his presence is not confined to the
heavenly worlds; the heaven of heavens cannot contain him; the whole universe
lies open to his eye: his presence extends itself through the infinitude of
space: at one vast comprehensive view, he beholds the whole creation, past,
present, and to come, heaven is his throne, and earth is his footstool; the
night and the day, the darkness and the light, are equal to him, he sees all
things both in heaven and in earth; even hell is naked before him, and
destruction has no covering. But, by God's being in heaven, we are to
understand, that this is the place where his glories are plainest seen, and
where he is best worshipped.

HALLOWED be thy name. By the name of God, the Hebrews understood the divine
Majesty himself, all his attributes, and his works; and therefore, we are to
understand by this petition, a desire in the worshipper, that the honor,
dignity, glory, and majesty of the Great Creator, may be displayed and exalted
amongst men; as much as though we should pray, may thy existence be universally
believed, thy supremacy over all things acknowledged, thy goodness believed and
confided in, and may all men think well, honorably, and worthily of thee, of
all thy works, and all thy ways, and all thy dealings toward them.

THY kingdom come. May thy glorious gospel, and the spiritual kingdom of thy
Son, be extended over the whole earth; and may all ignorance, superstition,
idolatry, and iniquity, be driven before the glorious rising of the Sun of
righteousness.

THY will be done on earth, as it is in heaven. May the sons of men be turned
from darkness to light, and from sin and Satan to the knowledge of thyself, and
by the divine aids of thy Spirit, may they be enabled to do thy will, as
steadily and sincerely, though not with such perfection, as it is done by the
angels of light in the heavenly world.

GIVE us this day our daily bread. Be pleased, O thou great parent of the
universe! who suppliest all thy creatures from the rich fountain of thy
fullness, to give us, day by day, such a portion of thy creature comforts, as
may enable us to serve thee with cheerfulness and satisfaction of mind.

AND forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, God being the supreme and
righteous governor of the world, he has a right to punish those who break his
just and equitable laws. The suffering of punishment is therefore a debt, which
sinners owe to supreme justice: and when we are commanded to pray, that God
will forgive us our debts, the meaning is, that he will remit that dreadful
punishment due to our sins. This enormous debt, the great king of the universe,
on account of the satisfaction which his justice has received, in the blood and
righteousness of his Son, is ready to forgive to all that believe in him, with
such a lively and powerful faith, as produces a steady and prevailing obedience
to his gospel. But the infinite mercy of God in forgiving our transgressions,
ought at all times to be remembered by us, in such a manner as to soften our
minds, and inspire them with a readiness to forgive those who have transgressed
against us. We give but a poor evidence, that by a sincere and influential
faith, we are become partakers of divine forgiveness, if we indulge an
unforgiving temper of mind, and pursue with inexorable and implacable
resentment, those who have transgressed against us.

AND lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Deliver us, O thou
eternal Father of our spirits! thou great maker and supporter of the feeble
frame of our bodies! from such temptations as thou know will be too hard for
us. Preserve us, O Lord! from such temptations as are too powerful for human
nature, either by removing them from us, or granting such a measure of thy
grace, and such assistance from thy holy Spirit, as may enable us to overcome.
Make us sensible, O our God! how weak and frail we are; may we never presume on
our own strength, but depending on thy grace, may we, in thy might, be enabled
to overcome all our spiritual foes, and be preserved to thy heavenly kingdom.

FOR thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Thou, O
God! art the eternal, universal monarch, thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and thy dominion extends over all: the government of the universe is thine,
and thou reignest the great independent King of the creation: thou, by thine
infinite power, first did establish, and now preservest the stupendous frame
of nature: all power in heaven and earth is in thine hand, thou can do what
thou please, and none can stay thine hand, or say unto thee, What do thou?
Thou art able, by thine almighty power, to protect and defend all thy faithful
servants; and thou hold omnipotence in thine hand to crush thy daring foes.
Thou art all perfect and all glorious; thou art possessed of every attribute
and every perfection which justly renders thee the object of supreme adoration
and the delight of the whole rational and intelligent creation. We adore thine
almighty, thine irresistible power; we venerate thy boundless, thine
unsearchable wisdom; we reverence thine impartial, thine inflexible justice; we
rejoice in the glories of thine all-supporting goodness: and exult in the
contemplation of thine immutable mercy. Open our eyes, O Lord! that we may see
thy glory. May we be enabled at all times to bless and praise thy holy name,
and may we be of the number of those, whose delightful employment will be to do
thy will, and sing thy praises for ever and ever.

SUCH was the prayer which the Son of God himself delivered to the multitude
who surrounded him; from which it may be learned, that the great King of the
universe, who is seated on the exalted throne of heaven, surrounded by angels
and archangels, and constantly adored by all the holy and happy inhabitants of
the upper world, is so kind and condescendingly good, as to hear the cries, and
attend to the petitions of sinful men. What an animating, heart reviving
thought it is, that poor, frail, sinful creatures are permitted to stand before
the throne of the eternal God, and call him our Father! The glimmering light of
the dim-winking taper, which sleeps in its socket, is not more exceeded by the
splendour and glory of the sun shining in his strength, than the brightness of
the throne, the extent of the dominions, the power, glory, and majesty of the
great King of the creation, exceeds the most exalted prince on earth. Earthly
princes are so proud, and their ministers and attendants so covetous and
haughty, that they are rendered inaccessible to the greatest part of their
subjects; but the great Monarch of the universe, the supreme Lord of heaven and
earth, is easy of access; he calls upon sinners to seek his face, and the
meanest of mankind may at all times have free access to his exalted throne. How
blind and stupid, how regardless of their best interest, how cruel to
themselves are those men who will not pray! We are poor necessitous creatures;
we stand in need of various blessings; God has all things to give; and God
has said, ask and ye shall receive: he has erected a throne of grace, and is
at all times ready to hear and answer our prayers; and shall we be so very
deficient as not to pray? Shall we, when in distress, and pressed with the most
urgent necessities, stand at a gloomy distance, and refuse to ask? What folly
and madness is this? It is highly incumbent on all who have neglected this
duty, to consider their ways, to treasure up our Lord's words in their hearts,
and daily, with fervent prayer, approach the throne of that God, who is willing
to hear, and able to help, in every time of need. And when we seriously reflect
on this excellent Prayer proposed by the Son of God, and are admiring the vast
extent of divine mercy and forgiveness, we ought to remember, that in this
Prayer, we are reminded of our duty to forgive one another; and we may learn
from hence, that a mild, placable, forgiving spirit, is not only well-pleasing
to our heavenly Father, but has a manifest tendency in its own nature, to
prepare us, in the habitual temper of our minds, for the forgiveness of God.

THE next point, which our Lord treated on, in his admirable sermon, was the
duty of fasting. In this part of his discourse, he severely blamed the conduct
of the Pharisees, who made the greatest ostentation of their religion, and were
particularly fond of mortification and fasting. Hence that they might be
remarked for superior degrees of strictness and sanctity, and appear to men of
the most recluse and mortified disposition, they disfigured their faces, and
appeared with sad and sorrowful countenances; but our Lord enjoins us not to
perform our religious exercises, with design to be seen of men, but, with all
uprightness and sincerity of heart, to regard the omnipresence of our heavenly
Father, who sees in secret and will reward openly all his faithful
worshippers. The divine orator then turned his discourse to another subject,
and inculcated the necessity of heavenly-mindedness on his attentive and
respectful audience. So vastly important in their nature, and extensive in
their duration, are the concerns of the soul above those of the body, that it
is the highest wisdom of man, closely to attend to heavenly things, and at all
times to give them the preference to the frail and fleeting trifles of this
present world. Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, said the
heavenly Teacher, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal:
for where your treasure it, there will your heart be also. The shortness and
uncertainty of our abode in this present state, with the many disasters which
may happen to us, and take away our worldly possessions, should excite us not
to put our trust or confidence in any thing which belongs to this world; it is
greater wisdom to contemplate on heavenly things, to consider their superior
excellency, and the extent of their duration, with such a fixed and unremitting
attention, as may work in the soul an habitual desire after them, and prepare
us, in the prevailing temper of our minds, for the enjoyment of them.

OUR Lord was the more earnest in recommending this heavenly-mindedness to his
hearers, because it was a doctrine which they had not been used to hear from
their former teachers. The Jewish doctors were, in general, strangers to the
blessedness and glory of an happy eternity. The rewards promised to the keepers
of the law, were chiefly of a temporal nature; and as it was the gospel of
CHRIST, which brought life and immortality to light, the doctrine of eternal
happiness was the peculiar province of our Redeemer; and that they might not
suppose that the heavenly mindedness which he recommended, was consistent with
a covetous and anxious desire after worldly riches, our Lord informs them that
these things are directly contrary to each other. No man, says he, can serve
two masters; for either he will love the one and hate the other, or else he
will hold to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and mammon!

OUR Lord proceeded to enforce the heavenly doctrine by ascertaining the
universality of the providence of God, and his paternal care over the least and
meanest of his creatures. Behold, says he, the fowls of the air: for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father
feeds them. Are not ye much better than they? If the providence of God
extends to the meanest and most insignificant of his creatures, and his wisdom
has so conducted his wide creation, that there is abundant provision made for
the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field, shall his creature man, whom
he has placed at the head of his lower creation, and made the object of his
peculiar care, be over anxious and careful, or gloomy and discontented for fear
he should not be able to procure food and raiment? How unworthy is this of his
superior reason, and how dishonorable to his great Maker, and most bountiful
Benefactor! Thus the divine Teacher led the most ignorant and illiterate of his
hearers to entertain great and sublime ideas of God and his providence; and
gave them a more elevated and extensive view of the nature of his government
than had been taught in the schools of the philosophers: for though they
believed that there was a God, and that he made and governed the world, they
had but very dark and confused notions of his particular providence, as it
relates to the state of every individual in his creation. This, our great
Redeemer gave them to understand, was fixed by the universal Governor, with
more exactness and precision, than was generally imagined, and less in the
power of individuals to alter, by their utmost anxiety and care. Which of you,
says he, by taking thought, can add one cubit unto his stature?

THE illustrious Preacher then proceeds from the animal, to the vegetable part
of the creation, and infers the absurdity of anxious and vexatious cares
concerning raiment. Can it be supposed that the great Being, who spread fresh
verdure over the fields, and adorns them with those flowers which shine
brighter than the golden embroidery which glitters on the purple robes of
kings, will not provide raiment for his own people? Will he thus cloathe the
inanimate, and neglect the noblest part of his creation? Consider, said the
exalted Redeemer, the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil not,
neither do they spin; and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon, in all his
glory, was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so cloathe the
grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall
he not much more cloathe you, O ye of little faith? Let these considerations
excite you, he adds, to be easy and quiet, patient and resigned to the
allotments of Providence. Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.
Make it your first great concern, to pursue the interest of your immortal
souls, and rest not till you have obtained a rational and scriptural
satisfaction, that your eternal interest is safe; and, when this great blessing
is obtained, be not anxious or vexatiously careful concerning the things of
time and sense, but rest assured, that all these things, so far as necessary to
your supreme good, shall be added unto you.

THE exalted Redeemer, now drawing toward the conclusion of his discourse,
proceeded to forbid all rash and uncharitable judgment, either with regard to
the general characters, or particular actions of men. This is an evil of the
most atrocious kind; innocence and virtue often suffer, and, however sorry the
slanderer may be for the wrong done, the injury cannot be repaired. No
character is more hurtful to society, and no person more hateful to God and
man, than the slanderer; and our Lord intimates that both God and man will
resent the injury done to his creatures, Judge not, said he, that ye be not
judged. If you judge charitably, said the kind and compassionate, the meek and
benevolent Savior of mankind; if you make allowances for the frailty of human
nature, and are ready to pity and pardon those who have offended you, both your
heavenly Father, and your fellow-mortals will deal with you in the same manner.
But if you are always ready to hear, and eager to spread slanderous reports; if
you put the harshest construction on every action: if you are pleased to hear
of another's misconduct, or misfortunes, and never touched with the feeling of
your brother's infirmities; if you take all opportunities to injure him in the
opinion of mankind, or pursue him with inexorable and implacable resentment; if
you are a stranger to mercy or forgiveness, no mercy or forgiveness will you
find, either from offended Omnipotence, or injured and insulted man. For with
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again.

IN order to prevent mankind from passing rash and censorious judgment, our
great Redeemer advises them to look unto themselves; and if they would
carefully advert to their own errors and failings, they would find less time,
as well as less desire, to censure the rest of mankind. It frequently happens,
that those persons who are most ready to censure and condemn their
fellow creatures, and most eager to search out, and expose the failings of
others, are not the most blameless themselves: but frequently more culpable
than the persons whom they are so ready to accuse. It is therefore with the
highest reason that our great Redeemer exhorted his hearers to look unto
themselves, and carefully mend their own faults, which would be of greater
service to them, than endeavoring to expose and scandalize those who are
better than they. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye,
and considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye: or how will thou say to
thy brother; let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and behold, a beam is
in thine own eye. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

SUCH are the several branches of moral righteousness inculcated by the Son of
God; but some are so perverse in their dispositions, and so obstinately
attached to their evil practices and errors, that it is impossible to reclaim
them; and therefore our Savior advises his followers not to attempt it: Give
not, says he, that which is holy unto the dogs; neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and turn again and rent
you. Lastly, that it might not be supposed that the moral precepts of
christianity were above the attainment of mankind, our Lord proceeded to inform
his hearers, how gracious, and full of compassion, their heavenly Father was,
and how ready to hear and assist all who called upon him; and in consequence
advised them humbly to entreat his assistance, and at the same time that they
exerted their utmost endeavors to do his will, and be found in the way of his
commandments. Ask, says he, and it shall be given; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that asks, receives;
and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Our
Lord appeals to their own feelings toward their children, as an encouragement
to be earnest in their petitions to their heavenly Father: If ye being evil,
says he, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father, which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? But,
that they might not depend on the divine assistance without the diligent
exertion of their utmost endeavors, our Lord immediately adds, Enter ye in at
the straight gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; because straight is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leads to life, and few there be that find
it.

THE illustrious preacher, before he concluded his discourse, proceeded to warn
his hearers of false prophets and teachers, who would come with fair pretenses;
but as their lives and conversations were not answerable to their profession,
nor honorable to the cause they espoused, they were to be despised and
disregarded: Ye shall know them by their fruits, said the divine teacher; do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. It is
not the pretenses to extraordinary piety and goodness; it is not the most
flaming zeal, or the most ardent devotion, that will compensate for a disregard
to the divine commands, or a departure from the unvariable rules of
righteousness and goodness. It is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, said
the exalted Savior of mankind, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he
that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. And then he sums up the
whole, with a beautiful and striking simile, intended to demonstrate the
absolute necessity of such a regard to the words of CHRIST, influenced the mind
and determined the conduct in an universal and persisting obedience: Therefore,
said he, whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken
him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock; and the rain descended,
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and heat upon that house, and it fell
not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that hears these sayings,
of mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built
his house upon the sand; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of
it. Thus ended our Lord's excellent and admirable sermon. The multitudes stood
around him with the utmost attention and surprise. The plain tokens of divinity
which attended his discourse, joined with his all-commanding eloquence,
attracted every eye, and affected every heart: but what surprised them the more
was, the difference of his doctrine from what they before had heard; for he
taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.

CHAPTER XI.
CHRIST having finished his sermon on the mount, repairs to Capernaum, and on
his way there is met by a leprous person, whom he cleanses: On his entering the
city, he is accosted by a Roman Centurion, whose servant was ill of the palsy,
whom he heals: He afterward repairs to the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, where
he dispossesseth a devil: He cures Peter's wife's mother of a fever, and many
other diseased persons: He travels through Galilee; and directs the disciples
to take a great draught of fishes.

THE exalted Savior of sinners, having finished his sermon, came down from the
mountain, attended by a great concourse of people, who had listened to his
discourse, with the mixed emotions of wonder and joy. They surrounded the divine
person of our Redeemer, with the most respectful regard, and soon an incident
arose which gave them fresh cause of wonder and praise. As he was on his way to
Capernaum, he was met by a leprous person, who, doubtless, having heard of his
wonderful works, and the condescending goodness with which he relieved the
afflicted and diseased, threw himself with the utmost humility at his feet, and
cried, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

THE species of leprosy common amongst the Eastern nations, and the Jews, was
very nauseous and infectious, as well as extremely hard to be cured. Our Lord
was not deterred by this, from approaching an object so loathsome; but, full of
pity, he condescended so far as to touch him, with this reply, I will: be thou
clean. The dire infection immediately fled before the touch of the Son of God;
who charged the person, thus instantaneously healed, not to publish the matter
abroad, but go directly and show himself to the priest, offering, at the same
time, the oblations which the law in such cases required.

THE blessed JESUS then proceeded to Capernaum, but as he entered the city, he
was accosted by a Roman centurion, who with the care and tenderness of an
indulgent master, informed him of the dreadful condition of his servant, who
was afflicted with a paralytic disorder, and grievously tormented with pain.
The compassionate Redeemer of mankind, listened to his complaint with pitying
attention, and replied to his address, that he would come and heal him. The
centurion thought this goodness too much to be expected by one who was not of
the Israelitish nation, and therefore told our Lord, that he was not worthy so
illustrious a person should come under his roof; and he, very probably, having
heard of the nobleman's son, who, while he lay sick at Capernaum, was healed by
JESUS, when he was so far off as Cana, desired our Lord only to speak the word,
and he doubted not but his servant would be healed; for he believed, that
diseases and devils were as much under the command of our Redeemer, as his
soldiers were subject to the will, and obeyed the word of their commander. Our
Lord was well pleased with the centurion's faith, and commended it in the
highest terms; I have not found, said be, so great faith, no not in Israel.

THE believing stranger, having applied the most exalted ideas of the divine
power and goodness to JESUS CHRIST, who appeared to be no more than a man, our
Lord took occasion, from the open confession of his faith, to declare the
gracious design of his Almighty Father toward the Gentile world, and gave the
surrounding multitude to understand, that the divine goodness was not confined
to the seed of Abraham, nor to the land of Israel: And I say unto you, said he,
that many shall come from the East, and the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. And having a clear view of
the obstinacy, impenitence, and final unbelief of the Jewish nation, he added,
But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Having thus spoken to the listening
throng, our Lord directed his discourse to the centurion, and said, Go thy way;
and as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee; and immediately the servant
was healed.

ON the next Sabbath day, JESUS went to the Jewish synagogue at Capernaum, and
instructed the people with such energy and power, and at the same time, with
such remarkable plainness and simplicity, that the congregation heard him with
the greatest pleasure and surprise: and to increase their admiration, there was
a person in the assembly, that was possessed by an unclean and wicked spirit,
who cried out in the most dreadful manner: Let us alone, what have we to do
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee,
who thou art, the Holy one of God. But the blessed JESUS, who wanted no such
testimony, commanded him to keep silence, and immediately come out of the man;
this command, the wicked spirit durst not disobey, and directly complied,
leaving the disordered person, to the astonishment of the whole congregation.

IT is constantly alleged, by those who are enemies to our religion, and
delight to cavil with the conduct of our Redeemer, and depreciate his mighty
deeds, that the persons, who are said in the gospels to be possessed by devils,
were only affected by some strange and unaccountable disorders; and because
sepulchers were esteemed polluted places, the melancholy persons who frequented
them, were said to be possessed with the devil. And the adversaries of our
religion, are fond of inquiring, why there should be any more demons in Judea,
than in any other country.

TO these objections it may, with great certainty be replied, that these
daemoniacs were not persons affected only with some uncommon and dreadful
disease; for the evangelists have taken care to be very particular on that
head: and being possessed with the devil, is carefully distinguished from any
other affliction and complaint: St. Matthew tells us, that, They brought unto
Christ, all sick people, that were taken with diverse diseases, and those that
were possessed with devils, and those that were Lunatic; and he healed them,
chap. iv. ver. 24. And again, chap. x. ver. i. He gave to the apostles power
against evil spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sicknesses
and diseases. And we are informed by St. Mark, chap. i.34. That they healed
many that were sick of diverse diseases, and cast out devils. There is in these
passages a plain distinction between those who were sick of various diseases,
and those who were possessed with devils; and this being distinctly noticed by
the evangelists, it cannot be supposed, that there were not plain, evident
marks of distinction, which made the cure so manifest, that there was no danger
of being deceived.

AND it may further be observed, to those who doubt of the existence of evil
spirits, that they cannot entertain such doubts without questioning the truth
of the Holy scriptures; for the sacred writers have laid down several
particulars concerning these impious and envious beings; they have taken care
to acquaint us with their original and fall, their names and numbers, their
government and orders, their malicious designs, and various of their
employments; and it is abundantly evident, both from sacred and profane
history, that before our Savior's ascension, there were great numbers of
persons possessed with evil spirits. These evil spirits had gained so great an
ascendancy, and taken possession of so large a part of the world, that they
reviled the great Creator in his worship; and in several Heathen nations, there
were oracles which were applied to, in order to resolve the doubts, and answer
the inquiries of their worshippers. And as the design of our Lord's
incarnation, and his whole ministry, was to destroy the works of the devil;
perhaps, the reason why these apostate spirits were so frequently permitted to
appear in Judea at this time, was, that the Son of God might, in a more
manifest and triumphant manner, display his authority and power over the prince
of darkness, and all his infernal legions, and thereby convince the wondering
world, that he was really the Son of God, and the Savior of mankind.

THE fame of this miracle was soon spread over the neighboring country. Our
Redeemer had healed the sick, and done various wonderful works, which had
excited the admiration of the people, and raised their expectations of
something very great and advantageous to the Jewish nation, to arise from so
extraordinary a person. But when the people beheld him, in the public assembly,
with a commanding authority, dispossess the devil, and drive the powers of
darkness before him; their astonishment increased, and they acknowledged that
this was the mighty power of God.

OUR Lord having performed this miracle in the synagogue, he departed to
Peter's house, whose wife's mother law sick of a fever: he took her by the
hand, and immediately the fever left her; and so perfectly was she restored to
her former health, that she arose and ministered unto him. The evangelist Luke,
in his account of this wonderful cure, says that he rebuked the fever; which is
a figurative way of speaking, conformable to the language of the Scriptures,
where not only the inanimate parts of the creation, but diseases, famine,
pestilence, and the like, are personated and represented as the servants of the
almighty, to execute his vengeance on rebellious sinners: hence, says the
prephet, before him went the pestilence: and burning diseases went forth at his
feet.

OUR Lord being grown popular, and famed through the city of Capernaum, for the
authority and eloquence of his teaching, and the manifold wonders which he
wrought, vast numbers of people resorted to him while he abode at Peter's
house, and brought with him great numbers of sick persons, and those who were
possessed with devils. The kind and compassionate Savior of the world, was
touched with pity at the sight of so many distressed and afflicted objects;
when he immediately healed them all, and fulfilled, by his extensive
all-relieving goodness, the prophecy of Isaiah, which says, He himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

BUT the vast crowds of people, who now gathered about him in Capernaum, were
not easily to be borne, and to avoid the troublesome press, our Redeemer
retired to the desert, whither he was soon followed by great multitudes of
people, who were so delighted with his instructions, and had conceived so high
an opinion of him, from his kind condescension, and his many wonderful works,
that they desired him never to depart from them. But this request being
inconsistent with the nature of his ministry, and the great design of his
coming into the world, he departed from the desert, and preached in the
synagogues of Galilee; and after he had proceeded through various cities of
that country, he returned to Capernaum.

WHEN our great Redeemer was known to be returned to the city, he was soon
surrounded by great multitudes of people; so that he was forced to retire into
a ship, which being a little way from the shore, the divine Instructor taught
them from thence, while the attentive multitude crowded the seaside, and
listened with great attention to his heavenly words.

WHEN he had finished his discourse, he turned to Peter, who was the owner of
the vessel, and advised him to launch out further from the shore, and let down
his fishing net into the sea. Peter informed him of their unsuccessful toil
during the night, but said, at his command, they would let down their net and
make one trial more. Accordingly, they cast into the water, and immediately
found that their net had enclosed so prodigious a number of large fish, that it
was in danger of breaking. Peter surprised at so strange a turn, and such an
unexpected success, and knowing it must be produced by a supernatural power,
fell down at JESUS's feet. Depart from me, said he, for I am a sinful man, O
Lord! He was convinced, by this miracle, of the divinity of his master, and was
at that time impressed with awe from a sense of his own unworthiness: but the
all-gracious Savior of mankind bid him banish his fears, and informed him,
that henceforth himself and his companions should be engaged in more noble
employments. Our Lord declared that they should catch men, meaning, that they
should be made instrumental in turning them from darkness to light, and from
sin and Satan to the knowledge of God.

THIS miracle was considered, by the disciples of CHRIST, as a fuller and
plainer manifestation of his divine power, and a clearer evidence of his being
the Son of God, than those they had seen him perform in Capernaum and the
adjacent country. It was the common opinion amongst the Jews, that good men, by
their prayers, might prevail so far with the almighty Governor of the world, as
to heal the sick and cast out devils; but they concluded that the creatures
inhabiting the elements of the air or water, were subject only to the commands
of our great Creator: and as he never granted to man an authority over these,
the miracle which our Savior had just wrought, proved him to be the Son of
God, and the great Messiah; and accordingly this manifestation of divine power,
fully convinced the disciples of the divinity of their master, and all they,
without hesitation, joined in the resolution to follow him through the world.

CHAPTER XII.
CHRIST cleanses a second leper: He rebukes the storm and calms the sea: He
casts out the Legion of Devils, and suffers them to enter into an Herd of
Swine: He cures a Person who had long been afflicted with the Palsy: And calls
Matthew, who was sitting at the Receipt of Custom.

THE disciples now having every scruple removed, and being fully convinced that
their master was the Messiah, left their employment and followed him, while
according to his usual custom, he went through various cities of Galilee,
preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and confirming his divine
doctrines, with the most astonishing miracles.

IN one of the cities which he visited on this occasion, he found a man, said
by the evangelist, to be full of leprosy, who, seeing Jesus, fell on his face,
and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. It was
the custom of the priests in Judea to drive from the conversation of mankind,
those persons who were infected with the contagious kind of leprosy; and as
this person was permitted to dwell in the city, it may be supposed that his
leprosy was not of the worst kind. His case however, excited the compassion of
our great Redeemer, who immediately cleansed him, and commanded him to depart
to Jerusalem, and show himself to the priest, and offer the customary gifts;
but not publish abroad the account of his cure, nor make any noise about it.
But the blessing which the poor man had received, was so great and unexpected,
that his heart was so full of gratitude and joy, that he could not contain it;
and he published the great things which our Lord had done for him, to all men
where ever he came. This brought such crowds of people to the Son of God, that
he was obliged to depart from Capernaum into the wilderness, where he spent
some time in retirement, meditation, and prayer.

SOME writers have supposed that this leper, and the other mentioned in the
foregoing chapter, were one and the same person; but this must be a mistake,
the former being cleansed in the fields, the latter in the city: after
cleansing the first, JESUS went to Capernaum and healed the centurion's
servant; after curing the latter, JESUS retired into the wilderness, to shun
the vast multitudes which soon gathered round him, from the leper being so
careful to proclaim to all men the miracles which JESUS had wrought.

PERHAPS it may seem strange that the blessed JESUS should be so careful to
conceal his wondrous works, and be looked upon in some measure, contrary to the
end for which they were performed, which must certainly be to prove his divine
mission. But it may be observed, that his modesty and humility would not allow
his works to have the least appearance of ostentation; nor the Jews to have the
least pretense of accusing him of seeking his own glory, or aiming at popular
applause.

AND it may be supposed that our great Redeemer did not think it proper, at
this time, to irritate the Scribes and Pharisees by the proclamation and
publication of his miracles through the kingdom. He very well knew that at the
appointed time they would perform whatever had been determined, concerning him,
in the councils of heaven. In the mean time, he was to work the works of him
that sent him, and proclaim his gospel amongst mankind. This he knew could not
be so conveniently performed if the fame of his miracles had roused the rage of
his enemies, and excited their malice and envy to exert their utmost power
against him. He likewise was sensible of the unruly humor of the multitude;
they were convinced that he was the Messiah; they had no further views than a
temporal reign; and he might be apprehensive that they would come by force and
make him king, if the fame of his miracles blazed abroad before he had informed
them of the spiritual nature of his kingdom. If such were his views, there was
the greatest necessity to keep his miracles concealed as much as possible. The
fame of his cleansing the last leper had brought such numbers of people to
Capernaum, that he was forced to retire into a solitary retreat in the
neighboring desert: nor could he even in this retirement long enjoy the repose
he sought; for the people soon found out the place of his retreat, and flocked
to him in great numbers from every part of the country.

OUR Lord finding his endeavors to conceal himself in the wilderness would be
in vain, he ordered his disciples to accompany him to the other side of the
lake. A certain Scribe, who happened to be amongst the company, declared that
he would follow him whithersoever he went; JESUS, who well knew that his only
desire was to gain the profits and honor of that temporal kingdom which he
supposed the Messiah would establish, told him, that if he wanted nothing more
than to advance and improve his worldly fortune, he would be greatly deceived;
for the blessed JESUS informed this teacher of Israel, That the foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where
to lay his head.

THE Son of Man is a name by which the Messiah is called in the prophecy of
Daniel, where his wide and extensive dominion is described; and therefore when
this title is applied to our Lord, it has reference to his human nature, and
at the same time conveys an idea of that glorious kingdom to which his manhood
will be exalted. But as it was also a name by which the old prophets were
called by way of contempt, it is used in several places to express the deep
humiliation of the Son of God.

THE disciples having provided a ship, took their Master on board, and crossed
the lake, being followed by several boats full of people, who were desirous of
hearing his heavenly discourse, and seeing the wonderful works which he
constantly performed. Our Lord, being fatigued with the labor of the day, fell
asleep in the ship, while she smoothly glided along the level seas.

But soon the weather, which till now had been calm and serene, changed, black
clouds covered the skies, and the big storm burst from the dark concave of
heaven, the winds roared aloud, and the white foam appeared on the face of the
waves; the ship could scarce bear the dashing tides, which beat incessantly
against her; the darkness of the night increased the horrors of the tempest;
the waves began to break over the ship, and she was in the utmost danger of
sinking. All hopes of being saved were lost, and in the agonies of despair the
disciples ran to JESUS, crying, Master, Master, we perish! This pitious
exclamation awakened him from his sleep, and raising that hand, so often
employed in acts of benevolence and mercy, he with an awful all-commanding
voice, rebuked the boisterous ocean. The elements knew his voice; the roaring
winds forsook the seas; and the foaming waves subsided. All was quiet, all was
still, and the ship smoothly cut the smiling deep, soon arriving at her
destined port.

THE disciples, before this, had seen our Lord perform many miracles, and had
abundant reason to rely on his power and goodness. They had certainly no cause
to be so much affrighted, or to give way to such despair and terror: they might
have considered, that the same divine person who had so often healed the sick,
and had lately shown such power over the watery element, as to bring the fish to
their nets, was equally able to stay the wild waves, or to have preserved them
alive, had the ship sunk beneath them: but they seemed, in the hurry of mind
consequent on the terrors of the storm, to have forgot the power of their
master, and therefore he gently rebuked them, Why are ye so fearful! How is it
that ye have no faith? They ought to have remembered likewise, that the voyage
was undertaken at his command, and it was not to be feared, that he would
permit them to perish: but when the terror of the storm was over, they wondered
at his power, and though they frequently had occasion to remark the effects of
his heavenly goodness, they exclaimed, What manner of man is this! that even
the winds and the sea obey him.

SOON after the storm was stilled, the ship arrived in the country of Gadara;
and on their landing, two men possessed with devils, came to meet our Redeemer.
They were both exceeding fierce, turbulent, and unruly; but one of them was
more furious than the other: this person had often been bound with chains and
fetters, but all in vain, for his fetters were always broken with the greatest
fury, so that no man attempted any longer to restrain him; being therefore at
full liberty, he shunned all human society, and wandered day and night, in
desert and dry places, and amongst the sepulchers and tombs, filling the silent
repositories of the dead, with the most dismal and horrid howlings, and
sometimes tearing his flesh, and cutting himself with stones.

THE disciples were very much alarmed and terrified at the approach of these
horrid and furious beings, but JESUS soon quieted their apprehensions of
danger, by commanding the devils to come out of the men, while they were at
some distance. The heavenly command had no sooner passed from the lips of our
great Redeemer, than the men fell on their faces crying, What have we to do
with thee Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? Art thou come hither to torment
us before the time? I adjure thee, by God, that thou torment us not. The
infernal spirits were not ignorant of the power of the Son of God, and were
afraid, that he would cast them immediately into the torments prepared for
them, and suffer them no longer to wander about the earth, which they seem to
have hoped would be permitted them, till the judgment of the great day.

JESUS, being willing that the torment of these miserable men should be the
more understood, asked one of the demons his name, who immediately answered,
my name is Legion, for we are many: at the same time, he humbly requested, that
our Lord would not immediately cast them into the ultimate torments prepared
for them in the great deep of bottomless perdition, but would permit them to
enter into an herd of swine, then feeding on a neighboring mountain.

The grand deceiver of mankind, no doubt, beheld with gnawing envy, the effects
of our Redeemer's power and goodness; and to abate the opinion which the
inhabitants of Gadara might form of him, and make him odious in their view,
seems to be the reason of his petition to enter into the swine; for doubtless
the Devil knew, that if his legion could gain this permission, it would be in
their power to destroy them; but though his secret designs could not be hid
from the Savior of the world, yet ou^ Lord was pleased to grant to the fiend,
the permission he desired: perhaps this might be complied with, to give the
disciples a full proof that these persons were really possessed with devils,
and to give a terrible instance of the power of these malicious beings when
free from restraint.

THE commission was no sooner granted, than the devils forsook the men, and,
swift alightning, seized their bristly prey. The whole herd were immediately in
a tumult, and the torments the poor creatures suffered, were plainly perceived
by the spectators at a distance; the keepers were affrighted, and found it
impossible to calm or restrain the wild fury of the herd; they poured, with
amazing rapidity, down the mountain's side, and approaching the confines of the
lake, leaped from the rocks and precipices into the sea, and the whole herd
perished in the waters. The persons, who but a moment before, were roaring,
raving, and cutting themselves, were now become calm and composed; they were
become mild and gentle, having recovered the use of their reason, and being now
proper members of society, they, doubtless, believed in the Son of God.

THE keepers of the herd, astonished at this surprising event, ran into the
city, in the utmost terror and amazement, and related the cure of the men who
had been possessed with devils, and the destruction of the swine. This
wonderful report, threw the whole city into the utmost consternation, and the
inhabitants in crowds, left their houses, to be spectators of the strange
event. They saw the men sitting at the feet of JESUS, and in their right minds;
but as they were conscious of having committed a trespass against the law of
Moses, by keeping such numbers of swine, which were strictly forbid to be
eaten, they were afraid, and seemed to expect some severer judgment: they might
have been convinced of the goodness and compassion of the great person who had
performed these wonders, by the cure of the men; but they were afraid, and
meekly besought our Lord to depart from their country.

THE stupid Gadarines, had they known how great a benefit they might have
received by attending on the illustrious person who had worked such wonders
amongst them, would not have been so cruel to themselves, as to have presented
such a petition. It is true they had lost their swine, but had received two of
their countrymen and fellow creatures; these happy men were delivered from the
power of the Devil, and their country was freed from so intolerable a burden;
and the benefit they might have received to their souls, by attending on our
great Redeemer and hearing his words, would have been of greater value than the
cattle on a thousand hills.

THE blessed JESUS, however, thought fit to comply with the request of the
foolish Gardarines, and soon returned to the country from whence he came. The
persons who were happily delivered from the power of the Devil, desired to
accompany him, but our Lord ordered them to remain in their own country, as a
standing monument of his divine power and goodness: Go home to thy friends,
said our exalted Redeemer to one of them, and tell them how great things the
Lord has done for thee, and has had compassion on thee.

IT may be remarked on this miracle, that here we have a fuller display of the
tyranny and power of the Devil, than in any other part of Scripture; and
therefore it is fit to be recommended to the serious attention of those
infidels, who, like the Sadducees, will not believe in the existence of
spirits, and scoff at the power of the Devil. Let such persons behold the
picture of these unhappy men possessed by the devils, as drawn by the
evangelists: they were driven from their abodes, and from the society of men;
one of them was so fierce that he could not be confined, but broke chains of
iron like a burnt thread, and fetters like rotten wood; he frequented the most
solitary places, and filled the desert with more dreadful howlings, than the
wild beasts; he dwelt amongst the tombs, and abode in the dismal and solitary
mansions of the dead, forlorn and naked, crying out day and night, cutting
himself with stones, and tearing his own flesh.

IF such persons would give themselves time to consider this dreadful
representation of human misery, surely their scoffs would be changed into
compassion for these unhappy creatures, and fearful apprehensions for
themselves; surely they would no longer scoff at the power of the Devil, nor
the pains of eternal damnation. It would certainly be more worthy the superior
wisdom they boast of, to be cautious and diffident; they are men, and surely
they will allow, that it is possible they may be mistaken: and when their
eternal interest is at stake, one would think they might condescend to
consider. But if they will deride, and still persist in their unbelief, a short
space of time will convince them of their fatal error; and dreadful experience,
force them to confess the greatness of the tyranny, and the bitterness of the
malice, of this prince of darkness, against the souls of men. May they see the
error of their conduct, and be enabled, by the Divine Spirit, sincerely to
repent of their evil thoughts, and perverse ways, and seek the things which
belong to their eternal peace.

THE blessed JESUS, with his disciples, being landed in Galilee, he soon
repaired to Capernaum; no sooner was his arrival known, than great multitudes
resorted to him; the house where he was could not contain them, nor even the
court before the door. He preached the doctrines and duties of his gospel to
the listening throng, amongst whom where many Pharisees and doctors of the law,
whom the fame of his miracles had brought from distant countries to behold his
person, and hear his words.

HE not only, by his preaching, represented the great precepts and principles
of his religion, in a plain and striking point of light, but worked such
miracles amongst them, as were sufficient to convince every judicious,
unprejudiced, and impartial inquirer after truth, of his divine mission; and he
proved himself to be the Son of God, by those illustrious and benevolent
actions, which God only could perform.

AMONGST many other instances of his almighty power and God like benevolence,
was that of his restoring a person to perfect health, who had long been
afflicted with the palsy, and was reduced by that deplorable disorder, to the
most melancholy and distressful condition: he was unable to move any member of
his body, and was become an helpless bundle of misery and distress. In this
deplorable condition, he was carried in his bed, with design to have petitioned
our Lord to take pity on his distress, and exert that healing power, for which
he was so remarkable in his relief. The multitudes who surrounded our Lord, had
filled the house, and pressed so close, that it was impossible to bring the
sick person into his presence. The persons that carried this miserable object,
perceiving the difficulty which attended their design, took the lame man to the
top of the house, lying in his bed. The houses in Judea had flat roofs, with
battlements round them, according to the command of the law, Deuteronomy. xxii.8. on
these roofs there was a kind of trap-door, by which they came up from the house
upon the roof, where they spent a considerable part of the day. It was also
common to have a flight of stairs from the garden to the roof of the house, by
which the persons who carried the sick must be supposed to have ascended. When
they came to the roof, they found the door shut: but being resolved, if
possible, to compass their design, they uncovered the roof, and by ropes let
down the sick of the palsy, lying on his bed, into the midst of the company
before JESUS. Our Redeemer seeing the faith of the friends of the afflicted
person, had compassion on him, and spoke aloud, Son be of good cheer, thy sins
are forgiven thee.

THESE words gave great offense to the Scribes and Pharisees, who said in their
hearts, This man speaks blasphemy; for he takes to himself that which belongs
only to his maker. Who can forgive sins but God only? They were ignorant of the
high dignity of the person who pronounced the words, and they murmured against
him in their hearts. But JESUS, who knew what passed in the inmost recesses of
their minds, was willing to let them understand that he was endued with the
Spirit of God; and to convince them that he knew their thoughts, he said unto
them. Why think ye evil in your hearts? For whether is it easier to say to the
sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, take up thy bed
and walk? By these words our Lord might have convinced them that he had really
a right to forgive sins; for certainly it must be easier to forgive sins, than
to remove the punishment which is inflicted on men for sin. As therefore it was
apparent our Lord had power to perform the latter, why should it be questioned
whether he had a right to pronounce the former; but these haughty teachers of
Israel cherished a gloomy rancour in their hearts, and, frowning, held their
peace. Our Lord then turned to the diseased person, and said, Arise, take up
thy bed, and go unto thine house.

NO sooner had our great Redeemer spoken these words, than the diseased person
was perfectly restored to his former health and strength; and, to the
astonishment of the surrounding multitude, arose, took up his bed, and departed
to his own house, praising and glorifying God; while the affected beholders,
with the highest acclamations, joined the praise, and glorified the God of
Isreal, who had given such power unto man; but the Scribes and Pharisees,
however confounded they were at the miracle, still persisted in their unbelief;
an instance which should fill us with the most serious thoughts, as it
demonstrates that a pride of heart, which produces an haughty self-sufficiency,
and generates an obstinate and determined hatred and opposition to the truth,
and by suspending and stupifying all the noble powers of the soul, operates
like the palsy of the mind, is a much more dreadful and deplorable disease than
the palsy of the body.

OUR adorable Redeemer having performed this miracle, he departed to the
seaside; and a multitude of people gathering about him, he made use of the
favorable opportunity to enlighten their dark minds with the rays of heavenly
truth. What were the particular points he chose, the evangelists have not
informed us; but we may safely conclude that these discourses, like the rest
delivered by this divine person, were worthy of God and advantageous to man.

OUR blessed Savior having finished his discourse, he returned to the city of
Capernaum, and going by the keys where the goods which were brought by sea from
various nations were landed, he saw Matthew, a rich publican, sitting in his
office to receive the customs; Matthew is sometimes in the gospels called Levi,
and was the son of Alpheus. CHRIST no sooner saw him than he called him. Follow
me, was his mild and gracious language; which the heavenly teacher had no
sooner spoken, than the wealthy publican felt a divine power warm his heart,
which overpowering every worldly consideration, he seems to have left his
acounts all unfinished, and immediately obeyed. He soon, by our great Redeemer,
was led into a more honorable and important employment, and afterward became
an evangelist, as well as an apostle.

A few days after this, the new called publican made a great entertainment, to
which he, with CHRIST and his disciples, invited several of his own profession;
no doubt hoping that his heavenly conversation might strike their hard hearts
with remorse for their wickedness and extortion, and lead them in paths worthy
of partaking the benefits arising from the glorious Redeemer of mankind. In the
course of the entertainment CHRIST reminded them that in the gospel
dispensation, God will have mercy, and not sacrifice; and as those who
confessed themselves sinners were the only proper objects of that mercy, our
Lord declared that he was not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance; and to blame him for conversing with publicans and sinners was as
great a piece of absurdity as to blame a physician for visiting the sick. This
declaration from the great friend and Redeemer of lost sinners, dissatisfied
greatly the haughty self conceited Scribes and Pharisees: and as they made
great ostentation of their fasting and abstinence, they took this opportunity
to give themselves consequence on that account; and joining with John's
disciples, presumed to blame our great Redeemer because his disciples were not
so frequent in this practice as themselves. To this our Lord replied, that the
present was not a time for fasting, for his disciples need not fast and mourn
in the presence of their master, any more than the friends of the bridegroom
need fast and afflict themselves while they enjoyed his company. But, said he,
the day will come, when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then
they shall fast. Intimating by this, that the calamities, troubles, and
afflictions which they would suffer after the death of their master, would
oblige them to fast and mourn; but the corrupt nature of man, which was the
cause of his coming into the world, required different treatment; the rent
would not be patched up with mortification, fasting or any external
performances; such treatment as this would be like sewing a piece of new cloth
on an old rotten garment, which would only make the rent worse; or putting new
wine into old leather bottles, which would burst as soon as the liquor
fermented.

CHAPTER XIII.
CHRIST heals a Woman of an inveterate Issue of Blood: Raises Jarius's
Daughter from the Dead: Gives Sight to two blind Men: Delivered a possessed
Person from the evil Spirit: And, returning to Galilee, chooses his twelve
Apostles out of his Disciples: Then, repairing to Capernaum, cures the
Centurion's Servant.

WHILE the blessed JESUS was disputing with the Scribes and Pharisees in the
house of Matthew, whom he had lately called into the number of his disciples,
an afflicted father, in all the agonies of distress, hastily pressed into his
presence. This was Jarius, the ruler of the Jewish synagogue in Capernaum, and
the cause his present affliction was the dangerous illness of his daughter, who
lay at the point of death.

HAVING earnestly implored the assistance of our great Redeemer in this
distressing case, the Lord of life graciously condescended to comply with his
request, and accordingly accompanied the distressed father to his house; and
great multitudes of people, who were desirous of beholding the miracles of
Christ, crowded around and pressed to behold what the divine Instructor would
do on this great occasion.

But as they passed through the streets of the city, the attention of the
surrounding multitudes were turned to a woman, who came behind the Son of God,
and touched the hem of his garment. This woman had been afflicted twelve years
with a terrible disorder, which had baffled the force of medicine. She had
spent her whole substance on physicians, but could obtain no relief; but
hearing of the miracles performed by the blessed JESUS, she was so fully
convinced of his divine power, that she concluded if she could but touch his
clothes she should be made whole. Nor was she deceived, for she no sooner
touched the border of the garment of our great Redeemer, than the issue of
blood dried up; and she felt such a flow of vital spirits, and uncommon
gladness warm her heart, that she was fully convinced that she had received a
cure.

THE blessed JESUS, who knew the heart of all men, was not ignorant of the
minutest circumstances attending this affair; he knew the woman's thoughts, and
was pleased with her faith: and with design to begin a conversation in which he
might testify his approbation, he turned about and asked who touched him? His
disciples, as they were not apprised of the transaction, wondered at their
Master's question. Thou see, said they, the multitude thronging and pressing
thee, and say thou, who touched me? JESUS, however, persisted in the
inquiry, and the woman, perceiving she could not be concealed, came to him
trembling, and told him what she had done. She approached him with hisitation
and diffidence, fearing he would be offended at the liberty she had taken; but
the divine Physician received her with condescending goodness, spoke to her in
the kindest manner, and commended her faith; Daughter, said he, be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole.

IN the midst of the surprise occasioned by this miracle, a messenger
approached from Jarius's house, and informed him that his daughter was dead, so
that he need not give our Lord the trouble to come any further; for they
supposed it far beyond the power of this extraordinary person to overcome the
mighty conqueror Death, or recall the fleeting spirit from the eternal world.
This message was received by the affectionate parent with the strongest
emotions of sorrow, and bitterest agonies of distress. Our Lord took compassion
on him, and desired him to be comforted with hopes, that his daughter should be
restored.

WHEN our great Redeemer came to the ruler's house, he found it full of
mourners, who made great lamentation, and were preparing for the funeral. Our
Lord commanded them to cease their preparations; for, said he, the maid is not
dead, but sleeps: and they laughed him to scorn. These words of CHRIST were
used with peculiar propriety, to denote that it was determined the virgin
should not continue in the cold embraces of death, but should instantly be
restored to her friends as one awakened out of sleep; and having thus spoken,
our Lord approached the apartment of the dead, taking with him none but Peter,
James, and John, except the father and mother of the maiden: then laying hold
of the cold hand of the dead virgin, he said with a gentle voice, Maid, arise!
The heavenly voice was immediately obeyed, and the damsel arose, fresh as from
a sound sleep, all healthful and vigorous; and JESUS commanded to give her
something to eat.

THUS the great Son of God gave a full and clear manifestation of his heavenly
power: and not only proved that he was the true Messiah, but gave a clear
demonstration of the possibility of the resurrection of the dead: and those who
have imbibed the absurd opinion of the soul's sleeping with the body till the
resurrection, would do well to consider the expression of the evangelist, Her
spirit came again, Luke viii.55: by which it appears that the soul exists in a
state of separation, when the body lies all cold and breathless in the dark
chambers of the grave.

HAVING performed this great and benevolent miracle, our blessed Savior left
the ruler's house; and going through the streets of the city, he was followed
by two blind men; they had, doubtless, heard of the great miracle which he had
just performed, and supplicated his assistance in their present deplorable
circumstances, well knowing that he was able to restore them to sight. The
benevolent Savior of sinners condescended to favor their request; and having
entered an house to escape the crowding of the multitude, he touched their
eyes, and said, According to your faith be it unto you; when immediately the
great and desirable blessing of sight was restored unto them; the sacred beams
of all-chearing day revisited their eyes, and filled their hearts with
gladness* and their tongues with praise; and such a flood of gratitude and joy
overflowed their hearts, that they could not conceal their miraculous
restoration to sight, though our Lord required them to keep silence, but
published our Redeemer's fame and their own happy condition, through every part
of the country.

THE men who had thus miraculously received their sight being departed, the
multitude brought to the benevolent Savior of Sinners a dumb man, possessed
with a devil. So affecting a case attracted the compassionate regard of the
blessed JESUS, wh^ immediately cast out the foul spirit. The dumb man instantly
recovered the use of speech, and spoke in so sensible and satisfactory a
manner, that the whole multitude were amazed, and, declared that such wondrous
works were never wrought by the greatest and most eminent of the ancient
prophets, It was, said they, never so seen in Israel.

THE Pharisees whose hearts were full of infernal rancour, and whose pride and
prejudice prevented their receiving instruction from the discourses, or
conviction from the miracles of our great Redeemer, beheld the miracle now
performed with a scornful sneer, and put the most invidious construction upon
it, that could possibly enter into the heart of man: He casts out Devils,
said they, through the prince of the Devils. The blessed JESUS, seems, at this
time, to have taken no notice of this calumny: but leaving the haughty,
self-conceited doctors, under the dominion of their blindness, and prejudice,
he proceeded in the prosecution of the duties of his mission, and exerted
himself more and more in the great work of promoting the cause of truth, and
enlightening and instructing mankind. Accordingly leaving Capernaum, he took a
tour through the adjacent country, bringing happiness and peace to the sons of
misery and distress, visiting all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness, and every disease amongst the people.

AT his return to Galilee, he was surrounded by vast multitudes of people, who
expressed an earnest desire to hear his instructions, and learn the way of
truth and happiness from his lips. This tractable disposition of mind engaged
the attention of the great Redeemer of sinners, and filled his heart with
compassion for them, in their present deplorable state of blindness and
ignorance, and excited him to exert his divine power for their relief. Indeed
the state of the Jewish nation at this time was worthy of compassion; for, with
respect to spiritual things, the common people might justly be compared to
sheep without a shepherd. The Scribes, Pharisees, and lawyers, who ought to
have instructed them, were blind, lazy guides, and their teaching tended rather
to lead them aside from the paths of truth and righteousness, than to afford
them any real advantage: their teaching tended rather to magnify and exalt
themselves than promote the knowledge or worship of their maker; and to
encourage a scrupulous exactness in external ceremonial performances, rather
than promote the cause of truth, purity, and virtue. In this dark and forlorn
condition, our Lord had compassion on the multitude, and, in his divine wisdom
and benevolence, proceeded to take proper measures for their relief. He always
regarded the seed of Israel with peculiar affection; and as they were wandering
on the dark mountains of error and superstition, without any to restrain their
wanderings, or teach their steps to find the way of peace, he recommended their
case to his disciples, and commanded them to approach the throne of God, with
earnest prayers in their behalf: The harvest, said he, truly is plenteous, but
the laborers are few; pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will
send forth laborers into his harvest.

NOR did our great Redeemer recommend this affecting case to his disciples,
without employing his own most powerful intercession with his heavenly Father:
for he ascended a mountain, and continued all night in prayer to God. Having
spent the night in earnest supplication, the morning no sooner returned, than
he set about the important task of divine instruction. To this end, he chose
twelve out of the number of his disciples, and named them apostles, to be
always with him, and that he might send them forth to preach. These were Simon
Peter, and Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother,
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew; James the son of Alpheus, and
Lebbus, whose surname was Thaddeus Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot.
These twelve having been constant attendants on our Lord, having learnt his
heavenly doctrine, and seen his wondrous works, and being fully qualified to
preach to the world, those divine truths, which themselves had received, were
sent out to preach the gospel of the kingdom; but commanded not to enter into
any city of the Samaritans, or of the Gentiles, but confine themselves to the
land of Israel, and to proclaim through the nation, that the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. They were also provided with miraculous power to prove the truth of
their doctrine, and manifest to the world, that they came from God, and were
commanded to exert those divine powers with unremitting ardour, for the
advantage of mankind. The command of their divine Master, was to heal the sick;
cleanse the lepers; raise the dead; cast out devils; freely, said he, ye have
received, freely give. And that they might be sensible of the care of their
heavenly Father, over the most minute circumstances which concerned them, they
were enjoined to make no provision for their journey, nor take any care about
temporal things: Provide, said their divine Master, neither gold nor brass in
your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, neither
yet s^aves; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

PROBABLY the apostles, knowing that the whole Jewish nation was elated with
the apprehension of the appearance of the Messiah, and the high expectations
they had formed of his sitting up a temporal kingdom, might expect to be
received with honor and esteem by their countrymen, as they were going to
publish the speedy approach of that kingdom which they so ardently desired, and
to work such miracles, as might convince them that their declaration was true:
but their Master informed them, that the event, in this case, would not be
answerable to their expectation; for, instead of being caressed and honored by
their countrymen, he assured them, they should meet with derision and contempt:
he informed them that they should be despised and persecuted, delivered to the
rulers, and punished as wicked man. But, at the same time, he promised them the
constant protection and assistance of his heavenly Father, and gave them minute
and particular instructions for their behavior on every occasion; and let them
know, that whoever rejected them and their message, should be rejected and
treated with indignation and scorn, by the great Judge of the world: but those
who received them with kindness, attended to their preaching and received it
with honesty and openness of mind, kindly contributing to their support, though
they gave but a cup of cold water to the least of his disciples, should not
fail of receiving a large reward.

THE apostles having received this commission, visited all parts of the
country, preaching the doctrine of repentence and proclaiming the kingdom of
the Messiah at hand. They confirmed the truth of their declarations, by working
of miracles, healing the sick, and performing every great work which was worthy
their master's cause, and necessary to prepare the minds of mankind to receive
him; while our great Redeemer continued the course of his ministry in Galilee,
and by the divine eloquence of his preaching, and the wonders he wrought proved
himself to be the Son of God.

IN the eye of worldly wisdom, it must seem a very foolish and unpopular
attempt to send a parcel of illiterate, despised Galileans to reform the world:
how was it possible, that such persons as these, should confound the wisdom of
the wise, and bafflle the power of the mighty? How was it possible, that they
should overturn the many false religions which then flourished in the world,
which were supported by civil government, and had established themselves by
long continuance, were deep-rooted in the human heart, and maintained by the
passions, prejudices, and interest of mankind. Had human prudence directed to
the choice of persons to be employed on this great occasion, they doubtless
would have been men of great learning, superior eloquence, and possessed of
every art of persuasion and address. But the wisdom of God stoops not to be
directed by the wisdom of man; his ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts
as our thoughts. When his glorious gospel was sent to enlighten and enrich the
world, this divine treasure was committed to earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power might appear to be of God: accordingly, it appeared
that the religion which these illiterate fishermen, these despised Galieans
published through the world, was far superior, was more worthy of God, and
beneficial to man, than the acutest reasonings, or the sublimest strains of the
Greek and Roman philosopers and poets, though they were furnished with all the
stores of human literature, and spent their whole time in study and
contemplation. Hence, it is manifest, that the glorious gospel of God, by its
noble simplicity, by its own intrinsic dignity and worth, as well as by the
miraculous power which attended it, and the heavenly glory which shone around
it, proved itself to be wholly original and divine.

NOR was the success which attended the attempts of these weak and despised
instruments, wanting to prove the divine original of the doctrine they taught;
while the tenets of the philosophers were confined to their respective schools,
the glorious gospel spreads over the world, and was received in every country,
and by men of every station; it was received by the bulk of mankind, with the
highest satisfaction, and the sublimest joy; as something necessary to their
supreme good, which hitherto they had been seeking in vain. It was, therefore,
the highest wisdom which conducted the propagation of the gospel, and made use
of such low and contemptible persons; for hence, it plainly appeared, that
these noble truths were not of human invention, but were the production of
Infinite Wisdom, and were first advanced, and are still supported, by the
mighty power of God.

AFTER our great Redeemer had appointed his twelve apostles, he came down from
the mountain, and was joyfully received by multitudes of people, who were
waiting for him in the plain: and such was the heavenly virtue which attended
and surrounded him, that whoever touched the border of his garment, was healed
of his disease. This is sufficient to account for the great numbers of people
which daily followed this illustrious person, who crowded around him, wherever
he went, and accompanied him to the remotest part of the wilderness of Judea;
nor was it only the vulgar and necessitous that pursued our Redeemer's steps
wheresoever he went, but persons of high rank and character, came from the
remotest parts to converse with him, hear his divine doctrine, and be
spectators of his wondrous works, and partakers of the benefits resulting from
them.

AFTER healing the sick amongst the multitude, he proceeded to instruct them,
and delivered a divine discourse, in substance nearly the same as that which he
before preached from the mountain: the chief difference in these discourses, is
the threatenings which are here denounced against particular sinners, whereas
the discourse recorded by St. Matthew, contains only blessings. It may not be
amiss, briefly to consider these maledictions, as a large paraphrase has been
given on the former sermon.

WOE unto you that are rich, said our exalted Savior, for you have received
your consolation. Riches in this world are no evidence of the love of God, but
are frequently bestowed on the worst of men; they are not bestowed upon any as
a reward for superior degrees of moral goodness, but are distributed by the
great governor of the universe, so as to answer the wise ends of his own
government, and bring about his great designs: they have no tendency to promote
the best interest of man, but are frequently made use of by the worst of men,
to the worst of purposes, and enable them to be more extensively and
desperately wicked: they are frequently a snare to the truly religious, and
have a natural tendency to pervert the affections, and corrupt the heart. It
requires great grace to keep them from degrading the soul, and generating a
low, mean, worldly spirit; for, wherever the natural course and tendency of
riches prevail, it will always remain an eternal truth, that it is easier for a
camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of God.

WOE unto you that laugh, for ye shall mourn and weep. It is not a joyful,
cheerful, thankful frame of spirit, which our Lord here exclaims against, but a
foolish, trifling, levity of mind. The gospel of CHRIST, is particularly
calculated to inspire a constant cheerfulness of temper, and Christians are
commanded always to rejoice; the assurance they have of reconciliation with
God, the lively hope of everlasting life, the constant pleasure which they find
in communion with God, and the contemplation on heavenly things, tend to fill
the mind with solid satisfaction and substantial joy. This joy will be
constantly increasing, as Christians advance in the divine life, and will be
fully completed in the eternal world: but those giddy, gay sallies of mirth,
and the thoughtless dissipation of mind which arises from an immoderate love of
vain amusement and sensual pleasure, that gives no time for consideration, but
scatters serious thoughts, and creates an utter aversion to sober reflection,
will soon lead the soul into such a labyrinth of wretchedness and woe, that
they shall then mourn and weep. This will certainly be their lot in this world,
when their vain delusive gratifications can please no more; and it will
eternally be their lot, when they will be deprived of every gleam of hope and
comfort, and consigned to the dark regions of sorrow and despair, where will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

BUT our great Redeemer added, Woe unto you when all men speak well of you, for
so did their fathers of the false prophets. This malediction of our blessed
Savior, is denounced against those teachers who, for fear of offending men,
shall keep back the truth of God, and fear to proclaim the unpopular and
humbling truths of the gospel, which are so mortifying to human pride, and by
flattering the vices, and humouring the pride and passions of men, shall gain
their commendation and applause. Such teachers as these, are compared to the
false prophets of old, who, by humouring the vanity and flattering the pride of
princes and great men, were more caressed and attended to than the true
prophets of God.

WHEN our great Redeemer had finished his discourse, he departed to Capernaum,
and was met by some messengers from a Centurion, who desired him to come and
heal a servant whom he highly esteemed, that was sick, and in danger of death.
This Centurion, from the character given him by the evangelist, seems to have
been a proselyte to the Jewish religion. The inhabitants of Capernaum spoke
much in his favor, and strongly recommended his case; for they said, that he
was a lover of their religion, and had built them ^ synagogue. The great
Savior of mankind, who went about doing good, graciously attended to the
petition, and readily accompanied the messengers; but before he arrived at the
house, he was met by a party of the centurion's friends, who expressed the high
conception which that officer had of the divine power of our Redeemer, and
desired he would not give himself the trouble of a personal attendance, as his
word would be abundantly sufficient to accomplish the cure. Our Lord was
pleased with the message, and turning to the spectators, said, I have not found
so great faith, no, not in Israel, Luke vii.9. The persons having delivered
their message, returned to the Centurion's house, and found the sick person
perfectly recovered.

THERE are several circumstances attending this miracle, and that related by
St. Matthew, proves that this Centurion was not the same person. The Centurion
mentioned by St. Matthew, attended on CHRIST in person; him whose case is last
related, presented his petition by the elders of Capernaum. It does not appear
that the former Centurion was a proselyte to the Jewish religion; but we find a
very high character given of the latter: these, and several other particulars
which might have been mentioned, to prove that this miracle ought to be
considered separate from the former.

THIS miracle being performed, our Lord repaired to the house of Peter, to eat
bread; the place of his residence could not be concealed; great multitudes of
people surrounded the house; some, no doubt, desiring to behold the wonders
which he wrought, and others, to be partakers of the benefit resulting from
them; they continued there some time, advancing their respective claims, in a
tumultuous manner, and it was with difficulty they were persuaded to disperse.

CHAPTER XIV.
CHRIST retires to Nain, a City of Galilee, where he raises a Widow's only Son
from the Dead: He receives Messengers from John the Baptist, and gives his
Testimony concerning him: After which he dines with Simon the Leper, where he
is anointed by Mary, whose affection he acknowledges and rewards.

WHILE the apostles were proceeding through the several cities of Judea,
executing the commission of their Divine Master, our great Redeemer was
carrying on the work of his mission in Galilee; and when they had returned to
our Lord, they accompanied him and his disciples to Nain, a city near mount
Tabor, where he was followed by a great multitude of people. On their
approaching the gate of the city, a scene of the most affecting affliction and
distress presented itself to their view; Behold there was a dead man carried
out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. What an affecting scene
was this, and how was the affliction and distress of the mournful parent
heightened by every circumstance which could make it the more bitter? A young
man cut down, probably in his prime, and followed to the grave by his weeping
parent. With slow and solemn steps, scarce able to bear up under the load of
her woes, the mourning matron follows the dead to interment, attended by her
affected friends and neighbors, who had strove in vain to comfort her for the
loss of her only son; for the young man was the only son of his mother, on whom
perhaps, she depended for support; and to render her affliction to the last
degree heavy and insupportable, she was a widow. With tender pity our great
Redeemer beheld this daughter of affliction, and immediately exerted his divine
power for relief. There was no need of any intercessor to prevail with the
blessed JESUS to attend to such a case as this; his own compassion was
sufficient to excite him to relieve her. The evangelist informs us, that when
the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and gently approaching, he bid her
forbear to weep. But so great was her loss, that it had opened all the ^luices
of sorrow, and it was in vain to bid her refrain from tears. Her husband was no
more, and now she had lost her only son, the surviving image of his departed
father, and the last hope of her afflicted soul. What comfort in the ordinary
course of nature could be administered to this mournful widow? She had lost her
husband; she had lost her son. What distress could be more overwhelming? What
case could be more deplorable? And how natural is it to suppose that she should
refuse to be comforted; and to determine to go down to the grave with mourning.
Our Lord well knew the weight of her affliction and the heavy pressure of her
present grief, and therefore used no arguments to comfort her; but approaching
the corpse, he touched the b^^r. The funeral procession immediately stood
still, and the whole train in silent expectation awaited the event: when that
powerful voice, which one day the dead shall hear, and they that hear shall
live, soon uttered these remarkable words young man, I say to thee arise: no
sooner had our great Redeemer spoke, but the joyful event followed: he that was
dead sat up, and began to speak, and he restored him to his mother. With what
emotions of joy must we suppose this mournful mother would receive her only son
thus unexpectedly rescued from the cold arms of death! What a flood of
tenderness would burst upon the soul, and with what gratitude and joy would she
behold his great deliverer, who did not make any show of this stupenduous
miracle amongst the multitude of his followers, and the attendants on the
funeral, but immediately delivered the revived young man to his late afflicted,
but now wondering and rejoicing mother, as a testimony that this great work was
wrought in compassion to her distress. The surrounding multitudes beheld this
wonderful event with a mixture of astonishment, pleasure, holy awe, and fear;
and they glorified God, saying, that great prophet is arisen amongst us, and
that God has visited his people.

IF we take a review of this miracle, we may observe that it is liable to no
objection, and abundantly proves the exertion of divine power. It is to be
observed that it was wrought in the open field amongst a vast number of
spectators. A great number of the inhabitants of the city attended the funeral;
they all bewailed the disconsolate state of the afflicted widow, and had the
opportunity of being satisfied that the youth was really dead. The powerful
word which called the dead man to life was delivered in an audible voice before
all the company; and this was done at the gate of the city, a place of general
resort; every one had the opportunity of satisfying themselves that the young
man was really restored to life. There was no possibility of deception, nor
room for objections of any kind; and this miracle, joined with the rest wrought
by the same divine person, abundantly proves that he was the Son of God, and
the Savior of sinners.

THE fame of the wonderful works which JESUS constantly performed, was rapidly
proclaimed through the various cities of Judea, and by the disciples of John
the Baptist carried to their master. This prophet, as we before related, was
cast into prison by Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee. The cause of his
imprisonment was the offense which that prince had taken at his boldly and
freely blaming his conduct respecting his incestuous connection with the
princess Herodias. John had now been confined above a year in prison, and as he
was fully convinced that CHRIST was really the Messiah, and no doubt having
imbibed the national expectation of the Jews, that the Messiah would set up a
temporal kingdom, he perceived that things did not answer his expectation: for,
doubtless, he apprehended, that before this time CHRIST would have manifested
himself, and made some advances toward his taking the reins of government. He
therefore sent two of his disciples to our great Redeemer, with this question,
Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? We are not to suppose by
this inquiry, that John entertained any hesitation or doubt, whether CHRIST was
the true Messiah, or not; for it is to be observed, that throughout the whole
course of his ministry, he had borne a regular and ample testimony to the truth
of his divine mission: he had been convinced by a particular revelation from
heaven, and by the descent of the Holy Ghost, in a visible form at CHRIST's
baptism, that he was that divine person who was to come to be the Savior of
Israel; and accordingly he made it his constant care to dispose the Jews in
general, and his own disciples in particular, to receive and reverence him as
the Messiah, bearing witness concerning him that he was superior to himself,
and holding him up to view as the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the
world. It cannot therefore be supposed as before observed, that the Baptist
entertained any scruples in his mind concerning our Lord's divinity; but his
design seems to be to lead his disciples into an acquaintance with our great
Redeemer, that by beholding his miracles, and hearing his divine conversation,
their minds might be prepared to receive him; for it is not improbable to
suppose, that the prophet John might have some expectations of his own
approaching death.

NOR was the conviction of his disciples, perhaps, the only view which the
prophet had in sending this message to our great Redeemer; it is to be supposed
that, like the rest of his countrymen, he expected the Messiah to set up a
temporal kingdom. Nor is this supposition derogatory to the dignity of a great
prophet, since we are informed, that though John was a prophet and more than a
prophet, the least in the kingdom of Heaven is greater than he; the meanest
preacher of the everlasting gospel is greater than the Baptist, because he had
the opportunity of being informed of the spiritual nature of CHRIST's kingdom.
As then, it is to be supposed, that great forerunner of our Redeemer ardently
desired, and impatiently expected the appearance of his kingdom; and as the
blessed JESUS had assumed no earthly honor or dignity, but every thing in the
Jewish church and state continued the same; the Baptist might send this message
gently to remind him of what was expected from him as the Redeemer of Israel.

THE disciples of John brought this message from their master to the exalted
Savior of the world, while he was attending to the various distresses of the
multitude which surrounded him, curing many of their infermities, plagues, and
evil spirits, and restoring sight to the blind. These miracles the disciples of
John beheld, and having delivered their message, our Lord did not think proper
to return them a direct answer, but referred them to the wonderful works they
had now been observing, and ordered them to carry an account of these things to
their master, as an answer to his inquiry: go your way, said he, and tell John
what things you have heard and seen, how that the blind see, the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have the
gospel preached unto them.

BUT that the multitude, from the proposal of this question, might not form an
unfavourable opinion of John the Baptist, our blessed Savior at this time
thought proper to place his character in the most favorable point of light. He
commended him as a person of the most invincible courage, resolution, and
fortitude, who stood firm in the midst of trouble and affliction, and was not
like a read shaken with the wind; and praised him for his austere and mortified
course of life, not wearing soft raiment, like those in king's palaces, but
maintained a manly hardiness, and abhorred all luxury, effeminacy, and
dissipation. Our great Redeemer then gave a full and clear testimony to the
prophetic office of the Baptist, and declared that he was the person referred
to by the prophet Isaiah, in those remarkable words, Behold, I send my
messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee: and added,
that this extraordinary person was that Elias which, the ancient prophets
declared, was to come.

OUR Lord having done justice to the character of his great forerunner, he took
occasion from thence to blame and rebuke the obstinacy and perverseness of the
great men and high pretenders to religion amongst the Jews, who had rejected
both his own and the Baptist's testimony. It seem^, by the nature of CHRIST's
rebuke, that the Scribes and Pharisees, who pretend to great fasting and
mortification, thought themselves eclipsed, and with envious vexation beheld
themselves outdone by the real austerity of the Baptist. His living in the
desert, and shunning the company of men and the conveniences of life, the
coarseness of his clothing, the abstemiousness and plainness of his diet, and
the real severities he practiced, they beheld with growing rancour, and not
only represented them as imprudent and unnecessary but proceeded so far as to
declare him possessed with an apostate spirit: For John came neither eating nor
drinking; and ye say, He has a devil.

BUT though these bold pretenders to superior sanctity and mortification, could
exclaim against the Baptist on account of the austerity of his life, it was
manifest that it was envy and not reason which promoted their unbelief: for
when CHRIST, on the contrary, dwelt in cities, and conversed with mankind,
enjoining no austerities nor mortification, they could make use of this conduct
as a ground of reproach. The son of man came eating and drinking: though he
could not by his most inveterate enemies be charged with any intemperance, or
with encouraging it in others; yet these determined opposers of heavenly truth
could say, Behold a man, gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, and a friend of
publicans and sinners! But, said our great Redeemer, wisdom is justified of her
children.

HE then proceeded to upbraid the several cities where his most wonderful works
had been performed; they had enjoyed the opportunity of attending his heavenly
discourses, and had been witness to his wonderful works; frequently had they
seen him perform miracles which could not be disputed, but fully manifested the
mighty power of God; they had often seen him perform wonders sufficient to have
convinced the most ignorant and idolatrous nations, who were immersed in the
depth of sensuality, and had imbibed the strongest prejudices against the
truth: yet, so great was their obstinacy, they persisted in their unbelief,
they persisted in their wickedness notwithstanding all he had done to convince
and reform them. Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! said our
great Redeemer, for if the mighty works which have been done in you, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes. But I say unto you it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the
day of judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum, that art exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works that have been
done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. But
I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the
day of judgment than for you. Matt. xi.21, etc.

AFTER having, in the most awful, affecting and awakening manner, pronounced
such woes on these unbelieving and profligate cities, our great Redeemer
concluded his discourse with these gracious and reviving words, Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. It is the Son
of the eternal God, the Heir of all things, the almighty Judge of heaven and
earth, who kindly condescends to address poor, lost, undone sinners in this
affecting language; having pronounced heavy woes on the rebellious race, whose
haughty self-sufficiency, inveterate prejudice, pride and obstinacy, prevented
their receiving the truth, the kind and condescending Savior of sinners gives
the most tender, heart-affecting invitation to the humble and penitent. Those
who labor and are heavy laden; those who are conscious of their vileness and
sinfulness, who are pressed with the weight of their iniquities; whose guilt
lies upon them like an heavy burden, from the weight of which they ardently
desire to be delivered, are here called upon and earnestly invited to come to
the only person who is able to relieve them. It is not the great and noble; it
is not the powerful, prosperous, and happy; it is not the exulting sons of joy,
but the poor, needy, and afflicted, who are laboring under a sense of sin, and
burdened with the weight of their iniquities, who are thus invited to come to
our great Redeemer. The great Maker of all things, the all-wise and
all-powerful Preserver, the supreme Governor and Judge of the universe,
graciously condescends to call unto, and with the utmost tenderness to invite
poor, heavy-laden, burdened sinners to come; he does not call upon them to come
with a design to punish their offenses; he does not summon them to appear
before his awful seat of judgment; he does not call them with a design to
deride or expose their miseries; he does not call them with an intent to punish
their offenses, but with a design to release them from their afflctions, to
release them from their burdens, to give them rest and peace, and make them
eternally happy. Come unto me, says our great Redeemer, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden; all you who are humbled under a sense of your iniquities; who
see the dreadful condition to which you are reduced by your sins; who have been
long groaning under the intolerable weight of your guilt, and panting for
deliverance; but throughout the limits of the wide creation can find no refuge;
no help, no deliverer. Come unto me, look unto me and be saved; trust in me as
mighty to save; venture your all in my hands; seek no other refuge, no other
help, no other deliverer; but come unto me and I will give you rest. It is not
my design to upbraid you with the vileness and folly of your conduct; it is not
my design to enter into judgment with you and punish you for your iniquities,
but to lead you into the paths of peace, truth and happiness: be not afraid to
listen to my words and follow my directions, but with a full reliance on my
power, wisdom, and goodness, take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am
meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your souls: for my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. Can there be a greater evidence of the corruption
and depravity of the human heart than the coldness with which the degenerate
sons of Adam, receive so tender, so affecting, and so important an invitation.
The great Creator has formed them with strong desires of happiness, and they
toil out a weary life, in the eager pursuit of every appearance of good. They
are lost in the pursuit, and instead of happiness, find themselves plunged in
trouble, vexation and woe; they find themselves burdened with many griefs, but
will not come to him who only is able to relieve them. What blindness,
stupidity, and abominable pride possess the human heart, and excite it to
reject the gracious calls and invitations of the only Savior of sinners!

AFTER our great Redeemer had finished his discourse, he was invited by one
Simon a leper, to go to his house, and take some refreshment. The invitation he
accepted, and accompanied him to his apartment, where, as he sat at meat, a
woman whose course of life was known to have been loose and profligate, sat at
his feet beholding him with the tenderest affection, and shed such floods of
tears that they trickled down his feet, which according to the custom of the
country were bare. She seeing that her tears had wet the feet, of her beloved
Lord, wiped them with her hair, frequently kissing them with the utmost
tenderness and affection, and anointed them with precious ointment. It was
doubtless the sense of her former course of life, and a deep conviction of her
crimes, which caused this woman to shed such a profusion of tears; and her love
to the blessed JESUS arose from the benefit she had received from his heavenly
discourses.

THE custom, which then prevailed in the Eastern countries, of pouring fragrant
oil on the heads of those guests on whom they designed to bestow peculiar and
distinguished marks of honor, seems to have brought this woman to our Redeemer
at this time; and it appears to have been her original intention to have poured
the ointment on his head; but being deeply humbled under a sense of her
unworthiness she could not approach her divine Instructor with so much freedom
as to accomplish her first intention, but thought it more consistent with her
humility and self-abasement to anoint only his feet.

THE leper, who it seems was a Pharisee had attentively observed the woman, and
knowing her character, concluded that JESUS could not be a prophet. This man,
said Simon to himself, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what
manner of woman (...) is that touched him; for she is a sinner. And so full of
pride and self-sufficiency was the man, that he was offended at, and was ready
to rebuke the blessed JESUS for his deigning to take notice of and conversing
with such contemptible characters: but our great Redeemer, to convince him that
he was a prophet, and that he knew not only the character of the woman who had
touched him, but was acquainted with the thoughts of all who thought mean of
him in their hearts, began a conversation with him on the very subject he had
been revolving in his mind. He did not expose his folly to the company by
openly relating the secret thoughts of his heart, and insisting on the
absurdity of them, but with the utmost delicacy pointed out to Simon himself
the unreasonableness of the conclusion he had formed. Simon, said, the blessed
JESUS, I have somewhat to say unto thee: there was a certain creditor which had
two debtors, the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty; and when
they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which
of them will love him most. Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom
he forgave most. And he said unto him, thou have rightly judged. Our divine
Instructor then immediately applied this short parable to the cause of the
woman, concerning whom the Pharisee had so unjustly reasoned in his heart.
Simon, continued he, see thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou
gave me no water for my feet; but she has washed my feet with her tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss; but this woman
since the time I came in has not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head with oil
thou did not anoint; but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment,
Wherefore, I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she
loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little.

OUR Savior having thus, with great delicacy, rebuked the unjust and injurious
suspicions of the Pharisees, and vindicated his own character, as well as the
conduct of the woman, whose extraordinary kindness and tender affection were in
no danger of losing their reward from one who enjoyed the fine feelings of
human nature in their highest perfection, now addressed the woman with the
soul-reviving news, that her sins were forgiven. But while her heart expanded
with that holy gratitude and joy, which was inspired by the great declaration,
the Pharisees beheld both our Redeemer and the woman with rancour, disdain, and
sullen contempt: they could not endure the thought, that great sinners should
be pardoned, and set on a level with themselves; nor could they be reconciled
to the authority which our Redeemer had assumed; for being ignorant of his
divinity, they concluded that he had infringed on the prerogative of the
Almighty, who only had a right to pardon sins. But the great friend of sinners,
regardless of their malicious murmurs, confirmed his gracious words, by
repeating his assurances to the woman, adding, that her faith had saved her,
and bidding her depart in peace.

SOME little time after this, our great Redeemer departed from Capernaum and
traveled through some parts of Galilee, going through every village, preaching
and showing the glad-tidings of the kingdom of God, Luke viii.1. And after this
short tour he prepared to go to Jerusalem to eat the passover; this being ^^e
second feast of that kind since the commencement of his public ministry. In
this journey, he was accompanied by several pious women, amongst whom were
Joanna the wife of Herod's steward, Susanna, Mary Magdalene, and various
others, who had been dispossessed of devils, or cured of dangerous and painful
diseases; some amongst them were persons of wealth, and were willing not only
to acknowledge the great benefits they had received, but to make such returns
as Providence had put in their power, and, therefore, they freely ministered to
him of their substance.

CHAPTER XV.
CHRIST, being at Jerusalem at the Time of the passover, heals an impotant Man
at the Pool of Bethsaida on the Sabbath Day: He heals one possessed with a
Devil, who was blind and dumb: He shows that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
is an unpardonable Sin: and shows whom he regards as his nearest Relations.
He alleges Scripture in excuse of his Disciples, whom the Pharisees charged
with breaking the Sabbath in plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day: He
appealeth to reason, and heals the withered Hand on the Sabbath Day.

NEAR the temple in Jerusalem was a pool of water, into which ran the blood of
the sacrifices, and the water which was used by the priests in preparing the
victims, and on other occasions. This pool was called in the Hebrew tongue
Bethsaida, that is, the house of mercy. It was surrounded by five porches, or
cloisters, and these were filled with a great multitude of impotent folks, of
blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. For an angel went
down at a certain season and troubled the water: whosoever then first, after
the troubling of the water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he
had. The account of this miraculous pool is given us by the evangelist John,
but is not mentioned by any more of the sacred writers: and various questions
have arisen concerning th^se whonderful waters, which it has been impossible
to resolve, because the pool of Bethsada is not mentioned by any other Jewish
writer, sacred or profane.

FOR the above reasons, it cannot be precisely determined, when this miraculous
power of healing first appeared in this pool; but it is almost universally
agreed, that it could not be long before the coming of our Redeemer; and that
the miracle was intended to lead to the Son of God, and to prepare the nation
for the reception of him. Nor is it strange, that a healing virtue should
attend those waters, which were stained with the blood of the sacrifices, which
pointed to CHRIST, at the time when this great person was about to be
manifested. The gift of prophecy, and that of miracles, had ceased amongst the
Jews above four hundred years; and therefore, it must be supposed, that this
miraculous event would rouse the attention of the nation, awaken every desire
in their hearts for the coming of the Messiah, and make them more circumspect
in observing the tokens of his appearance. And as the Jewish nation, at this
time, was under great tribulation and contempt, and oppression of the Gentiles,
it may be supposed, that the God of Israel graciously condescended to give them
this eminent token of his favor, and gave this wonderful healing virtue to
these blood-stained waters, that they might not despair of the fulfillment of
his ancient promises, but have an eye to the blood of the covenant, and expect
the appearance of that great person, of whom Isaiah prophesied, He was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. And as God was pleased,
at this time, to give such a wonderful healing virtue to a fountain of water,
it may reasonably be supposed, that he designed to lead the minds of the devout
worshippers in his temple to that great person, of whom it was prophesied that
he should be a fountain opened for sin and uncleanness.

JESUS being come to Jerusalem to the feast of the passover, he repaired to the
pool of Bethesda, and took a view of the various subjects of disease,
infirmity, and affliction, which crowded the porches, and waited for the
troubling of the waters. Had these miserable objects applied to our great
Redeemer for help, no doubt, they would all have experienced the great effects
of that divine power of healing, which this illustrious person so eminently
possessed: but it is to be supposed, that he was absolutely unknown amongst
them and no blessing or benefit was expected from him. This may be supposed to
be the reason why our great Redeemer did not extend his heavenly goodness to
the whole number of those afflicted and diseased persons; for the general
account which the evangelists give of his divine compassion on other occasions
is, that he healed all who came to him. Such diseased persons who left their
habitations, out of a persuasion of his divine power and goodness, were the
first objects of his compassion, and never returned without a cure; but the
sick at the pool of Bethesda, were attentive to other means of relief, and
thought not of the Redeemer of Israel.

AMONGST these miserable objects, was a man who had labored under his disease
no less than thirty-eight years. The long continuance, as well as the
distressful nature of this man's affliction, was well known to the Son of God;
and amongst the great number of diseased persons which he beheld crowding the
porches that surrounded the pool, our exalted Savior singled out this poor man
as the object of his compassion; and accosted him with this question, Will thou
be made whole? this question seemed designed to excite the attention of the
people around, and to give the impotent man an opportunity of relating the
malignant nature, and long continuance of his disease, and, of consequence,
making manifest the divine power which could instantaneously remove it. The
infirm person, thinking the question of our Lord had an immediate reference to
the waters of the pool, replied, Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled, to put me into the pool; but while I am coming, another st^ppeth down
before me. But our great Redeemer soon convinced him, that he was not to
receive his cure from the healing virtue of the waters, nor to wait till the
angel came down to trouble them; but would receive immediate relief, by the
mighty power of the Son of God, and, accordingly, bid him arise, take up his
bed, and walk. The powerful words had no sooner fallen from the lips of this
divine person, than the great event took place. The impotent man felt a sudden
warmth and vigor run through his relaxed nerves, and his feeble limbs assumed
their youthful strength; when, finding himself able to perform the command of
his great benefactor, he made no scruple of taking up his bed, and carrying it
along the streets, though it was the Sabbath Day.

SO great a miracle could not fail exciting the wonder of the spectators; and
the new cured man, carrying his bed through the city on the Sabbath Day, which
was a thing not practiced by the Jews, and must have a strange appearance to
the beholders, would not fail to spread the account of this surprising event
through the whole city. The man, who had so wonderfully recovered the use of
his limbs, did not scruple to obey the commands of the Divine Physician, though
they were contrary to the custom of his country, and would be likely to expose
him to the blame of the Jews; he well knew, that a person who could perform
such wonderful works, must be a great prophet; and he supposed that such a
person would not order him to perform any action which was sinful, and
therefore, regardless of the reproaches he met with from the Jews, he carried
his bed through the streets of the city. The Jews beheld him with a mixture of
in^^^nation and contempt, and angrily told him, that it was not lawful for him
to carry his bed on the Sabbath Day. But the man, elated by his happy
deliverance, and holding his great benefactor in the highest esteem, thought it
sufficient to answer, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy
bed and walk, John v.11. The Jews, not satisfied with this answer, sharply
inquired, who it was that had made him whole; which question the man was not
able to answer, as JESUS, as soon as he had performed the miracle, had mixed
with the crowd, and was imperceivably departed from them.

SOME time after this, the person who had thus been miraculously restored, met
with the Divine Physician in the temple, who took the opportunity to impress on
his mind, a sense of the great benefit he had received, and the obligations he
lay under to amendment of life: Behold thou art made whole, said our great
Redeemer, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. The evangelist has
not informed us what effect this admonition had on the person who had been
healed; but having, by this event, found out his great benefactor, he, no
doubt, expecting the whole nation would revere so extraordinary a person, went
to the ruler of the Jews, and told them, that it was Jesus who had made him
whole.

THIS information had a very different effect than what might be expected; the
pride and obstinacy of the rulers of Israel, prevented their conviction, and
their inveterate prejudices blinded their eyes, so that every manifestation of
divine power was lost on them: for instead of reverencing the Redeemer of
Israel, and rejoicing that God had remembered his people, they tumultuously
attacked him in the temple, and, probably, carried him before the Sanhedrim,
with an intention to take away his life, because he had done good on the
Sabbath Day. Our great Redeemer, in answer to their calumny, observed, that by
doing good on the Sabbath Day, he acted consistent with the conduct of his
heavenly Father, who, as Supreme Governor of the universe, carried on the order
of nature, and supplied the wants of his numerous creatures, without
distinction of days; and whose providence is constantly employed in doing good
to the sons of men without intermission, or regard to times and seasons. But
the Jews were not to be convinced by argument, they cherished in their minds a
growing rancour, and an implacable hatred to the Son of God; so that what he
had observed, instead of composing their minds, only tended to irritate and
inflame them: and they attacked him with mortal hatred, and all the virulence
of abuse, and stood determined to take away his life because he not only had
broken the Sabbath, but had said that God was his Father; making himself equal
with God.

HAD the Jews been wrong in this conclusion, that CHRIST, in the account which
he gave of himself, made himself equal with God, no doubt that divine person,
in whom dwelt eternal truth, would have set them to rights in a matter of such
high importance, which so nearly concerned himself, and which he was the only
proper person to explain. But we find, that the following discourse of our
great Redeemer, did not tend to discredit such a conclusion, but to establish
and enforce it. He begins with observing, that so close is the connection, and
such the equality between himself and the Father, that the same works which are
ascribed to one, may be properly ascribed to the other. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, said our great Redeemer, the Son can do nothing himself, but what he
sees the Father do: for what things soever he does, these also does the Son
likewise: for the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things, that
himself does; and he will show him greater works than these, that ye may
marvel. From this testimony which the Son of God bears to his own divinity, it
is evident, that all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father, and
that the stupendous works of creation, providence, and grace, may be justly
ascribed to our dear Immanuel: and him we may adore, as the Great Maker, the
All-wise and All-potent P^^server, the Great Supreme Governor, and Judge of the
universe.

THE Savior of the world then proceeded to refer to those particular works
which manifested him to be the Son of God, and, of consequence, by their own
conclusion, equal with the Father; and in this view, he mentions the
manifestation of his divine power in raising the dead: Verily, verily, I say
unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. For as the Father has life in
himself, so he has given to the Son, to have life in himself: and has given
him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. The
evidence of the divinity of the Savior of the world, arises not only from the
divine power which he manifested in raising the natural dead, but was also
abundantly manifest by his divine power, exerted in raising dead sinners; which
is a work which can be effected by nothing less than the mighty power of God;
and to which these remarkable words seem to allude.

BUT our great Redeemer proceeds further to assert and enforce his own
divinity, and equality with his Father, by observing, that to him is assigned
the great work of sitting in judgment, and fixing the eternal state of all
mankind. Marvel not at this, said he, for the hour is coming, in which all that
are in the graves shall come forth: they that have done good, to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
damnation. And my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the
will of my Father who sent me. In that great and terrible day, the fate of a
falling world will be decided by Unerring Wisdom, and the invariable rules of
righteousness and goodness: for the great Judge of heaven and earth, has a
full and clear perception of every action which has been performed from the
beginning to the end of time; and he is absolutely impartial and unbiassed,
having no inclination to satisfy, no end to pursue, different from those of his
heavenly Father.

THE great Savior of the world, as a further confirmation of his divinity,
appealed to the testimony of John, to whom the Pharisees had formerly sent a
deputation to know his opinion of CHRIST. Our Lord observed, that he was a
burning and a shining light, in which, for a time, the Jews greatly rejoiced,
and they had cause to rejoice, because the prophetic spirit, which had so long
ceased in Israel, had been revived in that holy man; and he had given a full
and clear testimony, that JESUS was the Son of God: but our Redeemer proceeded
to a greater testimony than that of John, which was no other than God himself,
who, by his miracles which he daily directed him to perform, was bearing a
constant witness to the truth of his divinity, and had by an audible voice at
his baptism, declared him to be his well-beloved Son; a voice which multitudes
of people had heard, and perhaps some of those to whom he was now speaking.

AND for a further confirmation of the great truth he had been maintaining, our
Lord, as a means to strike a full conviction in the minds of the Jews, with
whom he was conversing, appealed to their own Scriptures: Search the
Scriptures; for in them ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify
of me. But notwithstanding the clearness of the ancient prophecies, and the
remarkable manner in which they described and pointed out the Savior of
sinners, that unhappy nation was so blinded by their prejudices and vices, that
they could not believe. The Jews had long expected the Messiah to appear
amongst them, but they had formed very different conceptions of his appearance,
than the designs of heaven, or the descriptions of their prophets. The Scribes
and Pharisees had long amused themselves, and filled the minds of the people
with grand and magnificent ideas of the Messiah's kingdom; they had represented
him as a potent prince, who was to be adorned with all the ensigns of power,
and the glory of sovereign greatness; he was to sit on the throne of his father
David, and raise it in power, greatne^^, glory, grandeur, and magnificence,
above all the kingdoms of the earth. Hence it was, that they could not
acknowledge JESUS as their Messiah; they took offense at the meanness of his
appearance; and though the mighty works which he performed, fully manifested
the truth of his mission, and were sufficient to convince every impartial and
unprejudiced mind, that he was really the Messiah; yet the pride of that
infatuated nation, could not stoop so low as to acknowledge him: nor could
their teachers, who had filled their minds with such vast expectations of
temporal greatness, condescend to confess themselves so much mistaken in the
meaning of the prophets.

BUT to conclude this discourse, our Lord proceeded to observe that he himself
should not be their only accuser to his Father, but they would be condemned for
their infidelity by their great legislator, Moses, on whom they trusted as
their invariable friend. Do not think, said he, that I will accuse you to the
Father; there is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust: for had
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me: but if ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my word?

WITH such observations and arguments as these, the blessed JESUS combated the
pride and prejudice of the Jewish nation, and proved himself to be the Son of
God, the great Judge of the whole earth, and the Messiah promised by the
ancient prophets; and so plain and convincing were the proofs and arguments he
brought, that his adversaries could not reply: but though they were silenced by
the wisdom of his words, their old prejudices remained; and their being baffled
and overcome in every contest, filled them with a growing rancour and settled
hatred to his person, which showed itself on every occasion, and proceeded so
far as to induce them to endeavor to take away his life.

NOR was it long before the proud and envious Scribes and Pharisees found a
fresh opportunity to exclaim against our great Redeemer, and pursue him with
their impertinent objections and cavils; for going with his train through the
cornfieldsd on the Sabbath Day, his disciples plucked the ears of corn and eat
the grain, after rubbing it in their hands, and the Pharisees with the utmost
severity and bitterness exclaimed against this as a profanation of the Sabbath.
Our Lord, in reply to this calumny reminded them of the conduct of David, who,
in a case of necessity, when he fled from Saul, permitted his servants, and
presumed himself, to eat of the shewbread which was kept in the tabernacle,
and was not lawful for any to eat but the priests; and further to convince them
of the folly of their remarks, our Lord referred them to the conduct of their
own priests, who constantly performed the necessary work of the temple on the
Sabbath Day: from whence it appears, that works of necessity had been always
permitted on the Sabbath Day, though it was contrary to the command of the law.
Our Lord further observed, that it was necessary the Scribes and Pharisees
should know that the Son of man was Lord of the Sabbath: for as the work which
himself and his disciples constantly attended to was promoting the eternal
interest of mankind, they had a greater right to claim an exemption from the
strict observance of the Sabbath than the priests in the temple, who were only
concerned in the practice of ritual observances, could pretend to. And in the
conclusion of this discourse, our great Redeemer took notice, that acts of
mercy should always be performed, though they were attended with the violation
of some of the sacred institutions of the ceremonial law; for it would be
inverting the order of nature, and reversing the immutable rules of reason and
the nature of things, to suppose that man was made for the Sabbath, and not the
Sabbath for the use and benefit of man.

SOON after this debate with the Scribes and Pharisees, our blessed Savior
entered one of the synagogues of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, and in the
assembly there was a man whose right hand was withered.

THE Pharisees rightly concluded that such an object of distress would excite
the compassion of that divine physician, who had so often exerted the wonderful
power he possessed in behalf of the helpless and miserable: and, observing that
JESUS took particular notice of the infirm person, they watched him with all
the keenness and rancour of the most inveterate malice, concluding that they
should now have an opportunity of accusing him to the people as a breaker of
the Sabbath. So full of pride and self-sufficiency was this hypocritical
generation, and so greatly they valued themselves on the exact performance of
external ceremonies, that they could openly accuse our great Redeemer of a
capital offense for healing the diseased on the Sabbath Day: but so blind and
stupid were these doctors of the law, that they could not see that themselves
were profaning and polluting that sacred day of rest, by indulging the most
diabolical dispositions, and practicing the most attrocious actions which could
be committed. Such was their endeavoring to destroy a virtuous and innocent
person, who had never injured them, whose conduct and character demanded the
highest respect, and whose life was spent in promoting the best interest of
mankind.

THE Savior of the world was not unacquainted with their deadly malice, nor
their present intentions to take an advantage of his heavenly goodness; he knew
the rancour of their hearts; he penetrated their deepest designs; and unmoved
by their impotent rage, he ordered the person to stand up in the full view of
the whole congregation, and publicly avowed his design to heal him.

THE hypocritical teachers of Israel exclaimed against the beneficent action he
was about to perform, as an impious and unlawful profanation of the Sabbath. Is
it, said they, lawful to heal on the sabbath day? It is not to be supposed
that, by this exclamation, they designed to prevent the performance of the
miracle, but rather to draw from our great Redeemer such an answer as they
might take advantage of, and which might give them an opportunity to accuse him
with the greater success: but our Lord answered them in such a manner as let
them know that he penetrated their deepest designs, and at the same time
baffled and confounded their utmost rage. Is it, said he, lawful to do good on
the Sabbath Day, or to do evil? To save life, or to destroy it? Is it lawful
for you, ye most detestable hypocrites, to harbor in your minds the most
infernal rancour and hatred against me; and with the highest injustice and
cruelty to plot against my life on the Sabbath Day? And is it not lawful for me
to restore to his former strength, this poor distressed man who stands before
you? The justice and severity of this rebuke struck them dumb; and, not being
able to reply, they pretended not to understand his meaning: but to leave them
without excuse, our Lord made use of an argument which stupidity itself could
not mistake, and which all the sophistry of these hypocritical teachers was not
able to evade. What man, said our exalted Savior, shall there be amongst you,
who shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath Day, will he
not lay hold on it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than a
sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath Day.

THIS plain reference to their own practice was so clear and convincing, that
they could not pretend to be ignorant of it; and so full that they were
effectually silenced though they were determined not to be convinced. This
wicked perverseness and unconquerable obstinacy, grieved the spirit of the meek
and lowly, the kind and benevolent Son of God, who looking round on his enemies
with a mixture of compassion and sorrow, kindly commanded the lame man to
stretch out his hand: the man gladly obeyed, and instantly it was restored
whole as the other.

THIS astonishing work, our great Redeemer performed in a large congregation in
the full view of all the people, in whom the foregoing dispute had raised a
curiosity to behold the event; and as, no doubt, it was performed on a person
that frequented the synagogue, most of the persons there present were
acquainted with the man, while he labored under this infirmity, and seeing
JESUS in such a situation in the midst of his most inveterate enemies, it must
certainly have a great effect on the minds of the beholders, especially as they
saw that it had effectually silenced the Pharisees, who had nothing to offer,
either against the miracle itself, the proofs and reasonings urged for the
fitness and propriety of it, or the divine power of him who had performed it.

BUT though these proud, envious, and hypocritical teachers were astonished at
the miracles, and silenced by the arguments of the Son of God, yet they were
far from giving up their unjust and cruel institutions: for though they bore an
inveterate hatred to the Sadducees and Herodians because they presumed to
differ from them in their religious sentiments, yet they could join with these
persons they so much despised, and consult with them in order to take away his
life.

FOR they well knew that if he continued the course of his ministry, and
produced such incontestible evidences of divine power, the people would follow
him; when their own weight and influence would quickly decline, and their
preaching become contemptible. JESUS well knew their wicked designs, yet he did
not think proper at this time, any further to oppose them, but retired into
Galilee, to the borders of the lake of Chinnereth.

THIS retreat of our great Redeemer seems to have displeased some of his
disciples, who had strongly imbibed the popular idea of the Messiah's temporal
kingdom, and expected that he would have established his authority by force,
and exerted his divine power to bear down all opposition; and they were
extremely mortified to find their Master give way, and seem to decline any
further contest. But the obscurity of his retreat could not conceal him from
the multitudes who flocked to him from all quarters, bringing with them their
sick and diseased; and his heavenly goodness healed them all. Nor would the
disciples have been offended at this mild and peaceable conduct of their
Master, had they attentively considered the prophecy of Isaiah, where this
peaceable disposition is particularly insisted on as eminently distinguishing
the character of the Messiah. Behold my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved,
in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, he shall show
judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man
hear his voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking
flax he shall not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. And in his
name shall the Gentiles trust. Matthew xii.12, etc.

THE small variations between this prophecy, as quoted by St. Matthew, and the
original in the book of Isaiah, are of no consequence, as the sense is the
same; and here it may be worthy of remark, that this prophecy describes the
publication of the Christian religion by JESUS CHRIST, vastly different from
that of the Jewish religion by Moses. The law of Moses was published with
thunder and fire, and the strongest circumstances of terror from mount Sinai,
and only extended to the single nation of the Israelites: the doctrine of
salvation, as published by the Messiah, was mild, peaceable, and gentle, and
was extended to every nation and people under heaven. Accordingly, our Lord, by
retiring to Galilee, fulfilled the first part of this famous prophecy, He shall
show judgment to the Gentiles; for we are informed by the evangelist that great
multitudes came to him from beyond Jordan, and from Syria, and from the
countries about Tire and Sidon.

WHILE our Lord remained in Galilee, there was brought unto him a blind and
dumb man, possessed with a devil; but he, with a single word, cast out the evil
spirit, and immediately restored to the poor man the noble faculties of sight
and speech. An event so surprising, so miraculous, and so suddenly wrought,
could not fail of exciting the astonishment of the beholder; and the honest
plain-hearted part of the nation were inclined to believe. But the Pharisees,
who had followed him from Jerusalem with the basest intentions, were filled
with the most tormenting envy at seeing him perform such surprising miracles
and burning with all the rage of disappointed malice, contrary to all the rules
of reason and the conviction of their own minds, impudently and wickedly
ascribed his miracles to the power of the devil: an affirmation so horrid,
abominable, and desperately wicked, could not escape the notice, or fail of
exciting the sharp rebukes of the Son of God; who addressing himself both to
his enemies and the surrounding multitude, demonstrated the absurdity and
impossibility of such a conclusion from the common affairs of life. Every
kingdom said the blessed JESUS, divided against itself shall not stand: and if
Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how then shall his kingdom
stand? How foolish and ridiculous is it to suppose that the Devil would act
against himself, and undermine the foundations of his own kingdom! To which our
great Redeemer thought fit to add, If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do
your children cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges. But if I cast
out devils by the Spirit of God, then is the kingdom of God come unto you. You
did not impute the miracles of your prophets to Beelzebub but received them on
the evidence of these miracles as the messengers of God: but ye reject me, who
work greater and more numerous miracles than they, and impute them to the power
of the Devil. Is this conduct consistent; or is it possible to reconcile it to
reason or common sense? These prophets therefore shall be your judges; and they
shall condemn you. But if it is true, that I cast out devils by the Almighty
Power and Spirit of God, it follows, that the kingdom of God so long expected,
and ardently desired, is going to be established amongst you. Is not the horrid
impudence of this blasphemy of yours really astonishing! But, great as your
crime is, it may yet be forgiven; because fuller and more manifest evidences of
the truth of my mission, may hereafter convince you of your wickedness, and
excite you to believe; and the time is coming, when the Son of man shall be
raised from the dead, and the gift of miracles by the power of the Holy Ghost
will be bestowed on almost every believer. The nature of the Messiah's kingdom
will be more fully explained, and such proofs given, as if attended to, will be
abundantly sufficient to remove your prejudices and overcome your obstinacy and
prevailing unbelief. But if you then shut your eyes, and speak evil against the
Holy Ghost, contrary to the conviction of your minds, maliciously ascribing the
miracles wrought by his power, and his extraordinary gifts, to proceed from the
prince of darkness, you have wilfully shut your eyes against the light; you
have dared to insult the eternal God to his face; you have resisted, wilfully
resisted, the last means which he will use to convince you: and you never will
be forgiven, but shall surely fall under the fierceness of his wrath, both in
this world, and that which is to come. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of
sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come.

THE awful and alarming denunciation against the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost,
was probably laid down by our Savior at this time, to apprise the Pharisees of
their danger, to awaken them to a sense of their obstinate and envious
opposition to the truth, and make them afraid of the consequence, if they
persisted in such detestable calumnies, when their own hearts told them, that
they had no foundation in reason, but what flowed from malice and resentments:
but the most powerful arguments, or the most awful threatenings, had no effect
on this obstinate and perverse race of mortals, who sarcastically answered,
Master, we would see a sign from thee. What astonishing stupidity! Had he no^
the moment before, cast out a devil, and restored the faculties of sight and
speech to the blind and dumb! Had not he cleansed lepers, raised the dead, and
rebuked the tempestuous winds, and raging waves of the sea! Were not these
signs sufficient to have convinced the most obstinate and bigoted mortal! What
therefore could these stubborn doctors of the law require! Well might the great
Savior of the world call them a wicked and adulterous generation; for
certainly they could justly pretend to no part of the faith and piety of their
great father Abraham; he believed God, and, it was imputed to him for
righteousness: but they, by their malicious obstinacy, and determined unbelief,
added sin to sin, and plunged themselves into the depth of iniquity and
wickedness. Persons of such perverse dispositions, and incorrigible tempers,
merited no indulgence; and, therefore, our great Redeemer told them, that no
sign should be given them, but that of the prophet Jonah, who, by laying three
days and three nights in the belly of the whale, was a type of the Son of God,
who should continue three days and three nights in the chambers of the grave.

OUR Lord then proceeded to observe, that the obstinacy, perverseness, and
wickedness of that generation, was greater than that of the most barbarous,
ignorant, and idolatrous nations, who would rise in judgment with them and
condemn them.

THE people of Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonah; and the queen of the
South took a long journey to behold the wisdom of Solomon: but the obstinate,
wicked, and unbelieving Jews, would not repent at the preaching, and repeated
warnings of the Son of God, nor learn wisdom from the Eternal Fountain of
Wisdom itself.

OUR Lord then concluded his discourse with a parable, which showed the great
danger of wilfully opposing and resisting the truth, as such practices tend to
make men habitually and desperately wicked, and, in every respect, more
obdurate and abandoned than before.

DURING this dispute with the rulers of Israel, JESUS was informed, that his
mother and his kinsmen waited without, desiring an interview with him; upon
which, with a look of the tenderest affection, he stretched out his hand
toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethern! for
whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my
brother, and sister, and mother, Matt. xii.49, 50. These remarkable words ought
to be received with the warmest gratitude, and the most exalted joy, by every
Christian; since from this divine declaration, it may be learnt, that a faith
in CHRIST, which works by love, and produces a conformity to the precepts of
the gospel, gives the believer a claim to the high title of a Son of the Most
High, and a near relation to his dear Redeemer: by this divine principle, the
believer lays hold on the blessings and privileges which belong to his
spiritual birth, he claims a kindred to the skies, he becomes acquainted with
his union with the Divine Nature, and can stand before the throne of the
Eternal God, and call him his Father.

CHAPTER XVI.
JESUS delivers several Parables from a Ship, to the Multitudes that were
standing on Shore: He receives a second Visit from his Relations: At Evening he
retires to Capernaum, and delivers more Parables to his Disciples: Afterward,
he returns to Nazareth, his own City, and sends his Apostles to preach about
that Country: He then repairs to the Desert of Bethsaida and provides a
miraculous Repast for the whole Multitude.

THE public debate in which JESUS was engaged with the Pharisees, and the
miracle which was the occasion of it, brought together such a vast concourse of
people, that, for the greater facility of instructing them, our great Redeemer
repaired to the seaside. The crowd pressed so close about him, that he was
incommoded in his office of speaking, and for the greater convenience, he
entered a ship, and put off to some small distance from the shore, while the
attentive multitudes remained on dry land: being thus conveniently accommodated
for public speaking, our divine Instructor proceeded to lay down several
precepts of the utmost importance, which he thought proper to introduce in the
parabolical style. This was a mode of instruction very common in the Oriental
nations, and it was the general method of the old prophets, John the Baptist,
and our blessed Savior, to inculcate divine and moral truths, in the beautiful
method of allusion and fable; and sometimes so to contrive the discourse, that
it had an immediate reference to those objects, which at that very time
presented themselves to the view of the audience. This method of instructing
was, on several accounts, particularly adapted to the designs of divine
conduct, and the circumstances of the Jewish nation, at the time of the
Messiah's appearance. Similitudes of this kind, are the most easy and simple
methods of teaching; they are best accommodated to the apprehensions of the
ignorant and unlearned, and are very easy to be understood, remembered, and
applied at the same time, they are the finest veil for mysteries, and the best
medium for concealing from the proud and obstinate, those truths which their
perverseness and infidelity render them unworthy of having more clearly
revealed.

These observations seem to be alluded to by our great Redeemer himself, when
his disciples asked, why he taught the people in parables? Because, said he, it
is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but to them
it is not given: for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
more abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that
he has. Therefore, speak I unto them in parables; because, in seeing they see
not: and in hearing they hear not, neither do they understand, Matt. xiii.11,
etc. The beloved disciples, whom our Redeemer, by his divine power, had made of
an humble, teachable disposition, whose minds, by an heavenly influence, were
become docile, apt to learn, and open to instruction, were thus addressed by
the divine Instructor, and he gives them to understand, that it would be no
advantage to them, nor to any that sincerely desired to be instructed, and
attended on him in humility of heart, that the truths he delivered were clothed
in parables; for such persons would carefully consider his words, and resort to
him for their explanation: and the truths themselves, clothed in this beautiful
veil, would be more attractive to the humble inquiring mind: and, when
carefully considered, appear plain, simple, and easy to be understood.

BUT the proud, self-conceited Scribes and Pharisees, were so blinded by their
prejudices, that they would not give themselves time to consider, but would
heartily despise such methods of teaching, and condemn, as low and
contemptible, the plain allusions in which the divine truths were represented.
Our great Redeemer did not alter his manner of teaching, for their sakes, but
dressed the great truths of the gospel in such metaphorical robes as they did
heartily despise, and which would for ever conceal them from persons of their
temper and conduct. Nor need it be wondered at, the blessed JESUS further
observed: that he took this method with this sort of men; for it had been
prophesied of him, that he should open his mouth in parables, and utter things
which had been kept secret from the foundation of the world. And concerning the
pride, obstinacy, perverseness, and infidelity of the rulers of the Jews,
Isaiah had long ago prophesied to them, that, by hearing ye shall hear, and not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive: for this peoples
heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they
have closed: lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted,
and I should heal them.

THERE is some little variation between the words, as quoted by our Savior,
and those found in the prophecy of Isaiah, but the meaning is the same in each,
and the sense manifestly is, that the Jewish nation should hear the doctrines
of the gospel, but not understand them: and see the miracles wrought in
confirmation of the truth of those doctrines but not perceive them to be
wrought by the power of God: not because the evidences produced by our great
Redeemer, were insufficent to convince a judicious and impartial inquirer after
truth; but because the corruption and depravity of the hearts of the proud
Pharisees, would not suffer them to examine and weigh these evidences; for the
sins of that people had hardened their hearts, their pride and vanity had shut
their ears, and their hypocrisy and bigoted adherence to tradition, and forced
interpretations of the law, had closed their eyes; so that the bright rays of
divine truth could not shine upon their dark minds, nor the powerful voice of
heavenly wisdom, awaken their attention, or command their assent.

SUCH were the reasons assigned by our great Redeemer, for his teaching the
people in parables; and then he proceeded to remind his disciples of the great
privileges they enjoyed, in having the opportunity of learning, from his
heavenly lips, those things which the prophets of old so earnestly desired to
know and understand: But blessed, said he, are your eyes, for they see; and
your ears, for they hear: for verily I say unto you, that many prophets and
righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen
them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

THE first parable which the blessed JESUS delivered to the multitude, was that
of the sower, who cast his seed into different kinds of soil, the product of
which was answerable to the nature of the ground; some yielding a large
increase and some none at all; by which he elegantly displayed the success of
his own doctrine, amongst the several kinds of hearers to which it would be
preached. A sower, said he, went forth to sow; and when he sowed, some seeds
fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: some fell upon
stony places, where they had not much earth; and forthwith they sprung up,
because they had no deepness of earth; and when the sun was up, they were
scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprung up and choked them; but others fell into good
ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some
thirty fold.

THIS parable was peculiarly proper to be considered by the multitudes who
attended on the Son of God, when such vast numbers heard his discourses, and so
few practiced his precepts, or profited by the heavenly doctrines which he
taught. Not only the multitude, but the disciples heard him with a mixture of
pleasure and surprise; and, not understanding his meaning, they were impatient
to hear it explained; and were very urgent to know, why he chose that method of
instruction.

THE last of these questions, our Lord answered in the manner before related;
and then, with condescending kindness, proceeded to give them the explanation
of the parable of the sower: When any one, said he, hears the word of the
kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and catches
away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which received the seed by
the way side. The persons who are here represented as hearing the word of God
without understanding, are those careless hearers, whose minds are diverted
from attending to those things which concern their everlasting peace, by the
gay, trifling amusements and alluring objects of sense. Such persons hear the
word of God with so little attention, that they scarcely know what they hear;
and, for want of an habit of serious thinking, their ideas are loose and
scattered, and an universal dissipation of mind drives out all solid
reflection. Such persons as these, are at all times proper objects for the
great enemy of mankind to work upon; he well knows how to take advantage of the
vacancy of thought, which exposes such minds to his malicious attempts; and,
where he finds the mind empty, he takes care to enter there, and fill it with
such furniture, as soon erases the slight impressions it may have received by
hearing the word of God.

THE second kind of hearers, described in the parable of the sower, are those
who receive the word with a greater degree of attention, and in whom it
produces an outward reformation of conduct and behavior; but, not being
impressed on the mind by the operation of the Divine Spirit, it does not effect
a real change of heart. Such persons, while things go on smooth, and they meet
with success and encouragement in the world, may make a profession, and appear
to others, and think themselves religious, but, like seed sown on hard, stony
ground, which, though it springs up, and looks green for a while, yet, when the
sun shines hot and bright, soon withers for want of root; they cannot stand in
the day of adversity and trouble: for when tribulation, or persecution arises
because of the word, by and by they are offended.

THE third kind of hearers, are those who seem to receive the word of God with
great earnestness and attention; but however they may be delighted with it in
the house of God, they do not carry a favor of it into the world. In some, the
toil, trouble, care, and vexation arising from their circumstances in the
world, so fill the mind, engage the attention, overwhelm the spirit, and
oppress the heart, that, like a plant encumbered and surrounded with rank,
poisonous weeds, the word of God, which they have heard, cannot grow; the noble
truths of the gospel cannot have their proper influence on the mind, but
gradually sink and decline, till at last they are disbelieved, or totally
forgotten. Others, who meet with their desired success in their worldly cares,
are so assiduous in the pursuit, and so entirely devoted to the acquisition of
wealth, that every thing to them seems little and low which does not produce
some temporal advantage: as riches increase, they set their hearts upon them,
and a worldly spirit chokes the word, and it becomes unfruitful.

IN opposition to those unprofitable hearers of the word, a fourth sort are
represented in this parable, whose hearts, by the Holy Spirit, are prepared for
the reception of divine truth; for, as the best of ground, except it be
ploughed, harrowed and cleansed by the husbandman, will not receive the seed,
nor produce a plentiful harvest; so the heart of man, except it be changed by
divine power, will not receive the word of God, nor produce such fruit as the
gospel requires: but, when the heavenly seed falls on those hearts which have
been wrought upon and prepared by the Divine Spirit, the word is received with
gladness, it takes deep root in the mind, it operates on all the powers and
faculties of the soul, it terminates in obedience to the precepts of the
gospel, and brings forth fruit to the honor and interest of the cause of
CHRIST, in proportion to the capacities and circumstances of the different
subjects on which it falls, in some an hundred fold, in some sixty, and in some
thirty.

OUR great Redeemer, having finished his explanation of the parable of the
sower, he turned to his disciples, and explained to them, by the similitude of
a lighted candle, the use they were to make of the knowledge which they would
acquire by conversing with him, and receiving his divine instructions. Is a
candle, said he, brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed, and not to
be set on a candlestick? For there is nothing hid which shall not be
manifested, neither was any thing kept secret, but it should come abroad. By
which the divine Instructor gave them to understand, that, though now these
heavenly truths were veiled in shades and figures, and taught to mankind in
parables, the time would come, that they would be more clearly revealed, and as
a lighted candle, exalted on high, illuminates the whole apartment where it is
placed, so shall the brightness of divine truth, by their preaching, be spread
abroad, and enlighten the dark nations of the earth: therefore, as the
disciples of CHRIST were intended to convey the precepts of heavenly
instruction to the dark, uninlightened nations of the world, our Lord reminded
them, that it was a matter of the highest importance, that they should be
rightly and fully taught those truths they were to bear to the remotest
nations; and, therefore, it behoved them to hear him with the utmost care and
attention. Take heed, said he, what ye hear; with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you; and unto you that hear shall more be given.

AFTER our Lord had been thus discoursing to his disciples, he turned to the
multitude on the shore, and, addressing them in the most pleasing and powerful
manner, he delivered to them the parable of the enemy's sowing tares amongst
the wheat. The kingdom of heaven, said he, is likened to a man which sowed good
seed in his field: but while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares amongst
the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought
forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the husbandman
came and said unto him, Sir did not thou sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then has it tares? He said unto them, an enemy has done this. The
servants said unto him, Will thou then, that we go and gather them up? But he
said, Nay; lest, while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with
them. Let both go together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest, I
will say unto the reapers, Gather ye the tares, and bind them in bundles to
burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn.

THIS parable, as our Lord afterward explained it to his disciples, relates to
the different states of men at the end of the world. The husbandman is our
great Redeemer himself; the field is the christian church, planted in various
parts of the world; those Christians who are enabled by the Holy Spirit to love
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and bring fruit worthy their high profession, are the
wheat; and those who make an empty profession, without knowing the power of
true religion, are the tares. These are seduced into the paths of wickedness by
the enemy of God and man; and the parable elegantly represents, the mixed state
of the professing church on earth, and the deplorable end of the hypocrite and
those who know not God. Such characters as these may mix with the real
Christians, and may deceive for a time, by assuming the appearance of superior
sanctity and strictness of life; yet they will not fail sooner or later, to
betray themselves, and make it manifest that they are but tares amongst the
wheat. Yet we are taught by this parable, how sincerely soever we may wish to
free the church from all corruption both in doctrine and practice, it is not
lawful for us to assume the prerogative of the great Judge of heaven and earth,
by persecuting, or following with any corporal punishment, any who we apprehend
to be hypocrites and corrupters of ture religion. The tares and the wheat are
to grow together till harvest, they are not to be separated, lest by mistaking
the character of the persons, we bestow the censure on the true Christian,
which belongs to the hypocrite: but the harvest will come when they will be
separated by our great Redeemer himself, and his attending angels: then the
tares will be bound up in bundles and burnt, but the wheat carefully gathered
into the barn. For at the end of the world, our great Redeemer will distinguish
between the pretended and the real Christian; the wicked will be condemned to
eternal torment, but the righteous will be received to life eternal; when they
shall shine forth, as the sun, in the kingdom of their Father.

THE next parable which our exalted Redeemer though fit to propose to the
listening multitudes, was that of the seed which sprang up and grew
imperceptibly. So is the kingdom of God, said he, as if a man should cast seed
into the ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring and grow up he knows not how. For the earth brings forth fruit of
itself; first the blade, and then the ear. But when the fruit is brought forth
immediately he puts in the fickle, because the harvest is come. This
beautiful picture represents the gradual and silent progress of the gospel in
the heart of man; as the husbandman does not by any power of his own, cause the
seed to grow when he has sown it, but the blade and fruit are produced by the
power of the great Creator, and by those laws of nature which he he has
established in the vegetable creation: so the seed of divine truth does not
thrive in the heart of man by the power of the preacher, but by the silent and
efficacious energy of the Spirit of God. Thus JESUS and his apostles, having
preached the gospel in the world, and taught the doctrines of true religion,
they gave no commission to any to use the terrors of fire and sword to
propagate them, but left it to the silent and secret influence of the Holy
Spirit. And it is very probable that the blessed JESUS spoke this parable to
convince the Jews of their mistake, in supposing that their Messiah would set
up a temporal kingdom, and advance his dominion by the means which are used in
the world to rise to sovereign greatness: and also it might be intended to
quiet the minds of his disciples, and prevent them from being discouraged when
they saw that an immediate and rapid success did not attend their labors in
the gospel.

THE next parable which JESUS spoke to the multitude was that of the grain of
mustard seed, which in Palestine and other parts of the East, rises from a
small seed to a large spreading tree. The kingdom of heaven, said the divine
Instructor, is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in
his field; which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is
the greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air
come and lodge in the branches thereof. This may be considered as a
continuation of the subject of the former parable; for though the gospel seed
may at first seem small and contemptible, arising from the crucifixion of its
divine author, the inveterate hatred and final unbelief of the Jews, the
mortifying nature of its precepts, the weakness of the persons employed to
propagate its divine truths, and the small number and meanness of those who
first received it; yet being founded on eternal truth, and supported by divine
power, it would increase to a surprising extent and greatness, filling the
whole world, and affording divine instruction and comfort to persons of all
nations, who should enjoy the high privileges of the Messiah's kingdom, while
the Jews, for their wickedness in opposing the truth, should be left in
unbelief, cut off from being a nation, and scattered like chaff over the face
of the earth.

OUR great Redeemer then concluded his discourse with another parable of nearly
the same import with the foregoing. The kingdom of heaven, said he, is like
unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
whole is leavened: alluding to the silent and effectual spreading of the
gospel, by the powerful influence of the Holy Spirit, and prevailing efficacy
of divine truth.

WHILE our Lord was employed in delivering these elegant and beautiful
discourses, his mother and brethren came a second time, desiring an interview
with him: perhaps they were unwilling that he should weary himself with the
continual fatigue of preaching, and did not approve of his making himself so
public, and appearing in so distinguished a character amongst such vast
multitudes of people: and as it hereafter will appear in the course of this
history, that his brethren did not believe in him, it is very likely they
designed to take him home with them, and persuade him to attend to secular
affairs. But our exalted Redeemer was not to be diverted from following his
Father's work, and performing the great duties of his mission. On these grounds
he appears to have declined the desired interview, with this answer, My mother
and my brethren are those who bear the word of God, and do it.

EVENING now approaching, the blessed JESUS dismissed the multitude, and
retired with his disciples to an house in Capernaum; where, at their desire, he
explained to them the parable of the tares of the field in the manner before
related; and then he proceeded to deliver to them the parable of the treasure
hid in the field, and the parable of the pearl of great price. The first of
these parables holds forth the abundant glory, excellency, and value of the
gospel, above all earthly possessions; and the last denotes the willingness of
all those who are made acquainted with the high excellency and abundant worth
of the gospel, to part with their all in this world to obtain it. But, that the
disciples might be informed that a mixed multitude of people would make a
profession of the gospel, and the hypocrites would be blended with the
Christians in such a manner as it would be difficult to separate them, he
compared the gospel church to a net, which enclosed every sort of fish, good
and bad, but were carefully separated when they were drawn to land; the good
were preserved, and the bad thrown away: alluding to the great day of universal
and eternal decision and separation, when the righteous will be received into
life eternal, and the wicked cast into hell.

OUR Lord having finished these discourses, he asked his disciples if they
understood them, they answered in the affirmative; and our great Redeemer added
that every teacher of the gospel ought to resemble a person whose house was
completely furnished, and brings forth out of his treasures things new and
old.

NOT long after this, our great Redeemer left Capernaum, and repaired to
Nazareth, the city where he had spent his younger years, and where he had dwelt
with his relations till he entered on his public ministry, and preached,
amongst his old friends and countrymen, the glad-tidings of the kingdom. But
they, though astonished at his doctrine, could not overcome the prejudices they
had formerly conceived against him, on account of the meanness of his family,
and therefore would not own him to be the Messiah; they could not overcome the
strong national prejudice they had conceived against their promised deliverer's
appearing in a low, mean condition in the world; nor could they give up their
ideas of the glory and grandeur of the Messiah's appearance, so far as to
suppose it possible that JESUS should be the man. Our Lord, therefore, finding
them in the same temper of mind as when he formerly visited them, did not
choose to stay long amongst them, but departed and taught in the neighboring
villages.

DURING our Savior's stay at Nazareth, he sent out his disciples to preach in
different parts of Galilee, and proclaim the glad-tidings that God was going to
establish the glorious kingdom of the Messiah, in which he would be worshipped
in spirit and truth; and that they might confirm the doctrines they taught, and
convince the whole nation that they received their commission from the Son of
God, they were endowed with the power of working miracles. The evangelists have
not informed us how long they continued their preaching; but it is reasonable
to suppose that they spent a considerable time in carrying on their work in
several parts of the country.

THE people perceiving such wonderful works performed by the disciples of
CHRIST, were exceedingly amazed, and their expectations were raised very high;
for they could not recollect that the old prophets had ever given to their
servants the power of working miracles, and of consequence, they concluded that
JESUS must be greater than any of them. This extraordinary circumstance raised
the attention of the nation, and spread his fame so effectually about the
country, that it reached the ears of Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee.
This prince having lately, in an unjust and cruel manner, taken away the life
of John the Baptist, he heard of the mighty works performed by CHRIST, and his
disciples, with the utmost uneasiness and concern. His attendants endeavored
to dissipate his fears, by telling him that one of the old prophets was risen
from the dead; but a consciousness of his guilt would not permit him to rest;
for he apprehended, that the illustrious person he had so basely murdered, was
risen from the dead, and would doubtless be revenged on his murderer. He said
unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead, and
therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.

IT has been before related, on what occasion, and in what manner the Baptist
was put to death; and the news of this mournful event having reached the
disciples of CHRIST, while they were preaching in Galilee, those of them who
had formerly been the disciples of John, went and paid their last respects to
the remains of their master, whom having decently interred, they carried the
tidings to JESUS. When our great Redeemer had heard of the death of his
relation and forerunner, he found himself disposed for retirement, and sought
the silent shades of the desert of Bethsaida: he departed as private as
possible, that he might not be incommoded by the multitude, and for the greater
secrecy he went by sea. But every precaution was insufficient to screen him
from the penetrating eyes of the multitude who followed him; and his departure
was not long concealed, for great numbers repaired to the desert, and found out
the place of his retreat. The miracles which he performed, the benefit which
the helpless and miserable, always found from his goodness, and the strain of
divine eloquence which flowed from his lips, had such an effect on the honest,
open-hearted part of the nation, that the multitudes who had seen the wonders
he performed, and heard his heavenly voice, thought no difficulties too great
to surmount, no hardships too great to endure, nor no place too retired for
them to penetrate, in order to attend on his ministry.

THE kind and compassionate Savior of sinners, seeing the multitude had found
out his place of retreat, and beholding them crowding about him, he viewed them
with tenderness and love, because they were as sheep having no shepherd; for,
having none to instruct them in those things which concerned their everlasting
peace, they wandered about without a guide, without a defender. Their situation
indeed, was like that of a large flock of sheep wandering upon the mountains,
without a shepherd to feed and defend them from the ravenous jaws of the
various beasts of prey which waited to devour them. The blessed JESUS,
therefore, that good Shepherd, who came to lay down his life for the sheep,
beheld them with compassion: that same pity which brought him down from the
throne of glory in heaven, for the sake of his lost and wandering sheep, now
brought him to this multitude of people: his heavenly goodness healed all the
sick amongst them, and from his lips they heard the words of eternal life.

THE divine Instructor continued his heavenly discourses, and attended to the
great work of healing the diseased, not dismissing the people, though the day
wore away, and the shades of the evening were approaching. His disciples,
thinking this circumstance had escaped his notice, thought proper to remind
him, that the day was far advanced, and the place a solitary desert, where
neither food nor lodging could be procured: it would, therefore, be convenient
to dismiss the people, that they might repair to the towns or villages on the
borders of the wilderness, and provide themselves food and other
accommodations; for they had nothing to eat. But our Lord informed them, that
he did not intend to dismiss the surrounding multitude so hastily, for, as they
were weary and faint in the wilderness, it was his intention to give them a
repast; at the same time, to try what opinion his disciples entertained of his
power, he turned to Philip, who was well acquainted with the country, and
inquired, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? Philip, astonished at
the proposal, considering the vastness of the multitude, and the enormous
quantity of provisions which would be necessary to supply them, he apprehended
it impossible to procure them in the desert; and not considering his Master's
power to supply them by extraordinary means, he replied, Two hundred pennyworth
of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.
Our blessed Lord might justly on this, as on a future occasion, have replied,
Have I been so long time with you, and have thou not known me, Philip! But he
did not reproach his disciples with their inattention to his former character
and conduct, but commanded them to give the multitude to eat. The disciples,
not yet understanding the design of their master, repeated the objection of
Philip, and proposed to go and buy a quantity of provisions* but this was not
their Lord's intention, who, without making them a direct answer, asked them
how many loves they had. It does not appear that they had any bread in
possession; for after the disciples had made a diligent inquiry, Andrew came
and informed his Master, that there was a lad amongst the multitude, that had
five barley loaves, and two small fishes, a quantity so inconsiderable, that
they were ashamed to mention it: What are they, said the disciples, amongst so
many? And what, indeed, would they have been among such multitudes of people,
if they had not been distributed by the all-creating hand of the Son of God.

JESUS, notwithstanding the smallness of the number of loaves, and scantiness
of the provision, ordered them to be brought to him; and at the same time
commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and ordered his disciples to
arrange them in companies at convenient distances, that their number might be
ascertained, and that they might be regularly served. In obedience to his
command, the people sat down as they were ordered, no doubt wondering what
would be the consequence of such an arrangement, and what benevolent action our
great Redeemer was about to perform.

THE multitude thus seated in order, our Lord, in open view, took the five
loaves and two small fishes in his hands, and the whole multitude had an
opportunity of beholding what a small quantity of provisions, in the hands of
the Creator of all things, were sufficient to provide a repast for such a
number of persons as were then assembled. The great master of the feast then
looked up to heaven, and returned thanks to his heavenly Father, for his
all-preserving and all-supporting goodness, manifested at all times to his
creatures, but particularly for his paternal care, in providing for their
present refreshment; he praised his Almighty Father, for the miracles which he
had been enabled to perform for the benefit of mankind, and particularly for
that which he was now going to perform, for the refreshment of the multitude,
who had left their habitations with desires to see his mighty works, and hear
his words, and followed him into the desert, where they were weary and faint
for want of provisions. After which, our great Redeemer blessed the bread, and
his divine blessing had so wonderful an effect, that the five small barley
loaves and two dry fishes, were multiplied to a quantity sufficient to satisfy
the craving appetites of ten thousand persons; for the men were five thousand,
and it is very probable the women and children might not be less. The great
Master of the feast distributed to his disciples, and they served the multitude
as they sat on the grass; and so plentiful were the provisions, that every one
was satisfied, and such fullness crowned our great Redeemer's board, that, when
all the people had eat and were satisfied, there were twelve baskets filled
with the broken meat.

THUS, the great Son of God, provided a feast in the desert, for the people who
followed him; and though they had no canopy but the azure sky, no table but the
verdant grass, no better fare than barley-bread and dried fish, and no drink
but the clear spring; yet they were more honored by the presence of the
illustrious founder of the feast, than ever was a royal banquet, which was
given by the Assyrian or Persian kings; and doubtless there was more heartfelt
joy, and solid satisfaction at this feast, than ever was at the noble banquet
of the gorgeous Ahasuerus, or the splendid entertainments of the imperious
Belshazzar.

HAVE we not reason to wonder at the obstinacy and perverseness of the heads of
the Jewish nation, that such a manifest display of divine power would not
convince them. The account of this miracle, as recorded by the several
evangelists, is very plain and circumstantial; and, it may be observed, that
the particular circumstances of time and place, tended to make it more
wonderful, more conspicuous, and less, liable to objections and cavils. The
place was a desert, where no bread could be procured, and therefore, it is
manifest, beyond contradiction, that it must be produced by a miracle. Had this
repast been given to the surrounding multitude, at one of the towns or
villages, it might have been objected, that bread had been secretly supplied:
but neither the Pharisees of those days, nor the infidels of ours, can tell us,
how it was possible for any deception of that kind to be practiced in the
desert. And it may be further observed, that this mighty work was performed in
the evening, when the people had been fasting all day, and, with the fatigue of
traveling were, doubtless weary and very hungry. Had this repast been given in
the morning, the miracle might have been depreciated, by supposing, that the
people did not stand in need of refreshment, and this treat might have been
represented as unnecessary: but the particular circumstances attending this
wonderful work, cut off every shadow of an objection, and abundantly proved,
that God can furnish a table in the wilderness.

THE consideration of the wonderful power of the Son of God, thus manifested in
procuring bread in the wilderness for so many thousands of people, ought to
relieve the cares, and quiet the minds of his people concerning their daily
bread. With what joy and satisfaction of soul ought we to consider, that we are
under the immediate care of our heavenly Father, whose paternal goodness
provides subsistence for all his creatures; and, who opens his hand, and
satisfies the desire of every living thing. It is the beloved Son of the
eternal Father, that showers down such a wide profusion of blessings on a
thankless world; and according to the beautiful language of the Psalmist,
"visits the earth and blesses it; who makes it very plenteous, who waters
her furrows, and sends rain into the little valleys thereof; who makes it
soft with showers, and blesses the increase thereof; who crowns the year
with his goodness, while his clouds drop fatness, making the valleys stand so
thick with corn, that they laugh and sing." With what thankfulness and praise
ought we to behold the constant effects of that heavenly goodness, which
supplies the whole creation with food: ought we not to rely on the paternal
care of the great Parent of nature, who manifests his goodness, and displays
his bounty to an undeserving world, by giving them rain and fruitful seasons,
and filling their hearts with food and gladness?

NOR should we be unmindful of the manifest exertion of divine power, in the
constant supplies which are provided for a world of creatures, and in the
abundant provision which is made for the daily supply of all mankind. Is it any
less a miracle, that the supreme Lord of universal nature, should, every day,
support and feed the whole race of mankind, and all the brute creation, than
that he should feed ten thousand persons in the wilderness, with five loaves
and two small fishes? What proportion does ten thousand persons bear to all the
myriads of men on the face of the earth, who are daily feed by its fruits? And
is not the increase of those fruits as great a miracle, and as manifest an
exertion of divine power, as the increase of the bread by the blessing of our
great Redeemer.

IF we had hearts to consider the works of God with attention and care, we
should perceive the manifest exertions of his power, in the secret operations
of Nature, and as clear proofs of his divinity in her regular productions, as
in the most extraordinary and miraculous events. The marks of divine power are
equally seen in the wine, which arises from the moisture of the earth, through
the tubes of vegetation, and is received from the branches of the vine; as in
that instantaneously made from water at the marriage at Cana. Nor ought they
less to be regarded in the corn, gradually ripened, and made into bread for the
support of all mankind; than in the bread miraculously blessed to the support
of the multitude in the wilderness: but we are very prone to overlook the
common operations of creative wisdom and power, without considering, that, if
we are unaffected with the divine munificence and bounty, so manifestly and
richly displayed in the works of nature and providence, there is much reason to
conclude, that outward miracles would not awaken us to a sense of our duty, nor
effectually mend our hearts: we are, however, very apt to deceive ourselves in
this particular, and often led to conclude, that had we been present at so
stupendous a miracle, as that we are now considering, we should have adored the
divine hand that wrought it, and never have forsaken the Lord of life. But,
alas, if all the display of divine wisdom and goodness in the works of
creation; if all the evidences of the omnipotence of the Son of God, in the
constant supplies which he provides for his numerous creatures; if the constant
manifestations of his goodness to ourselves, in providing for us, and feeding
us the whole course of our lives; will not elevate our hearts, and raise them
to himself in gratitude and joy, there is the highest reason to conclude, that,
had we seen the blessed JESUS feed ten thousand men, women, and children, with
five loaves and two fishes; yea, had we been partakers ourselves of this
miraculous repast, we should have been like many, who really enjoyed these
privileges, yet, afterward took offense at some of his words, which they
called hard sayings, and walked no more with him.

CHAPTER XVII.
The Multitudes, after having been miraculously fed in the Wilderness, attempt
to take CHRIST by Force, and make him King: He shuns their Importunity by
withdrawing himself from them: He walks on the Sea to his Disciples: He saves
Peter, who desired to accompany him, but was sinking for want of Faith. CHRIST
disputes with the Jews in the Synagogue of Capernaum, and declares himself to
be the Bread of Life: He goes to Jerusalum at the Passover; then returns to
Galilee, and reproves the Pharisees for their Superstition.

WHEN the wondering multitudes had partook of the miraculous banquet, prepared
for them by our great Redeemer, a sudden flow of gladness and elevation of mind
ran through the desert; every eye was fixed on the great Founder of the feast;
every heart was glad, and every tongue resounded his praise.

AND now, being thoroughly convinced, that he was their promised Messiah, and
having no notion of the reign of the Messiah, but that of his setting up a
temporal kingdom, they reverenced him as the great deliverer of their nation,
and stood determined, immediately to make him King, whether he consented to it
or not. Loud acclamations resounded through the woods and wilds, and the voice
of exultation and triumph ran along the side of the mountain where the miracle
had been performed: the disciples seemed to join with the multitude in their
desires, and every thing was preparing to proclaim him King.

JESUS, to prevent the execution of their design, without their perceiving his
intention, sent his disciples away in a boat, with orders to sail to Bethsaida.
The multitude were very willing to let the disciples depart, when they saw that
JESUS did not go with them; perhaps, they imagined, that the disciples were
sent to provide such things as were necessary against he assumed the kingdom;
nor did they refuse to disperse when our Lord dismissed them, no doubt,
designing to return in the morning; which, we find, was really the case.

HAVING thus sent the disciples, and the multitude away, JESUS ascended to the
summit of the mountain alone, spending the night in heavenly contemplation, and
ardent prayers to his almighty Father.

BUT the disciples meeting with a contrary wind, could not continue their
course to Bethsaida, which lay about two leagues northward of the desert
mountain, where the multitude had been miraculously fed. They, however, did all
in their power to land as near the city as possible: but a tempest arising they
were tossed all night in the tumultuous sea, without being able to make the
desired port. At the conclusion of the fourth watch, which was about five
o'clock in the morning, they were advanced no further than about a league from
the shore; they were tossed by the foaming waves, and opposed in their course
by the stormy wind; and, though they toiled hard, had no prospect of reaching
the place where they desired to land.

OUR Lord had, from the mountain, beheld the distress of his disciples, and was
now coming to their relief, though they had not the least expectation of his
presence. Thus the Christian, when storms and tempests of trouble and
affliction overtake him, is too prone to forget his almighty support, and
overlook the promise of his great deliverer: but, it would be well for him to
remember, that the blessed JESUS beholds every particular of his distress, and
has not forgotten to be gracious, but in his own time and way, will certainly
appear in all his mightiness to save and work out his deliverance. Nor ought it
to be forgotten, that the time when human wisdom fails, when our distresses and
trouble arises to its highest pitch, when there appears no refuge, no help, no
deliverer, then is the time for a God to manifest his divine power; and, at
such a time, he has often been found to be nigh at hand, and has brought
deliverance to his people in the most wonderful and unexpected manner.

THUS the disciples, when tossed by the mighty tempest, and in danger of being
swallowed up by the foaming seas, saw their divine master at a distance,
walking upon the frothy surface of the mighty waters; they saw, but they knew
him not: nor were they convinced by his nearer approach, but thinking they had
seen an apparition, shrieked with fear. Their terrors, however, were soon at an
end; with kind compassion, and condescending goodness, in his well known voice,
the blessed JESUS dispelled their fears with these words, Be of good cheer; it
is I; be not afraid. No sooner had our great Redeemer uttered these words, than
every fear vanished, and satisfaction and joy filled every heart. Peter was so
elated with the sight of his Master, and so overjoyed to see him walking on the
sea, that he felt in his mind a strong desire to accompany him; and,
accordingly, begged his master to permit him to come upon the water.

OUR great Redeemer having, with condescending goodness, granted his request,
he left the boat, and walked on the surface of the sea; and some time continued
the miraculous course, wondering at himself, and rejoicing in the power of his
master. But the storm increased, the whistling winds roared around him, and the
wild surges tossed their raging heads on high, and dashed about their foam; so
that it was with the utmost difficulty that he kept on his feet. Peter was not
so strong as he imagined; his presence of mind forsook him; his faith failed;
he forgot the presence of his divine master, and he began to sink in the mighty
waters. In this extremity, he looked earnestly for his divine supporter, and,
upon the brink of being swallowed up, he cried, Lord save me! His kind,
compassionate master, immediately relieved him; he stretched out his hand and
caught him; at the same time, gently rebuking his staggering resolution and
wavering faith, he said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou
doubt?

THE case of Peter should be a standing warning to the Christian, and excite
him to be very cautious of putting a vain confidence in his own strength. Peter
thought that he could endure all things in the company of his master, and,
while he felt his heart warm, he supposed that his resolution and courage would
bear him above every fear. But on this, as well as on a future occasion, which
will hereafter be remarked, he found himself mistaken. When he perceived the
storm to increase, and foaming billows rage more horribly than before, his
fears suggested, that either his master would be unable or unwilling to support
him amidst the furious blasts of the tempest. He had, on various occasions,
beheld the divine power and goodness of his master, and his fears were
unreasonable, and he was justly to be blamed; because the same power which had
before been so fully manifested, and which now had enabled him to walk on the
sea, was able to support him there, notwithstanding all the horrors of the
storm.

PETER might have reasoned thus, had he been in his right mind; but his fear
prevailed, his courage and resolution, which he depended so much upon, forsook
him, and he began to sink. Thus the Christian, when he enjoys the presence of
his Savior, thinks that he can endure all things; and concludes, that his
mountain stands strong, and he shall never be moved: but, when affliction and
trouble arise, he has a very different view of things; when great dangers are
before him, and the boisterous waves of disappointment, vexation, and distress,
roar around him, he is very prone to be disheartened, and to think, that he
shall certainly be swallowed up, that God has forsaken him, and will be
favorable no more. Such are too often his sentiments, and, if the divine hand
of his Savior did not hold him out, he would, like Peter, sink in the mighty
water.

THIS miracle of our exalted Redeemer's walking on the sea, seems to have
astonished the disciples, more than any which had been before it; for though
they had so lately seen the miracle of feeding the multitude with five loaves,
it did not appear to have such an effect on their minds, as this last
manifestation of his divine power; for now, with the utmost veneration,
gratitude, and joy, they came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art
the Son of God.

NOR was walking on the sea, the only miracle which our Redeemer wrought at
this time; for we are informed by the evangelists, that as soon as their
almighty master, and his relieved disciple, were received into the ship, the
vessel was instantaneously transported to its intended port. Then they
willingly received him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land
whither they went.

IT was in the country adjacent to Capernaum, that our great Redeemer landed;
and, as he had not been in that neighborhood since his visiting Nazareth, the
country people flocked about him in great numbers, bringing their sick and
diseased, which the divine physician immediately healed: and, as it had been a
considerable time since he had been in that country, they crowded around him in
such numbers, that he could not pay a particular attention to every object of
distress; but they had so great an opinion of the healing virtue, which he so
eminently possessed, that they beseeched him, that they might only touch the
hem of his garment; and as many as touched were made perfectly (...).

IT has been before related, that after CHRIST had fed the multitude in the
desert, he dismissed them; but, though they dispersed at his command, they did
not return to their habitations: for, perceiving that the disciples were sent
to the other side of the lake, and that JESUS stayed behind, they probably
concluded, that they were sent to provide necessaries for their master's
assuming the kingdom; though he had modestly declined that high dignity in the
evening, they were encouraged to hope, that he would accept of it the ensuing
day. This expectation, it may be supposed, induced them to lodge in the
solitary wilderness, and shelter themselves in caverns of the rocks and
mountains, though they were very much incommoded by the raging of the storm.

WHEN morning arrived, the multitude left the places of their retreat, and
searched for our Redeemer in every part of the desert mountain: they saw him
ascend to the summit the foregoing evening, and were very much surprised that
he could not be found; but having wearied themselves in an unsuccessful search,
they probably concluded that he had departed in some boat which belonged to the
sea of Tiberius, that had been forced by the storm to take shelter in some
creek, at the foot of the mountain. With this expectation, they departed to
Capernaum, where they found him in the Synagogue, teaching the people; and,
with a mixture of joy and surprise, asked him, Rabbi, when come thou hither?
To this question, our great Redeemer answered, that they did not follow him
because they were convinced by his miracles of the truth of his divinity, but
because they had been miraculously fed: Verily, verily I say unto you, said he,
ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled. Hereby our great Redeemer intimated, that their views
in following him were low, selfish, and sordid, and far below what might be
expected from the Messiah's kingdom. Food for the body is of small consequence,
when compared with those blessings which promote the welfare of the immortal
soul. It was not mere animal food which the Son of God came down from heaven to
bestow, but that divine wisdom and grace which would lead the immortal mind in
the paths of eternal happiness; and, therefore, he exhorted them not to follow
him for common food, but for that meat which endures to everlasting life.
Labor not, said he, for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto you: for
him has God the Father sealed.

THE Jews, if they had attentively considered the writings of their prophets,
where divine wisdom and knowledge are frequently held forth, under the
metaphors of meat and drink, might easily have understood what our Savior
meant by the meat which endures unto everlasting life. But their popular
notions of a temporal dominion, led them into the idea of some corporeal food,
which the Messiah would give them to enable them to pursue the designs, and
establish the glories of his kingdom. It is, therefore, no wonder that they
asked him, what they should do to erect the Messiah's kingdom, and obtain that
wonderful bread, which, he said, God had commissioned him to bestow.

THE minds of the Jews were filled with vast conceptions of the splendor and
glory of the Messiah's reign; as they expected that CHRIST was about to
establish his great empire, doubtless they imagined he would have given proper
directions for their rising against, and opposing the Roman power, as the first
step toward raising that dominion which had been so long promised to their
nation. But our great Redeemer, to convince them of their mistake, and inform
them what God really required of them, in order to erect the Messiah's kingdom,
told them, that the way to obtain favor of the God of Israel, was to believe
in the person whom he had sent. The Jews were exceedingly offended at this
unexpected answer, and seemed determined not to receive CHRIST as their
Messiah, because he declined all means of establishing a temporal kingdom: as,
therefore, he appeared in a character so contrary to their expectations of the
manifestation of the Messiah, they required him to produce some signs, which
might demonstrate that he was greater than Moses, or any of the old prophets.
As to the miracle of feeding the multitude, they supposed, that such a
pre-eminency could not be gathered from thence, because Moses had fed their
whole nation with manna in the wilderness, which, they insinuated, was a
greater miracle than CHRIST's feeding ten thousand persons in the wilderness.
What sign shows thou then, said they unto him, that we may see, and believe
thee? What do thou work? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is
written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. To this objection, our Lord
replied, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from
heaven; but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.

THE manna which sustained the Israelites in the wilderness, was not the
production of Moses, but the gift of God; it was not sent as an evidence of
Moses, being a great prophet, but was intended to carry on the designs of
divine providence, in the support of that peculiar people, and to be an emblem,
or representation of that true spiritual, heavenly bread, which God has given
for the spiritual life of all who believe in his Son.

SOME of the audience, who had listened with great pleasure, to the description
which our Lord had given of the celestial bread, were possessed with an carest
desire to be partakers of so great a blessing: and immediately cried out, Lord,
evermore give us this bread. To which, the divine Instructor replied, I am the
bread of life: he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes
on me, shall never thirst. But, continued our great Redeemer, as I have often
said, your nation obstinately and resolutely resists the light, and continues
in unbelief, notwithstanding the manifest and glaring evidences of divine
power, which you have seen, and the glorious fruits which would follow on your
believing; but think not, that your unbelief will prevent the rising glories of
my spiritual kingdom; for many there are which my father has given me, these
shall be induced by the power of his spirit to come unto me, and him that
comes, I will in no wise cast out: for I came down from heaven, not to do mine
own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's will which
has sent, that, of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life: and I will raise him up at the last day.

AS the greatest part of the Jews were desirous only of temporal privileges and
advantages from the Messiah's kingdom, it is no wonder they should be offended
at this doctrine; they could not bear the thought, that a man who declined all
earthly honors, should be supposed to be the Messiah: nor could they tell what
he meant by calling himself the bread of life, and asserting, that he came down
from heaven. With murmuring and discontent, therefore, they hastily exclaimed,
Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How is
it then that he says, I came down from heaven?

TO these degrading expressions, our Lord thought fit to reply, that no
objections arising from the meanness of his birth and education, could
invalidate the testimony of the miracles which he had wraught, or excuse their
obstinacy and unbelief. But it was not strange, that they should oppose and
resist the truth, for it required the agency of divine power to teach them to
understand what he meant by declaring himself the bread of life: and also it
must be the mighty power of God, which enabled them to receive him, and live
upon him as such. A believing in the Son of God, as the only Savior of
sinners, and resting upon him for life and salvation, and thereby partaking of
the divine nature, and receiving spiritual nourishment from him, as the body
does from corporeal bread, was not within the reach of the natural abilities of
the unbelieving Jews, nor any of the human race, without divine assistance;
and, therefore, our Lord told them, No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me, draw him. And he further proceeded to inform them, that it
was related in their prophets, concerning the kingdom of the Messiah, that all
the subjects of that kingdom should be taught of God, Every man, therefore,
that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me. But, continued
our great Redeemer, you are not to suppose, that men will be so favored as to
see God with their corporeal eyes; for him none has seen, or can see: but the
happiness and glory of that kingdom will consist in believing on me, in such a
manner as to receive me as the true bread of life: by this the believer will
obtain a vital union with me, and draw spiritual nourishment from me; and, by
that means, grow up to everlasting life.

OUR Lord, having thus declared himself to be the bread of life, which came
down from heaven, and shown the way in which it is to be obtained, proceeded to
examine the comparison between himself, considered as the bread from heaven,
and the manna, which, in the time of Moses, the Israelites eat in the
wilderness. Your fathers, said he, did eat manna in the wilderness, and are
dead. This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a man may ea^
thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any
man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will give,
is my flesh, which I will give for the life if the world.

THOUGH the Jews were no strangers to a figurative way of speaking, yet such
was their blindness and perverseness, that they understood those words, and the
rest of CHRIST's declaration, in a literal sense, and inquired, with the utmost
astonishment, How can this man give us his flesh to eat* But our Lord, knowing
what manner of persons he was conversing with, did not think proper to explain
his meaning in any other way of speaking; but continuing in the same figurative
way of expression, he repeated, and affirmed what he had before asserted,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, said he, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; meaning, that no
person can obtain that eternal life, which the gospel of CHRIST makes known,
but by a vital faith, which receives the Son of God, and, partaking of his
divine nature, draws spiritual nourishment and life from him. 'He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the living
Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me, even he
shall live by me.'

OUR Lord proceeded to inform them, that this is the bread which he had before
told them came down from heaven, infinitely superior, in its nature and
consequences, to that bread which their fathers eat in the wilderness; 'for
they eat the manna and are dead; but whosoever eats this bread shall live for
ever.'

SUCH was the conference which our Savior had with the Jews, in the Synagogue
at Capernaum, which took its rise from the miraculous repast which he had so
lately provided for the multitude in the desert, and thence naturally turned on
bread. Though the Jews were no strangers to a figurative way of speaking, and
might have found the same mode of expression in their own prophets, yet they
had no clear idea of his meaning, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood,
they still understood literally; and, as it was a thing prohibited in the law
of Moses, and abhorred by the most barbarous nations, they looked upon it with
the utmost astonishment and aversion; and many of his disciples, with a mixture
of dissatisfaction and surprise, said, This is a hard saying; who can hear it?
Our Lord, perceiving their discontent, said, Are ye offended because I told you
my flesh was meat, and my blood was drink; what would you think if you saw the
Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickens; the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and
they are life. Thus, our Lord further explained the meaning of what he had
before advanced; as much as if he had said, When you see me ascend with this
body into heaven, you will be convinced that I really descended from thence;
and you will also perceive that you cannot eat my flesh, or drink my blood in a
corporeal manner; I never intended you should think my words had any such
meaning: my flesh in such case, could not be of any advantage to the Sons of
men; but the great blessings I have been relating, arise from receiving the
doctrines I preach; to reveal these, I laid aside the glory which I had with my
Father; I took upon me the veil of flesh, and assumed the nature of man: it is,
therefore, entering into the spirit of these doctrines, which will bring you to
eternal life; but I know your hearts are so wicked, and your prejudices so
strong, that you will not receive them; nor am I disappointed in you; for, I
have told you before, that no man can come unto me, except it be given him of
the Father.

THE Jews were so puzzled, confounded and offended at this discourse, that many
who had professed themselves the disciples of CHRIST, departed out of the
synagogue, and followed him no more. They did not understand his views, nor
like his method of proceeding; nor could they perceive how a temporal kingdom,
that idol of Jewish vanity, was likely at this rate to be established: and,
therefore, they could no longer acknowledge JESUS to be the Messiah, whose
appearance and reign they expected so vastly different.

WHEN the Jews were departed, our Lord turned himself to his disciples, with
benignity of countenance, and with an air of condescending goodness, bid them
remark how degrading and shameful it was for the sons of men, to consider, and
reflect, on the perverseness and obstinacy of the unbelieving Jews; who thought
themselves offended, and made it a crime, for asserting and spreading such
divine, immutable truths, and knowledge, to which they deafened their ears, and
which affected so materially their future welfare and tranquillity. Divine
truths! demonstrated to them in supernatural miracles, heavenly goodness, and
by the fulfilments of the predictions of the ancient prophets, out of all
probability of doubt, if they would only reflect and consider on the sacred
writings, and how inconsistent it ought to appear to all, who were not blinded,
nor led astray by evil-minded men, nor over fond of following implicitly,
without considering the manifest contradictions, and absurdities contained in
the dogmas of their Elders; whom they themselves despised, by performing the
least, and neglecting the most material rites which they contained.

OUR blessed Redeemer added, that by such an ungrateful conduct toward his
heavenly Father, they rendered themselves unworthy to partake the blessings
arising from his divine and spiritual kingdom, to which they turned their
hearts, in defiance to the precepts and examples of the Son of Man; delighting
in iniquity and walking in darkness; preferring the works of feeble men, to the
paths of his heavenly kingdom, turning their hearts against his ministry, by
entertaining such notions of the Messiah's temporal kingdom, so inconsistent
with the divine will of his heavenly Father; but that the time will come, when,
convinced of their iniquitous proceedings, they should atone for their
transgressions, and the power of the Son of man will be fully known. Adding,
also, that because he permitted his disciples to eat with unwashen hands, which
was contrary to the tradition of the elders, by which the Pharisees explained
the law of Moses. Several instances of legal uncleanness were particularly
stated, and forbidden by the Jewish legislature; but these, and other
cerimonial performances, were multiplied in the most extravagant and ridiculous
manner in those traditions, which were held in such high veneration by the
Pharisees. These people, who valued themselves on an exact and scrupulous
performance of every title of the law, considered it as a notorious offense to
eat bread with unwashen hands, though at the same time, they were scandalously
careless in things of the highest importance.

TO show the stupidity and folly of this conduct, our Lord answered the
question of the Pharisees, by retorting on them the wickedness of their conduct
in a scrupulous exactness and punctuality, in the observance of human
traditions, and, at the same time, neglecting the positive commands of God. Why
do you also, said he, transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? For
God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and mother: and, He that curses
father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his
father or his mother, it is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by
me: that is, whatever I might have spared for the relief of my parents, I have
dedicated to God, and thus suffers his parents to want, not honoring his
father and mother, he shall be free. Thus have you, continued our great
Redeemer, set aside the immutable duties of natural religion, and dared to
oppose and contradict the positive commandments of God, by your ridiculous and
contemptible traditions: ye hypocrites, said he, well did Isaias prophesy of
you, saying, This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me
with their lips; but their heart is far from me: but in vain do they worship
me, preaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

OUR Lord having thus sharply rebuked the Pharisees, he turned to the people
and explained to them the nature of the argument, and desired them to reflect
on the absurdity of the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees. Not that which
goes into the mouth defiles a man: but that which comes out of the mouth,
that defiles a man, said he; and appealed to the common sense and
understanding of mankind, for the apparent truth of this observation, desiring
them to judge what contemptible hypocrites those persons must be, who could
professedly neglect the great duties of morality, which are of universal and
eternal obligations, and at the same time, value themselves on the exact and
scrupulous performance of such a trifle as washing of hands.

THE Pharisees were highly offended at our Lord, because he spoke in a
degrading manner of their traditions, of which, having complained with some
warmth, the disciples came and informed their master. JESUS replied, that they
need not give themselves any pain about the offense which that set of men had
taken at his words, nor need they be afraid of their anger; for both themselves
and their doctrine would soon be destroyed, for neither of them were of God.
Every plant, said he, which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind
lead the blind, they shall both fall into the ditch.

BUT the disciples themselves did not fully understand, nor were they entirely
satisfied with his doctrine; and Peter having desired his Lord to explain it to
them, the divine instructor proceeded to inform them, that meats being of a
corporeal nature, could not defile the spirit of a man, or render him polluted
in the sight of God: no real guilt can be contracted this way, except the meats
are used to excess, or in direct contradiction to the command of God; and then
the pollution proceeds from the man, who suffers himself to be prevailed on to
transgress a positive command, and not from the meat, which, as the good
creature of God, is lawful to be received. Thus, that which enters in at the
mouth, does not defile the man, but that which comes out of the mouth,
proceeding from a wicked heart, such as evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: these are the things which
defile a man; but to eat with unwashen hands, defiles not a man. Discourses
like these, could not fail of exceedingly offending the proud, self-conceited
Pharisees, and raising their resentment to its highest pitch: for these, and
such like observations of our Lord, tended to strip them of that outside show
of sanctity and superior strictness, with which they ve^^ed their deformity,
and rendered themselves so venerable in the esteem of the vulgar Jews. These
discourses therefore, and the general opposition the proud Pharisees met with
from the Son of God, excited them, with the utmost pride and envy, not only to
oppose his doctrine and degrade his miracles, but to attack his reputation, and
plot against his life. Our great Redeemer thought it unnecessary to continue
the contest with such hardened hypocrites, and determined opposers of the
truth, and immediately departed out of the country.

CHAPTER XVIII.
JESUS, at the repeated Request of the Wowan of Canaan, cures her daughter:
Restores the Faculty of Speech to a dumb Man at Decapolis: Miraculously feeds
the Multitude a second Time in the Desert: Warmly exhorts his Disciples to
beware of the Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees: Restores Sight to a blind
Man, near the City of Bethsaida: After which, he departs into the Towns of
Caesarea-Philippi, where he approves and commends the Faith of Peter.

THE Lord of life having departed from Galilee, to evade the cruel and
malicious designs of the Pharisees, he retired to the borders of Palestine, and
approached near to those two famous maritime cities Tire and Sidon: but so
great was the veneration of the common people, such the fame he had acquired by
his kind and beneficent actions, and so many the benefits which multitudes had
received from his all-healing goodness, it was not possible he should be
concealed. And though he was so famous in the land of Isarel.

THE first, amongst the inhabitants of these Heathen cities, which implored the
assistance of the Son of God, was an unhappy parent, whose only daughter had an
unclean spirit, and was grieveously vexed with a devil. Various were the
discouragements which lay in the way of the afflicted matron; she was a
Canaanite, one of that detested race with which the Jews would have no
dealings, and with whom they disdained to converse, and had every reason to
fear, that her petition would be disgusting to one of the most eminent of the
sons of Israel; but, notwithstanding all these circumstances, she, as an humble
petitioner, threw herself upon the tender mercies of the benevolent Son of God:
strong necessity urged her on, grief and growing distress caused her to be
importunate; such dreadful sorrow, such pressing distress surrounded her, it is
no wonder that she would take no denial, but pursued, with repeated petitions,
the only person who was able to help. Accordingly, in the deepest humility of
mind, with the most respectful reverence and submission, and the most ardent,
earnest, and powerful address, she came and fell at the feet of our great
Redeemer; she besought him, and cried, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of
David. The earnestness of this woman's petition, and her calling our Lord the
Son of David, plainly indicate, that she believed him to be the Messiah; she
seems to have received that faith, which was always honored by the Son of God,
and always recommended the persons who possessed it, to his first regard; and
one would have expected, that such a petition would not have been rejected by
that bountiful and merciful Redeemer, who went about doing good, and who kindly
invited the weary and heavy-laden, to come to him with the promise of relief.

THIS woman, being a native of Syrophoenicia, was, no doubt, educated in all
the idolatrous superstition of the Greeks; but had been enabled to believe in
the Son of God, and earnestly and vehemently to apply to him for relief. And
there is no reason to doubt, but that divine Person, who had enabled her to
believe his ability to heal her daughter, and thus, with all her heart and
soul, to implore his assistance, beheld her with an eye of tender pity, and
stood determined to grant her request.

BUT we find, that our Lord did not think proper to let her know his intentions
toward her at first. He made no reply to her petition, nor did he seem to take
the least notice, either of her, or her distress; but this silence, and seeming
disregard, did not intimidate her so far as to induce her to desist; but
excited her to press her petition with the more earnestness. She continued her
cries with a vehemence which would take no denial, till the disciples were
affected with her grief, and became her advocates; and they, however strongly
they had imbibed the prejudices of their nation, against the Gentiles* besought
their Master to dismiss this troublesome petitioner, to grant her request, and
send her away.

BUT JESUS soon silenced his disciples, with an answer agreeable to their own
prejudices; I am not sent, said he, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. To this, the whole train readily assented; they had an high opinion of
the peculiar privileges and high prerogatives of the Jews, and looked upon the
Gentiles as absolutely unclean, and unworthy of the least favor from the God
of Israel: so that they were entirely satisfied with this answer, and urged the
matter no further.

But the woman herself was not so easily prevailed on to give up her request:
it was her own cause; she had no hopes of relief from any other quarter; and
that divine power which had wrought faith in her heart, and given her a full
persuasion, that JESUS was the Messiah, and able to help her, had also given
her strength and perseverance in her request. She took some encouragement, from
observing herself the subject of conversation between CHRIST and his disciples,
and, though conscious of her unworthiness to approach so illustrious a person,
yet fully convinced of his divinity, she worshipped him, and prayed, Lord, help
me.

OUR Lord now condescended to speak to this humble and earnest petitioner: but
his words were seemingly sufficient to have discouraged every future attempt;
and though she had conceived so high an opinion of the person and condescending
goodness of our Lord, his reply seems sufficient to have inspired her with
bitter dislike and aversion. 'It is not meet,' said he, 'to take the childrens'
bread, and to cast it to dogs.' Intimating, that the Jews were the children of
God, to whom all the privileges and blessings of the covenant of Abraham
belonged; and, as the Gentiles were vile and contemptible, they could not
expect to share those blessings with the sons of Israel. This answer, however
severe, did but speak the language of the petitioner's humility, and therefore,
it did not excite her resentment, or cause her to go murmuring away; but*
acknowledging the justice of his remark, she meekly replied: 'Truth, Lord; yet
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's table.' Thus,
continuing the similitude which our Lord had laid down, she artfully introduced
her own case, and beautifully and meekly urged her petition, at a time when, it
might have been expected, she would have declined it with murmuring resentment.

OUR Savior, having thus given the woman an opportunity of manifesting the
strength and steadiness of her faith, and declaring what just notions she had
of her own unworthiness, and the power and goodness of our great Redeemer, he
now beheld her with a gracious smile, commending her faith, and wrought the
cure which she had so warmly and successfully solicited in behalf of her
daughter; 'O woman,' said he, 'great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou will.' These gracious words were no sooner spoken, than the great event
followed; and the affectionate parent had reason to rejoice, for 'her daughter
was made whole from that very hour.'

THIS affecting and interesting relation, should excite every person in
distress, especially those who are in distress of soul, to be ardent, constant,
and persevering in their addresses, to our great Redeemer. Whatever may be the
nature of our distress, and however impossible it might seem to us, that our
comfort should be restored; yet there is the highest encouragement to seek to
that great Person, who is mighty to save, and in his own time and way, will
deliver all that commit their case to him, that believe in his name, and come
to him for deliverance. Nor ought we to be discouraged by the most humbling
views which we may have of our own unworthiness: the Syrophoenician woman was
an Heathen and an idolater, but yet she (...) not prevented by those
considerations, from imploring the pity of the Son of God: she sought it
perseveringly, and she found it. Thus, how lost soever we may suppose our
condition to be, how desperate soever our case, we ought not to despair: the
most humbling and abasing sense of our unworthiness, ought not to keep us from
the great Savior of sinners, but rather urge us to follow him with our
petitions, and ardently and vehemently implore his relief.

AND further, from the success of this afflicted parent, we may be excited to
perseverance in our petitions, though we do not meet with the desired relief,
after a long continuance in our supplications: the person whose case we are
considering for some time met with no answer, and was afterward repeatedly
denied; but still she persisted, and at last prevailed: so, though the Lord
stands at a distance from us, leaves us to our sorrows, and does not answer our
prayers in the time, or the way we might expect; still we are encouraged to
continue our address: he is not offended at our importunity, he is not angry at
our wants, nor weary of our cries; but the language of his words is, that we
ought always to pray, and not to faint. Nor ought we to be weary of this pious
practice though the Lord may seem to deny our request; though instead of
removing our affliction and destress by his gracious smiles, he seems to frown
upon us, and lays fresh burdens on our souls; though, at the time when we
expected deliverance, we meet with new distresses; and, though the Lord follows
us with stroke after stroke, and lays one affliction upon another; still we
ought to continue our petitions, to lay them at his feet, to take no rest till
he answers our prayers, and to determine, that we will not let him go until he
bless us. And we may rest assured that whosoever is enabled, like the
Canaanitish woman, thus ardently, vehemently, humbly, and perseveringly, to
continue their supplications to the Son of God, will sooner or later, like her,
find the desired relief.

JESUS being returned from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, and taking a tour
through the region of Decapolis, a man was brought to him who was deaf and
dumb. The divine Physician was always ready to relieve such objects of
affliction and distress as applied to him: but, as the multitude thronged about
him, expecting he would soon set up his kingdom, he thought proper to take the
diseased person and his relations aside from the throng; he then put his
fingers in his ears, and touched his tongue, that the deaf man, who could not
be informed by language, might mark the great person who was his benefactor. He
then looked up to heaven, and sighed, and said unto him, Ephatha, that is, Be
opened: and straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he spoke plain. And he charged them, that they should tell no man.

THIS injunction, however, was very little regarded; for, the man and his
relations were so elated with the benefit they had received, and the miraculous
manner in which that benefit had been conferred, their hearts were so full of
gratitude to the great person from whom this unspeakable favor had been
received, that they published it in every part of the country; doubtless,
thinking they could not be too lavish in the praises of so great a benefactor,
especially as the modesty in which he performed the miracles, fully manifested
the uprightness of his intentions, and showed, that he did not aim at popular
applause, but only sought after the real benefit of mankind.

THE vast crowds that gathered about our exalted Redeemer, were such as it was
a trouble to bear: he, therefore, to avoid such prodigious numbers of people as
the fame of his miracles had brought together, retired to a desert mountain
near the sea of Galilee. But the solitary shades of the widlderness could not
long conceal the great Benefactor of the human race: multitudes who were
related to helpless objects of distress, soon discovered the place of his
retreat, and brought to him from all quarters, the sick, the lame, the blind,
the dumb, and the maimed. The compassionate Savior of sinners was moved at the
sight of so many piteous objects; he graciously released them from their
several complaints, and restored them to health and strength. Miracles like
these could not fail of exciting the veneration and wonder of the numerous
spectators: but above all, the restoring the dumb to the faculty of speech
filled the beholders with astonishment; for, it must be observed, that he not
only conferred on these persons the faculty of hearing, and pronouncing sounds,
but instantaneously conveyed into their minds, the whole language of their
country: they were instantly acquainted with the various words it contained,
their significations, their forms, their powers, and their uses, and, at once
acquired the habit of speaking properly and fluently. This surely was
sufficient to have convinced the most ignorant and stupid of the human race,
that such works could be effected by nothing less than the mighty power of God;
and, we are informed, that the multitude wondered when they saw the dumb to
speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see, and they
glorified the God of Israel.

THE attending to the various cures our great Redeemer performed, detained the
multitude three days in the desert; during which time, they had consumed all
the provisions which they brought along with them into this solitary retreat:
no refreshment was to be procured in the desert, and the kind, compassionate
JESUS would not send them away fasting, l^st any who had followed him so far
from their habitations, should faint by the way; and, therefore, he again
exerted his almighty power to feed the multitude in the wilderness.

WITH this view, our exalted Savior called his disciples unto him, and said, I
have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days,
and have nothing to eat; and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint
by the way. The disciples, thought they had lately had so plain a manifestation
of divine power on a like occasion, seemed to wonder at the proposal: Whence,
said they, should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great
a multitude? Their divine Master did not rebuke them for their unbelief, but
calmly asked them, How many loaves have ye? To which they replied, Seven, and a
few small fishes. Our great Redeemer then comm^nded the multitude to sit down
on the ground. And he took the seven loaves, and the fishes, and gave thanks,
and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude;
and they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up the broken meat that
was left, seven baskets full. And they that did eat, were four thousand men,
besides women and children.

IT is not unworthy of remark, that the blessed JESUS, during the course of his
public ministry, very frequently wrought his wonderful works, and published his
divine discourses in the silent retreats of the wilderness, and the solitary
shades of the desert. Here he was followed by great numbers, who were diseased
either in body or mind, and who came after him with a sincere desire of
receiving benefit, either from the miraculous powers of healing which he
possessed, or from the heavenly doctrines which he taught* and, were not
sincerely desirous of receiving instruction, would endure the hardships to
which they were frequently exposed in the wilderness, where they were sometimes
two or three days without food: so that we may observe the wisdom of our great
Redeemer, who took this method to collect together, the honest, plain-hearted
part of the nation, who were more likely to be affected with his miracles, and
profit by his instructions, than the proud rulers of the people, or the haughty
and opulent inhabitants of the crowded cities, and it may be further remarked,
that our heavenly Instructor chose these desert places and obscure retreats,
that he might have the opportunity of conveying his divine doctrines to the
persons whose hearts were prepared to receive them, without opposition from the
proud self-conceited Scribes and Pharisees. How happy were people, who thus sat
under the divine instructions of the Son of God! who left the busy, bustling
scenes of folly and dissipation in the crowded city, and retired to the silent
and solitary shades of the desert, to attend to those things which concerned
their everlasting peace; thus exchanging the loud roar of laughter and folly,
for the calm dictates of eternal wisdom; and, giving up the bread that
perishes, for that which endures to everlasting life.

AFTER having miraculously fed the multitude, JESUS departed to the territory
of Magdala, and appeared in a province of that country, called Dalmanutha. The
Pharisees, having heard that he had again fed the multitude, followed him
there; for they feared that the common people would be convinced by his
miracles, and acknowledge him to be the Messiah; and they were determined to
oppose him with all their might, and openly and publicly confute whatever he
advanced, with a view to prevent the nation from owning him under that
character.

IN order to this, they boldly demanded of him a sign from heaven, to make it
plain, beyond all contradiction, that he was a greater prophet than Moses.
JESUS replied, by rebuking their blindness and folly, who, by observing the
face of the sky, could distinguish the signs of fair and rainy weather, with a
precision which was fully manifested by the event; but, at the same time, they
were so blind and foolish, they could not perceive the evident manifestation of
the ^^^filment of the prophecies respecting the Messiah, nor distinguish the
signs of those times which they so ardently expected and desired. Had the
Pharisees duly attended to the evidences which our Lord produced to prove his
divine mission, and examined them with the same care as they did the face of
the sky, when they predicted the fairness or foulness of the weather, they
would doubtless have been convinced of the truth: but their obstinate and
inveterate prejudices, prevented their receiving the Redeemer of Israel, and
filled their hearts with so much pride and envy, that our divine Instructor
would not attempt their information and conviction; but fetching a deep sigh,
because of the hardness of their hearts, he declared, that their expected sign
should never be given them; and further observed, that the only sign which
Divine Providence would allow them, was that of his own resurrection from the
cold regions of the dead, in which dark abodes he should be no longer held,
than the prophet Jonah was in the belly of the whale. This miracle of our
Lord's resurrection, was a sign greater than any which had formerly been shown
by the ancient prophets, and was justly insisted on by our great Redeemer, to
prove that he excelled and was far superior to them all: A wicked and
adulterous generation, said he, seeks after a sign; and there shall no sign
be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas.

HAVING given this answer to the Pharisees, our Lord departed with his
disciples, and went by sea to Bethsaida. During this short voyage, he cautioned
his disciples to beware of the doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, which he
introduced under the metaphor of leaven, described its wide-spreading
contagion, and pernicious influence on the minds and actions of men. These
hypocrites, valued themselves for their zealous attachment to a religion, which
consisted in the scrupulous observance of frivolous tradition, while they
neglected the immutable duties of natural religion, as well as the weightier
and more important precepts of the law: but the disciples, having forgotten to
take bread with them in their voyage, thought our Lord introduced the discourse
of leaven, to caution them against procuring it of the Heathens, or Samaritans;
for, though their Master had so lately ^ed the multitude in the desert, they
had forgotten his miraculous power, and seemed not to be sensible, that he who
had fed ten thousand persons with five loaves, was able, at all times, to
provide for their necessities.

HAVING crossed the lake, and landed at Bethsaida, there was brought to our
Lord a blind man, and he was earnestly entreated to restore him to sight. He
received the petition with his usual kindness, and taking the man by the hand,
he led him out of the city; then he spit in his eyes, and laid his hands upon
him, and asked him, if he saw any thing: to which, the man replied, I see men
as trees walking: which words very properly express the indistinctness of his
sight: JESUS then laid his hands on him a second time, and he was immediately
restored to clear, distinct, and perfect sight.

IT is proper in this place to be remarked, that the inhabitants of Bethsaida,
had, by their ingratitude, impenitence, and unbelief, greatly provoked our
great Redeemer; and it may be said of this city, as it was of another, he would
not do many mighty works there, because of their unbelief: and this, no doubt,
was the reason why he would not perform this miraculous cure in the city, but
led the blind man into the fields; and soon after departed into the territory
of Caesarea-Philippi.

BEING retired into this country, our Lord thought proper to try the faith of
the apostles; not that he did it for his own information, but that it might be
manifest to themselves that they believed in the Lord. With this view, he asked
them, Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am? In answer to this question,
the disciples replied, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias;
and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets. The people in general, were
convinced that JESUS was a great prophet; but though they were convinced of
this, they did not acknowledge him as the Messiah. The reason of their mistake
is very apparent: they expected that the Messiah, when he appeared, would
assume the honors, grandeur, and power of a temporal kingdom; but, as JESUS
disclaimed and declined all earthly honors, they could not receive him under
that character. JESUS, therefore, gave the disciples an opportunity of
declaring what their conceptions were of his person and character; and, with
this view, he asked them, But whom say ye that I am? To this question, Peter
immediately replied, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. With a
condescending smile, our Lord accepted the title, and, to testify his
approbation of Peter's faith, immediately replied, Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-jonah: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven. Our great Redeemer, then alluding to the name of Peter,
which signifies a rock, led him, and the rest of the disciples, to a view of
that eternal Rock, on the faith he had before expressed, and the whole church
of CHRIST rests, as on a sure foundation. And I say unto thee, said he, that
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it.

IT cannot, without great absurdity, be concluded, that Peter was the rock on
which CHRIST declared he would build his church: weak indeed, and easily
assaulted and overcome by the powers of hell, would the noble fabric be, if it
rested on any creature; and much more so, was it supported by a weak, mutable,
and fallible man: it is therefore manifest, that CHRIST himself is the Rock, on
which his universal church, containing the whole number of his redeemed, is
erected; and this is a foundation which will stand for ever: not all the powers
of earth and hell, can shake the immovable basis of this rock: and whosoever is
so happy as to be fixed on this foundation, need not fear the dreadful
earthquake, the rushing inundation, the raging tempest, or the devouring flame:
not all the rage and confusion of a tumultuous world, can hurt such a person as
this; but he may stand secure amidst the last convulsions of expiring nature,
and behold, without fear, "the wrecks of matter and the crush of worlds."

BUT our Lord proceeded to show the favorable regard which he had for his
disciples, and the gifts which he would bestow upon them; and, therefore, he
adds, And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matthew. xvi.19. As Peter
had spoken in behalf of himself and the rest of the apostles, so our Lord lays
down these gifts which were common to all; for the same words, with very little
variation, are applied to the whole number, in Matt, xviii.18, and in John
xx.23. They cannot be supposed to contain a declaration of any superiority
assigned to Peter over the rest of the apostles; for, it is evident, that, when
they afterward disputed on this head, and held any contention amongst
themselves, who should be greatest, they were always reproved by their Master:
nor can we find, that the rest of the apostles ever confessed any such
superiority, or that Peter ever claimed it.

THE keys of the kingdom of heaven being given to the apostles, by a very easy
and beautiful figure, represents the success of their ministry. The kingdom of
heaven, in the language of the evangelist, is the kingdom of grace, or the
dispensation of the glorious gospel: and what can be more natural, than to say,
that the keys of the kingdom of heaven are given to them who open those noble
truths to the sons of men. And when it is said, that whatsoever the apostles
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; it evidently relates to the divine
approbation of those regulations and restrictions, which the apostles should
establish in the church; for binding and loosing, are frequently used in the
talmudical language, to represent the allowing or forbidding particular
sentiments and practices: so that, from the whole, we may conclude, that
however our Lord approved or applauded Peter's faith and zeal, he did not, by
these declarations, intend to give him any pre-eminence or authority over the
rest of the apostles.

CHAPTER XIX.
CHRIST informs his Disciples of his Sufferings and Death: He declares, that he
shall judge the World, and gives a Description of the Last Judgment: He is
transfigured in the Presence of three of his Apostles: At the Foot of the
Mountain of Transfiguration, he cures a Youth, who had a dumb and deaf Spirit:
And, returning to Capernaum, pays the Roman Tribute, with a piece of Money,
taken out of the Mouth of a Fish by Peter, agreeable to his Master's Direction.

THE disciples, as they still retained their expectations of a temporal
kingdom, were, doubtless, highly elated with the discourse of their Master,
which they had lately heard; giving them the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
enabling them to bind and loose with such authority, were very agreeable to
them: and, it is to be supposed, that they explained these grants to mean some
great temporal powers and honors they were to be invested with. Their divine
Leader, to abate their high swelling conceits, and to lead them into clearer
views of the nature of his kingdom, and the final issue of his ministry amongst
the Jews, informed them that it was appointed in the eternal councils of his
Father, that he should be rejected by the rulers of Israel, persecuted with the
utmost malice, followed with false accusations, and, at last, put to death as a
malefactor, with circumstances of the greatest cruelty and public shame.

THE disciples were exceedingly alarmed at this prediction of their Master; he
had just before accepted the title of the Messiah, and declared, that he would
bestow high honors, peculiar privileges, and extraordinary powers on his
apostles; and his now declaring, that he should be arraigned, condemned, and
put to death as a malefactor, was so contrary to their expectations, that they
thought it impossible to be true. Peter, who was of a warmer temper than the
rest, heard his Master talk of dying at Jerusalem with the utmost astonishment,
and could not forbear hinting, that he did not believe it to be true; and he
proceeded to blame his Master, for mentioning any such thing. For this
boldness, our Lord sharply rebuked him: Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an
offense unto me; for thou favourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men.

IT was the false notions of the nature of the Messiah's kingdom which Peter
had imbibed, and his love to the world, and desires after its grandeur and
glory, which induced him to utter that imprudent language, which brought so
severe a rebuke from his Master. It was, therefore, a lesson, which our
Redeemer, at this time, thought peculiarly proper to inculcate, that all who
would afterward obtain that glory which belonged to the subjects of his
kingdom, must deny themselves; that is, they must always be ready to give up
every worldly pleasure, every thing which tends to gratify the senses, and even
life itself, whenever the cause of CHRIST required it. And he informed them,
that whosoever pursued the glory and blessedness of his kingdom, in such a way
as to be likely to obtain it, must expect to meet with trouble, vexation,
disappointment, affliction, and distress: for, our Lord declared, that he who
would be his disciple, must take up his cross daily, and follow him.

OUR Lord thus opened to his disciples the true nature of his kingdom, and let
them know, that it was quite the reverse of what they had expected: for, though
they had undergone many afflictions, difficulties, and trials, there were
greater and more severe exercises of their patience and fortitude still to
come; these it would be in vain to attempt to shun or evade, for they must
follow their Master in the footsteps of his affliction, which, if they
attempted to shun, they would fall into greater evils; but those who persevered
in the way of their duty with patience and fortitude, though they might lose
their temporal lives, they would certainly gain an happy immortality: For
whosoever, said he, will save his life, shall lose it: but whosever shall lose
his life for my sake, the same shall save it. For what is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?

OUR great Redeemer, having explained to his attentive disciples, the usage
they must expect to find from the world, and the reproach, trouble, affliction,
and variety of distress which they must expect to go through; he then thought
proper to change the scene, and represented to them the grandeur, glory,
dignity, and majesty in which he should appear, when those sufferings were at
an end: For the son of man, said he, shall come in the glory of his Father; and
then he shall reward every man according to his works. This consideration might
have been abundantly sufficient to quiet their minds, and reconcile them to the
various difficulties, troubles, and afflictions which lay before them. Then
their despised Master will appear in greater glory and dignity than the most
pompous earthly prince; he will assume the birthright of the skies, and sit as
the supreme judge of heaven and earth: then will his enemies meet with the
punishment which they have so justly deserved, and his friends most assuredly
receive their eternal reward; but those who, through fear of the difficulties
and troubles which lay before them, have deserted his cause, will find
themselves deserted, and finally rejected at that awful day; for, said our
great Redeemer, Whosoever, therefore, shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.

AS this is the first time which our exalted Redeemer mentioned this great
event to his disciples, it may not be amiss to take a short view of this grand,
magnificent, awful, and most interesting scene. As the Son of God is the
exalted person who shall judge the world in righteousness, let us, for a
moment, contemplate the glory, grandeur, and dignity in which he will appear:
he himself declares, that he will appear in the glory of his Father, and with
the holy angels: he will appear arrayed in the majesty of that God, who dwells
in light, and whose glory no mortal can approach; not the blessed inhabitants
of the heavenly world, can bear the blaze of that boundless glory which
surrounds the eternal throne, but veil their faces in the presence of that God,
who dwells in light, and fills the heavenly regions with the boundless blaze of
uncreated brightness. How small, how dim a speck is the sun, when compared with
the eternal fountain of light, or with the brightness of that God, who pours
the beamy radiance from world to world, and could, with one ray of glory darted
from his throne, light up a thousand suns.

IN this boundless brightness, and majestic pomp, will the Son of God appear.
Ah! how unlike the despised Galilean; how unlike the person, who groaned and
bled on Calvary! Not now attended with twelve weak disciples, twelve mean,
illiterate fishermen; but surrounded with myriads of celestial spirits, and
numberless hosts of mighty angels. With what celestial pomp, with what
unutterable brightness, they descend through the sky, while the sun,
overpowered with excessive light, shrinks and disappears; and the whole bright
assembly descends from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel,
and the trump of God. The trumpet, with tremendous roar, resounds through the
regions of the dead: the dead awake and rise; some exulting with joy at the
sight of their Savior, and others terrified, confounded, and filled with
inexpressible horror, at the sight of their judge: the great and mighty, the
rich and noble, warriors, captains, princes, and potentates who ruled the
world, and did what they pleased amongst the sons of men, now have lost all
their honors and command, and are filled with the utmost consternation,
amazement, and dismay: they cannot bear the brightness of the Judge, they would
plunge into eternal darkness, to avoid his piercing eye, and they call upon the
rocks and mountains to fall on them, and hide them from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his
wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand.

HOWEVER reluctant, they are forced to appear: urged by strong necessity, and
driven by frowning angels, they crowd to the bar, and stand, trembling and
astonished, on the left hand of their Judge. The elect of God, gathered by
angels from the uttermost parts of the earth, are placed on the right hand;
they lift up their heads with joy, and, beholding the great Judge of heaven and
earth, with exultation and transport can say, This is our God, we have waited
for him; we will be glad and rejoice in him. And now the time is come, when
flagrant outrageous vice shall be thrown down and despised, oppressed,
afflicted virtue shall be exalted; now is the time, when the mysteries of
Providence shall be unveiled, when all the clouds and darkness, which
surrounded the ways of God, will be cleared away, and the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of divine conduct, fully vindicated, both in those who are saved, and
those who perish: now the church of CHRIST, his spotless bride, purchased with
his blood, shall appear in all her glory and beauty, all vain hypocritical
pretenders will be exposed, and every thing that offends, done away.

AN awful silence is proclaimed; the books are opened; the secrets of all
hearts, and every dark deed which had been carefully concealed, are brought to
light, and then the exalted King of the universe, who fits in Judgment,
proceeds to pass that sentence, which must stand for ever. With looks of the
most kind, condescending goodness, and unspeakable complacency and delight, he
first beholds the happy heirs of life and glory, who had been enabled, by his
grace, to believe in him for life and salvation, and bring forth such fruits of
righteousness, as were honorable to his cause: these happy souls look up to
their Judge, with such emotions as are above description, and, with
inexpressible joy, hear him pronounce this heart-expanding sentence, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; for I was thirsty,
and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye
clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

THE redeemed of the Lord, with ineffable joy, receive the approbation of their
Judge; but their meek and humble hearts will not take any praise to themselves,
nor ascribe the happiness they are going to receive to any thing done by them;
and therefore, they meekly reply, 'Lord when saw we thee an hungered, and fed
thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took
the in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and
came unto thee.' Our Lord approves and commends their humility, but at the same
time, to let the whole assembled world know, how kindly he accepted of every
instance of the kindness and benevolence they had shown to his people, he adds,
'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me.'

THE Judge then changes his countenance, and, with a look of indignation and
rising wrath, which pierces through the inmost soul, he beholds the guilty
wretches, who stand trembling at his left hand: filled with conscious guilt,
and all the agonies of raging despair, they stand expecting their final doom,
while these accents break from the lips of their angry Judge: 'Depart from me,
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: for I
was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not;
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.' The wicked, however conscious of
guilt, not recollecting the precise acts of kindness and contempt of the Son of
God, here literaly specified, are emboldened to reply. Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, or athirst or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee? However willing they may be to justify themselves, our
Lord well knows the naughtiness of their heart, and is fully acquainted with
their evil deeds, and, therefore, he confounds them for ever with this reply;
'Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.'

THE final and eternal sentence thus passed, the execution immediately
succeeds: a legion of mighty angels drive the black, horrid train of trembling
sinners from the judgment seat; and, caught in a fiery tempest, they are
precipitated into their dreadful place of punishment; the gulf of eternal
horror and despair stretches wide its burning jaws to receive them at their
fall; and they are tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the
holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

MEAN while, the friends and favorites of the eternal king, are conducted to
the paradise of God, and safe lodged in the realms of eternal blessedness and
rest: these happy realms, formed by the eternal God for the abode of his
people, contain every thing which can satisfy the pure desires of an immortal
spirit, and fill the soul with holy and ever-growing delight; now every fear,
every sorrow, and every sin is done away; and the happy inhabitants of this
glorious place, drink full streams of bliss, and partake of those joys which
proceed from the throne of God, and of the Lamb: now the redeemed of the Lord,
forming one vast, one happy society, dwell in that splendid city, where the
full glory of the eternal God is manifest in that exalted Savior, who is
emphatically styled, 'the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express
image of his person.' Here every happy believer in the Son of God, dwells in
the presence of his Savior; beholds this supreme object of his love, face to
face, and is clothed by him in the beauty and glory of immortality. But all
description fails: the human mind, in its present beclouded state, cannot bear
the blaze of immortal glory, nor receive any adequate ideas of that boundless
bliss, which the Lord will bestow on his people: For eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has
prepared for those that love him.

AS this doctrine of CHRIST's being appointed, the universal Judge of heaven
and earth, might seem incredible to the disciples; especially, as our Lord had
but just before given them the humbling account of his sufferings and death; he
proceeded to inform them, that some who heard him speak, should see so much of
his glory and his kingdom while they lived, as should convince them, that his
declaration was true: Verily, I say unto you, said he, there be some standing
here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in
his kingdom. Agreeable to this prediction, the disciples lived to see the
transfiguration of their Master, and to be witnesses of his glorious
resurrection, and his triumphant ascension into heaven; they lived to see the
descent of the Holy Ghost, and the doctrines of the gospel propagated in
various remote parts of the world; and some of them lived to see that awful and
ample display of divine vengeance, manifested in the destruction of that
unbelieving race, who were the professed enemies and murderers of the Lord of
life, and that wicke^ city where he was crucified.

THE first of these great events succeeded the declaration in about six days,
when our great Redeemer being with the multitude in the country of
Caesarea-Philippi, he left them in the plain, and, accompanied by Peter, James,
and John, ascended an exceeding high mountain. In this solitude, while our Lord
was praying, he was transfigured; his face assumed a glorious radiance, and
emitted a beamy brightness, not inferior to the sun shining in its strength;
his garment shone with a snowy whiteness, far beyond any thing which human art
could produce, and, like the fair beams of the morning light, glowed with a
sweet refulgence, not inferior to the brightness of his countenance. Thus, for
a short time the Son of God appeared in his native glory, and the majestic
brightness of his divinity shone through the veil of his human nature. To
heighten the solemnity of the scene, Moses, the great lawgiver of Israel, and
Elijah, the great prophet of the Lord, and supporter of the law, appeared in
the beauties of immortality, and shone in those robes with which the
inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem are adorned.

IT appears that the disciples, being heavy with sleep at the time of prayer,
did not see the beginning of this glorious scene; they, however, awaked in the
utmost surprise, to behold the place shining with heavenly glory; they had lost
the first part of this bright display of our Redeemer's divinity, and of the
conversation he held with the two great prophets who came down from heaven on
this great occasion; but they heard so much, as gave them to understand, that
these glorious persons had been talking of those things which their Master had
lately informed them of. His sufferings and death, which would soon be
accomplished at Jerusalem, though they appeared to them of such an humbling
nature, and contrary to the character of the Messiah, they found were not
unworthy the contemplation of the greatest personages of the heavenly world;
and though the mentioning them, had lately given such offense to Peter, he
perceived that they were spoken of by persons of superior dignity and
understanding, as highly honorable to the character of his Master. But the
feeble nerves of the three disciples could not bear the blaze of heavenly
glory; they were amazed, confounded, and terrified, and scarce knew where they
were, or how they ought to behave: but the forwardness of Peter's disposition
prompted him to say something on the occasion, though he considered not the
propriety or tendency of it: Master, said he, it is good for us to be here; and
let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for (...).

(...) having beheld such glory, as never before darted on mortal sight, and
seen his Master assume an appearance of grandeur and majesty, far beyond his
most sanguine expectations, he concluded, no doubt, that JESUS had now taken
upon him his proper dignity, and that the temporal kingdom, which he had so
ardently desired, and impatiently expected, was now actually begun; especially
as Elias, according to the prophecy of Malachi the prophet, had made his
appearance; he no doubt, concluded that he was come from heaven to assist in
the rearing the Messiah's kingdom: Peter, therefore, thought it highly
necessary to provide some accommodation for his Master, and his noble
companions; perhaps, he intended to bring the rest of the disciples, and the
multitude, who were waiting below, to behold the peerless glory of their
Master, and his august assistants; this, he thought, would be much better, and
more honorable for him, than being put to death at Jerusalem, or suffering
those things which had been the subject of the late heavenly conversation; the
design of which, Peter, at this time, could not comprehend: but, while he yet
spoke, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and, behold, a voice out of the cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him

WHEN the three disciples heard the voice, which was vastly different to any
they had heard before, and, at the same time, that it seemed soft as the
southern breeze, yet it was awful and majestic as the thunder's roar; impressed
with trembling awe, they fell with their faces to the ground, and continued in
that posture, till their compassionate Master came to them, and gently touched
them, bid them arise, and not be afraid. They immediately looked about them,
but the heavenly scene was withdrawn, and no person was seen but their divine
Master, in the plain and unadorned form in which he appeared before he ascended
the mountain.

OUR Lord, having continued on the summit of the mountain all night with his
three disciples, he early in the morning descended to the plain, and charged
them to conceal what they had seen, till he was risen from the dead. He was
well aware, that the world, and even his own disciples, were strangers to his
spiritual kingdom, and had no idea of his ascending to heaven, and being highly
exalted at the right hand of God: therefore, they could not comprehend the
design of his transfiguration, and it was unnecessary to publish it before his
resurrection, as it could not be described; and, perhaps, would not have been
believed: and the present appearance of our Redeemer, joined with the
afflictions, persecutions, sufferings, and sorrows which lay before him, might
still tend to prejudice the minds of the people, and prevent them from
believing any account of his exaltation and glory.

NOR were the disciples, at this time, able to understand the doctrine of
CHRIST's resurrection; they had never learnt that the Messiah was to die, nor
had they any conception of his rising from the dead; for they were fully
persuaded that he was to abide for ever, and that his kingdom was to have no
end. They seemed very much surprised at the departure of Elias, and at their
Master's ceasing to shine in the glorious manner they had so lately beheld on
the mountain: nor could they comprehend the meaning of the prophet Malachi, who
had prophesied of the coming of Elias, which their readers of the law explained
to refer to a time, prior to the appearance of the Messiah. After long debating
amongst themselves, they concluded to apply to their Master, to solve the
difficulty, and therefore asked him, Why say the Scribes, that Elias must first
come? To this inquiry, our Lord replied, that the Scribes had rightly explained
the prophecy of Malachi, by declaring that Elias must come before the
appearance of the Messiah; but, at the same time, he informed them, that this
great prophet had made his appearance, and had been used by that perverse
generation, in the same manner as the prophets of old had been treated by their
fathers: But I say unto you, said he, that Elias is come already, and they knew
him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed: likewise shall also the
Son of man suffer of them. Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them
of John the Baptist.

WHEN JESUS descended to the foot of the mountain, attended by his three
disciples, he saw a great multitude surrounding the nine, who had continued
with the people while our Lord had been transfigured, and the Scribes disputing
with them. The people seeing JESUS approach, ran to him with exultation and
joy, and saluted him with the warmest gratitude, and the most respectful
reverence. Our Lord having joined the company, he immediately asked the
Scribes, what was the subject of their debate with his disciples? to which one
of the company answered, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which has a
dumb spirit; and wheresoever he takes him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and
gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spoke unto thy disciples, that
they should cast him out, but they could not.

THIS answer seems to indicate, that the Scribes had been reproaching the
disciples, on account of their inability to restore the afflicted youth: and,
no doubt, they rejoiced, that, at last, a devil had appeared who was too hard
for them, and, perhaps, would not submit to their Master. Tha^ something like
this had been the subject of their conversation, is evident from our Savior's
reply: O faithless generation, said he, how long shall I be with you? How long
shall I suffer you? After having spoken in this manner to the proud,
self-conceited, skeptical Scribes, our Lord turned to the father of the
afflicted young man, and said, Bring thy son hither. The afflicted father
obeyed; but no sooner was the youth brought into the presence of the great
ruler of earth and heaven, than the evil spirit attacked him with double fury:
the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.

IT is not to be supposed, that the blessed JESUS could not have prevented this
furious attack; but he was pleased to suffer it, probably, that the minds of
the spectators might be the more affected with the deplorable condition of the
sufferer, and have the more just and lively ideas of that wisdom, power, and
goodness, which should give him relief; and, it is probable, with the same
views, he asked the mournful father, how long his son had been in this pitious
condition? To which he replied, Of a child. And often times it has cast him into
the fire, and into the waters to destroy him: but, if thou can do any thing,
have compassion on us, and help us.

IT seems, that the inability of the disciples to cast out this evil spirit,
had greatly discouraged the afflicted father: and the exquisite torture, and
apparent agonies of his son, and the remembrance of their long continuance, had
dispirited him so much, that he began to fear, that this possession was too
strong for the power of JESUS himself, as the Scribe had affirmed; which was
the reason of his expressing himself with so much hesitation and doubt, when he
told our Lord, how long his son had been afflicted. But JESUS, to make him
sensible of his mistake, as well as gently to reprove him for his unbelief, and
groundless fears, said unto him, If thou can believe, all things are possible
to him that believes. The father, affected with this declaration, and with a
heart full of tenderness and joy, at the supposed possibility of the relief of
his son, replied with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. The
vehement manner in which the afflicted parent spoke these words, caused the
crowd to gather about him; when Jesus rebuked the soul spirit; and said unto
him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of him, and enter no
more into him.

THE awful voice, at which all the devils tremble, had no sooner pronounced
these words, than the devil, with an hideous howling, and convulsing the
tormented youth in the most frightful manner, came out; leaving the youth, in a
manner, senseless and motionless, as one dead. Our Lord then, taking him by the
hand, restored him to life, and delivered him perfectly recovered, both in body
and mind, to his father.

THE nine disciples, who had unsuccessfully attempted to drive out this
obstinate demon, remained most attentively silent during this transaction;
doubtless they were glad to find, that this dreadful and powerful devil, was
not an over-match for their Master, however they were mortified to find, that
he was too hard for them. They were very desirous to know the reason, why they
could not dispossess this demon, as they had done others, but did not choose to
ask their Master in the hearing of the multitude; but when he had retired, they
asked him, why they failed in their attempt to restore the possessed young man?
Our Lord informed them, it was because of their unbelief, For, said he, if ye
have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, remove
hence to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible to
you.

OUR Lord then retired to the unfrequented parts of Galilee; and in this
solitary retreat, he again instructed his disciples in the nature of his
kingdom, and the design of his coming into the world; laying before them a view
of his sufferings, death, and speedy resurrection. There, doubtless, was a
necessity of inculcating these disagreeable and unpopular truths frequently on
their minds; for, though they must remember how sharply Peter was reproved for
opposing the declaration of these events, yet our Lord's predictions concerning
this matter, were very slowly received; and the national prejudices which the
disciples had so strongly imbibed, which represented the grandeur, glory and
perpetuity of the Messiah's temporal kingdom, would not permit them to believe
it possible that he should die.

AFTER having abode a short time in the desert part of Galilee, our Lord
returned to Capernaum, the place of his general abode. Soon after his arrival
at that city, the tax*gatherers applied to Peter, inquiring if his Master would
pay the tribute: Peter promised them that his Master would satisfy their
demand; but, on further consideration, was afraid to mention the thing to him:
perhaps he thought it derogatory to the dignity of so great a person to pay
tribute to any potentate on earth. But, however cautious Peter might be of
mentioning the affair, it was no secret to his Master, which our Lord soon
apprised him of, by proposing the following question: What think thou,
Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? Of their own
children, or strangers? Peter says unto him, Of strangers. Jesus says unto
him, Then are the children free. Peter, by this question, was fully satisfied,
that our Lord knew his thoughts, and had fully penetrated the affair which was
in agitation; he was also convinced, that, as the Son of God, and heir of all
things, he was under no obligation to pay tribute to the greatest monarch on
earth: but our Lord, to avoid giving offense, condescended to submit to the
claim; and proposed to Peter the following miraculous method of raising the
money: Go thou to the sea, said he, and cast an book, and take up the fish that
first comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece
of money; that take, and give it unto them for me and thee.

OUR Lord, by this miraculous manner of paying that tribute, which he was under
no obligation to pay, teaches us, that in all common cases, we should avoid
giving offense to the civil power; and rather submit to a demand, which may
seem burdensome and oppressive in a small degree, than offend our brethren, or
disturb the tranquillity of the state. And sure it becomes the children of the
Prince of peace to avoid all occasions of contention and discord, and rather
give up some small part of their property, than give the rulers of the state
any reason to complain. It may further be observed, that this miracle is a
manifest proof of the omnipresence of the Son of God; no less a person than he,
who knows all things and is present in all places, could know that the fish had
the piece of money in its mouth, while it was covered with the rolling surges
of the sea; and that this same fish, still holding the piece of money, would
come to Peter's hook. These are most surprising events, and with the rest of
the miracles wrought by our great Redeemer, blaze out like a bright
constellation, adorn his royal crown, and proclaim him the great King of the
universe, the supreme Lord of heaven and earth.

CHAPTER XX.
CHRIST reproves his Disciples for their foolish Contention about Superiority:
He answers the Petition of the Mother of Zebedec's Children, and checketh the
Indignation of the other Disciples thereat: He teaches how to treat an
offending Brother, and how often to forgive him, by the Parable of a King, who
punished one of his Servants for refusing that Mercy to his Fellow, which he
had experienced from his Lord in a larger Degree: He then goes to Jerusalem at
the Feast of Tabernacles, where he teaches in the Temple: The Rulers send
Officers to apprehend him, who being struck with his Discourse, return without
him, and are rebuked by the Pharisees, who chide Nicodemus for taking his part.
CHRIST afterward lets go, uncondemned, the Woman taken in Adultery.

THOUGH our blessed Savior had lately given his disciples an affecting account
of his sufferings and death; and though their minds seemed to be very much cast
down and dispirited at the expectation of events, so mournful and distressing
in themselves, and so contrary to their expectations; yet their grief seems to
be of no long continuance, nor had they yet given up their favorite notion of
the Messiah's temporal kingdom: for, not many days after, they had so far
forgot the predictions of their Master, that they were engaged in a warm
dispute concerning the posts of honor in that kingdom. On what grounds several
of the disciples advanced their pretensions to be greatest, is not related by
the evangelists; but it is very plain, that those claims did not originate from
any intimations given them by their Master, of his design to advance any of
them above the rest; for he very severely rebuked them for their pride and
folly, and they were fearful of letting him know what subject they had been
disputing about.

OUR Lord did not directly proceed to reprimand his disciples on account of the
above conversation, but first asked them, what they were disputing about by the
way? They were confounded at the question, and, as they knew it would be in
vain to attempt, either to evade a discovery, or to conceal the truth, they
feared to return an answer. JESUS, perceiving their confusion, soon gave them
to understand, that he well knew the subject of their debate, and that he
highly disapproved it: having commanded their particular and earnest attention
to what he was going to advance, he said, if any man desires to be first, the
same shall be last, and servant of all. And then, to teach them the useful
lesson of humility, he took a little child, and set him in the midst of them:
Verily, I say unto you, said he, except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore,
shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom
of heaven.

AS our Lord, at this time, thought proper to discountenance all pretensions to
superiority amongst his disciples, it is evident, that he had given no
supremacy to Peter, when he declared his approbation of his declaration of
faith, as before related. Had he, when he told that disciple that he gave him
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, designed to exalt him above the rest of the
disciples: or had they understood his words in that sense, they could not
possibly have been at any loss to know who was to be the greatest; nor is it
likely they would have contended about an affair which had in the presence of
them all, been finally settled by their Master: neither is it possible to
suppose, that, if our great Redeemer had given the pre-eminence to Peter, he
would have blamed his disciples for talking about it, and not on this occasion
have confirmed his former grant.

THE justice of this remark is further confirmed by the answer which our great
Redeemer gave to the wife of Zebedee, when she presented a petition to him in
behalf of her sons; she had strongly imbibed the national error of the Jews,
respecting the Messiah's kingdom; and, as she supposed that her sons, from
their near relation to our Lord, might claim a peculiar share in his favor,
she presented her request, that one might sit on his right hand, and the other
on his left, in his kingdom. To this petition, our Savior replied, To sit on
my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give; but it shall be given
to them for whom it is prepared.

THE rest of the disciples having heard the request, and remarked our
Redeemer's reply, were much offended at the pride and vanity of the brothers,
and could not see any reason, why they should expect so peculiar and
distinguished a mark of favor. To put an end to all contention on so weak and
frivolous an account, our Lord called his disciples in such a manner, as to
engage and fix their attention, and said unto them, Ye know that they which are
accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them; and their
great ones exercise authority upon them; but so it shall not be amongst you,
but whosoever will be great amongst you, shall be your minister; and whosoever
of you will be the chiefest, shall be the servant of all.

SUCH is the language of our great Redeemer, who is sole king and lawgiver in
his church; and may we not justly conclude, that the pretenses of the church of
Rome to infallibility and supremacy, which she would have us believe have
descended from the apostle Peter to the pope, as his successor, have no
foundation in scripture or reason, but are unjust and arbitrary usurpation,
designed to advance and enrich the priesthood, and impoverish, abuse, and
enslave mankind.

THE exalted Savior of mankind, having thus gently rebuked his disciples for
their eager and unabating desires after worldly grandeur, John, one of the sons
of Zebedee, perhaps to give a turn to the conversation, informed his Master,
that they had seen one casting out the devils in his name, and had forbidden
him, because he had not joined himself to their company. To which our Lord
replied, that they ought not to have forbidden him, because no person would
attempt to work miracles in his name, who did not entertain a very just
conception of his divinity. Forbid him not, said he, for there is no man which
shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.

BY this language our Redeemer exorted them to consider, that whosoever did not
oppose him, may be considered as his friends; and the casting out devils in his
name, would advance his reputation; and promote his interest, though the devils
themselves, and the persons who rejected them, might design the contrary: he
further informed them that the least degree of friendship and respect shown to
his cause, though it was no more than a cup of cold water given to his
disciples, when they stood in need of such a favor, was acceptable to him, and
would certainly find its full reward hereafter. Whosoever, said he, shall give
you a cup of cold water in my name, because you belong to Christ; verily, I say
unto you, he shall not lose his reward. At the same time, our Lord gave them to
understand, that the least discouragement to his servants in their duty, would
be remarked, and punished with the greatest severity: And whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.

FROM hence our great Redeemer took occasion to remark, that it was better and
more advantageous to us, to deny ourselves the enjoyment of those things which
are most pleasing to our sense, and which our corrupt affections might be as
loath to part with, as with an hand, a foot, or an eye, than by any indulgence
or sensual gratification, to give offense to the disciples of CHRIST, or
prevent the success of his gospel: and, as the disciples of CHRIST were
appointed to preach the glorious gospel to a wicked world, to show all nations
the stupidity and folly of their idolatry, to teach the uncorrupted worship of
the true God, and the practice of every virtue, JESUS exhorted them to be
particularly careful of their conduct and behavior; for, if their lives were
dishonorable to the cause of the gospel, they would be useless and despised,
like salt which had lost its favor. But amongst all the vices which prevail in
the hearts of mankind, there is none more contrary to the nature and genius of
the religion of JESUS, or more likely to prevent the usefulness of the
preachers of his gospel, than a spirit of pride; of this, therefore, our Lord
particularly cautioned his disciples to beware; for, he assured them, that the
meanest person is an object of the paternal care of the great Creator, and is
supported and defended by his particular providence; such, therefore, are not
to be despised; for our Lord declared, that their angels do always behold the
face of his heavenly Father.

AND to show the particular notice and care which his eternal Father takes of
his people, and with what tender regard he always beholds the believers in his
Son, our great Redeemer proceeded in this manner, 'How think ye,' said he, 'if
a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, does he not leave
the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountains, and seeks that which is
gone astray? And if it be, that he finds it, verily, I say unto you, he
rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not
astray. Even so, it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one
of these little ones should perish.'

OUR Lord having declared the heavy vengeance which would certainly fall on all
who injured his disciples, and opposed the propagation of his gospel; and
observed the tender care with which his Almighty Father beholds his people, and
their certainty of protection and defense; he proceeds to warn them of taking
their cause into their own hands, and pursuing, with hasty and unreasonable
resentment, any who had offended them. 'If thy brother,' said he, 'shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if
he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee,
then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto
thee as an heathen man, and a publican.'

OUR Savior then proceeds to inform them, that the Supreme Judge of heaven and
earth will interest himself in their behalf, when they are justly offended, and
the sentence which they pass on such offenders will be ratified in heaven:
'Verily, I say unto you,' proceeded he, 'whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven.' The meaning of this is, that if the method you take with an
offending brother is blessed to the end you designed, and he is brought to a
repentance, he is loosed from the guilt of his sin, and stands acquitted at the
bar of supreme justice: but, on the other hand, if all methods are used in
vain, and the offender still continues impenitent, and persists in his evil
ways, he is bound by the chains of his guilt, and cannot escape deserved
punishment.

OUR blessed Savior then proceeded to lay down some considerations, which
ought to encourage good men to use their utmost endeavors to convince sinners
of the error of their ways, and bring them to sincere repentance, and to offer
up their earnest and persevering prayers to the God of all grace, for his
divine assistance in so great a work, by which only it can be effected: for our
Lord informs them, that his heavenly Father would always hear their prayers,
and grant their petitions, if consistent with the designs of his providence,
and the methods of his grace. 'Again, I say unto you,' said he, 'that if two of
you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall
be done for them of my Father which is in heaven: for where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.'

PETER had carefully attended to the doctrine of forgiveness of injuries, as
inculcated by his Master; doubtless, he saw the beauty and dignity of such a
rule of conduct, and desired it to be further explained: 'Lord,' said he, 'how
often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times?' It
seems by this question, that, however great and noble he apprehended this rule
of conduct to be, he thought it was necessary to observe some restrictions in
the practice of it; but his Master informed him, that it must not be limited
to seven times, but carried on to seventy times seven, if the case required it.

IN order to show the beauty and dignity of this excellent moral precept, and
the necessity of forgiving the greatest injuries in every case, where the
offending person is sensible of his fault, and promises amendment; our Lord, by
way of illustration, proposed the parable of two servants, debtors to one lord:
'Therefore,' said he, 'is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king,
which would take account of his servants. And when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents. But, for as much as
he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and
children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant, therefore,
fell down, and worshipped him, saying, lord, have patience with me, and I will
pay thee all. Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and
loosed him, and forgave him the debt. But the same servant went out, and found
one of his fellow servants, which owed him an hundred pence; and he laid hands
on him, and took him by the throat, saying, pay me that thou owe. And his
fellow servants fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not: but went and cast him into
prison till he should pay the debt.'

'So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were sorry, and came and
told unto their lord all that was done. Then his lord, after that he had called
him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt,
because thou desiredst me: should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him unto the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto
him.'

BY this affecting narrative, our Lord beautifully displays the extent of
divine forgiveness, and the obligations which the sons of men, to whom God has
forgiven so much, are under to forgive one another. God is the great king and
sovereign of all creatures, to him all are accountable, as servents are to a
master; he keeps a register of their actions, as a tradesman keeps an account
of his debts, and a day will surely come when they will be called to a
reckoning. The servant who owed ten thousand talents, represents every man that
lives in the world: the enormous debts which men owe to their Creator, is but
faintly described by that prodigious sum; for their sins of thought, word, and
deed, which the most correct and regular of mankind commit, exceed all
conception, and may justly be compared to the stars of heaven for multitude, or
the sand on the sea shore. The plea of the insolvent debtor 'Have patience with
me, and I will pay thee all,' is an elegant description of the expectations of
men in general, to obtain the divine forgiveness, by their future good
behavior, and thinking to perform such good deeds as may make amends for their
former guilt; but the lord, knowing how impossible it was for this servant to
pay this enormous sum, had compassion on him, and freely forgave the debt.
Hence, we learn the freeness of divine forgiveness; it is not on account of any
thing which has been done, or can be done by the sons of men, that the great
Jehovah is induced to pardon their iniquities; but his forgivnss slows from the
rich fountain of his own infinite mercy, that mercy which he has magnified,
and fully manifested to the world in the gospel of his Son: and whosoever is
made partaker of the rich blessing of divine forgiveness, is laid under the
highest obligations to forgive his fellow creatures, and to extend that
forgiveness, if required, beyond the limits prescribed by our Lord, even beyond
the number of seventy times seven: but such is the corruption and depravity of
the human heart, that we are too prone to forget, or carelessly overlook the
mercies received, and consider not how justly the great Judge of heaven and
earth might call us to a strict account for our numerous offenses, while we are
pursuing our fellow creatures with implacable resentment; nor do we consider
how much we are indebted to the supreme Lord of universal nature, while, like
the unmerciful servant, we take our fellow creature by the throat, with, 'Pay
me what thou owe.' But whosoever duly considers the vast debt they owe to
God, and are enabled to rely on his infinite mercy for forgiveness; if they have
a just view of their unworthiness and insolvency, and are enabled to seek
forgiveness in the way which God has appointed, will, in a greater or less
degree, be careful to cultivate a placable forgiving frame of mind; especially
when they consider those remarkable words with which our Lord concludes this
narrative: for having declared, that the lord delivered the cruel servant 'to
the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him;' he adds, 'so
likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not one another your trespasses.'

HAVING delivered these precepts, our great Redeemer departed into Galilee,
passing through the country beyond Jordan; by that means giving the Jews which
inhabited that country an opportunity to hear his heavenly discourses, and to
receive the benefit of his all-healing power: and after having taken a tour
through those distant parts, he returned to his own city Nazareth.

THE feast of tabernacles now approached, when the males of the Jewish nation,
capable of traveling, repaired to Jerusalem, and dwelt seven days in the
tabernacles, or booths made of boughs of trees, in commemoration of their
fathers having had no other habitation during their forty years sojourning in
the wilderness. Some of the kinsmen of the blessed JESUS, being about to take a
journey to the capital on this occasion, they desired him to accompany them
thither, and openly show himself to the whole nation of the Jews. They did not
believe, that he was really the Messiah so long expected by their nation, and
they condemned his conduct, as unnatural and absurd, from a person who made
such pretensions: they could not conceive what induced him to spend so much of
his time in deserts, and remote parts of the kingdom, while he assumed so
public a character as that of the Redeemer of Israel. Jerusalem, the seat of
power, the habitation of the great men of the nation, and the place of general
resort, was, in their opinion, the properest place for him to publish his
doctrines, and work his miracles in: these, they thought, being exhibited in
public, before the great and learned men of the nation, might have a better
effect, than being performed in obscure retreats amongst the ignorant and
illiterate. The decision of the doctors of the law, and the great men of the
nation in his favor, they thought would increase the number of his disciples,
and be a means of inducing the whole nation to own him for the Messiah, whether
he were really that great person or not: Depart hence, said they, and go into
Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou do: for there is
no man that does any thing in secret, and himself seeks to be known openly.
If thou do these things, show thyself to the world.

BUT our Lord was no stranger to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and, therefore,
he did not think proper to reside amongst them any longer than was absolutely
necessary: he well knew their inveterate prejudices, their obstinacy and
preverseness, and their prevailing unbelief; and was fully convinced, that they
would not receive his doctrines, nor be induced, by his miracles, to believe in
him, but would be more likely to use all their power to destroy him, before he
had finished the work, which he assumed our nature to perform: for which
reasons he did not choose to accompany his relations to the feast, or go in a
public manner to Jerusalem: My time, said our great Redeemer, to these
unbelieving relations, is not yet come: but your time is always ready. The
world cannot hate you: but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the
works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this
feast: for my time is not yet full come. This was as though he had said, it is
not expedient that I should go to Jerusalem before the feast begins: you may
advance to the city whenever you please, there is nothing to make you afraid;
the Jews are your friends, you have never offended them, nor have you done any
thing to displease them: but the purity of the doctrine I have preached amongst
them, and the plainness and freedom of speech with which I have opposed their
foolish traditions, and reproved their hypocrisy, and other enormous vices,
have raised their resentment, and provoked their malice to the utmost height;
and, therefore, as the time of my suffering is not yet come, it is not proper
for me to go so soon to Jerusalem.

PERHAPS there might be another reason why our Redeemer did not choose to
accompany his relations to the feast of tabernacles at this time: the vast
concourse of people which annually attended this solemnity, would fill all the
roads to the capital, and these gathering around him, and attending him to
Jerusalem, would have made a noise in the city, and have given fresh offense to
his enemies, which might have exasperated them to that degree, that they might,
as they had done before, have attempted his life, and their cruelty and rage
might have prevented his doctrine and miracles having their proper effect: he,
therefore, chose to continue in Galilee till the crowd were gone up to the the
feast, when he followed, as it were in secret, neither preaching nor working
miracles by the way; so that no crowd followed him, nor was there any rejoicing
at his approach.

AS JESUS did not go publicly to Jerusalem, so neither did he, on his arrival,
repair to the temple, and there preach openly to the people. This gave rise to
several disputes amongst the Jews concerning his character and conduct; some
affirmed that he was a true prophet, and his not coming to the feast could only
arise from some accident, which had prevented him; others maintained that he
was an imposter and deceiver, and though he assumed the sacred character of a
prophet, he did not keep the law; nor regard the institutions which they had
received from heaven.

BUT about the middle of the feast, JESUS appeared openly in the temple, and
publicly taught the people, delivering his divine discourses with energy,
force, and spirit, and such strength of reasoning joined with such elegance of
expression, that his enemies were astonished, as they knew he had not enjoyed
the benefit of a learned education. Now, about the midst of the feast, Jesus
went up and taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knows this man
letters, having never learned? To this the exalted Savior of mankind replied:
My doctrine was not produced by human wisdom; the learned men and sages of this
world were not my instructors; but I received it from heaven, and it is the
doctrine of the great, supreme, eternal Father of the universe, whose messenger
I am: My doctrine, said he, is not mine, but his that sent me. And our Lord
further observed, that it might be gathered from the manner of his teaching,
that his doctrine was really divine; he sought not the praise of man, he did
not stand candidate for popular applause, he did not seek to advance his own
interest, but the eternal interest of mankind, and the glory of the heavenly
Father: He that speaks of himself, said he, seeks his own glory; but he
that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness
is in him.

SOME of the Jews presumed to call JESUS a false prophet, because, in the
porches of the pool of Bethesda, he had healed an impotent man on the
Sabbath Day, which, they pretended was a violation of the law of Moses, and
what a good man would not be guilty of: in answer to which, our great Redeemer
told them, that however they might CHRIST preaching to the People of JUDEA, and
reproving them for rejecting his Holy Gospel
pretend to reverence the authority of Moses and his law, they made no scruple
to violate the most sacred and essential of his precepts; this was manifest in
their conduct toward himself: contrary to all the principles of justice and
humanity, and every law of God and man, they had resolved to put him to death;
and, in order to execute their black, horrid, and infernal scheme, they were
now laying plots against his life.

TO this charge the Jews replied, Thou have a devil: Who goes about to kill
thee? To which JESUS answered to this effect, I have performed a miracle, in
favor of a distressed poor man, on the Sabbath Day: this you think contrary to
the character of a good and pious man, and wonder how I could undertake it; but
I can give you an example out of your own law, in the case of circumcision:
Moses gave you that law, and you make no scruple of performing the institution
on the Sabbath Day: you think yourselves justified in this, because it is a
precept both of Moses and the fathers. Since, therefore, ye think yourselves
bound to dispense with the strict observance of the Sabbath, in order to
perform a ceremonial precept, can you be angry with me because I, on the
Sabbath Day, have fulfilled the most sacred and immutable part of the moral
law, by curing a man who was infirm in all the members of his body, and have
not exerted so much bodily labor as you do in the practice of the rite of
circumcision: consider therefore, the nature of the thing, be not blinded by
prejudice, be no longer attached to foolish traditions, or superstitious
opinions; but make use of your reason, show yourselves men, and judge
impartially: Moses, said our great Redeemer, therefore gave unto you
circumcision (because it is of Moses, but not of the fathers); and ye on the
Sabbath Day circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath Day receive circumcision,
that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have
made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath Day? Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

THOUGH the Jews could not answer this argument, they would not be convinced,
but objected to JESUS's being the Messiah, because they were acquainted with
his parents and relations: they apprehended, that when the Messiah appeared,
his pedigree and relationship would not be known; and they founded their
opinion on a passage in the prophet Isaiah, Who shall declare his generation?
They were full of resentment and malice, and some of them were desirous that he
should be apprehended; but Divine Providence would not permit them to
accomplish their cruel purpose, because the time of his sufferings were not yet
come. But though his enemies beheld hi^ with rancour and contempt, yet many of
the people, convinced by his miracles, affected by his divine discourses, and
satisfied with the unanswerable reasons which he had advanced in support of his
character, believed on him, and publicly in the temple affirmed that he was the
Messiah. The Evangelist informs us, that many of the people believed on him,
and said, When Christ comes, will he do more miracles than these which this
man has done? John vii.31.

THE Scribes and Pharisees beheld the attachment of the common people to the
Savior of sinners, with the highest indignation and contempt, and were so
provoked, that they could bear it no longer; and, accordingly, on the last and
great day of the feast, they met in council to consider on some means to
prevent his growing popularity: the result of their deliberations, was a
determination to apprehend him; and, accordingly, the proper officers were
dispatched from the council to arrest him, and bring him before them. While
these things were in agitation in the council, JESUS was teaching in the
temple, and he exhorted the people to give a diligent and unabating attention
to his discourses; not only because the subject matter of the^ was of the
utmost importance, but he informed them that their opportunity of hearing him
would soon be over; Yet a little while, said he, am I with you, and then I go
unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and ye shall not find me; and where I
am, thither ye cannot come.

NOT understanding that our Savior alluded to his death, resurrection, and
ascension to the right hand of God, whither no person in the body could follow
him, the Jews were very much puzzled with this declaration, and could by no
means understand the meaning of it: they could form no other conjecture
concerning the meaning of these words, than that our Lord designed to leave
Judea, and go amongst the Gentiles, to preach amongst their brethren who were
dispersed in the neighboring nations: but they were aware, that this
conjecture did not answer to the latter part of our Lord's declaration: for
though he should go amongst the Gentiles, it would not be impossible for them
to follow hi^ they, therefore, in the utmost confusion, reasoned amongst
themselves, and inquired, Whither will he go, that we shall not find him? Will
he go unto the dispersed amongst the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles? What
manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me:
and where I am, thither ye cannot come.

WHILE our exalted Redeemer was teaching in the temple, according to the annual
custom, the water of the pool of Siloam was brought in. Part of this was drank
in the temple with loud acclamations, in commemoration of the great deliverance
wrought for their fathers, who were miraculously relieved and preserved by a
stream which flowed from a hard dry rock, and revived the nation which was
fainting with thirst: the other part was poured out as a drink offering,
accompanied with their prayers to the Almighty, for the former and latter rain
to fall in their season; which ceremony was concluded by the whole
congregation, singing this passage out of the prophet Isaiah, With joy shall ye
draw water out of the wells of salvation. chap. xii.3.

IT was the constant mode of instruction which our great Redeemer pursued, to
accommodate his discourses to the particular occasion and circumstances of his
hearers, and to engage and fix their attention, by alluding to occurrences and
objects actually in view; and, accordingly, he took this opportunity of
representing the rich blessings which sinful creatures would receive from him
under the metaphor of water: and, in allusion to the ceremony which they had
seen performed, In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that
beli^veth on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water.

WHILE our Lord was thus speaking to the people, with a beautiful simplicity,
and heart-affecting strength and energy, such as never were joined before, the
officers sent from the council to apprehend him, came into the temple: before
they proceeded to the execution of their mission, they staid a few moments to
hear his discourse; to this they were excited by their curiosity, but his
divine eloquence overcame their resentment, removed their prejudices, and
melted away their rage: the harmony of his pronunciation, the beautiful
simplicity, and plainness, and the amazing strength, energy, and clearness of
his reasoning, displayed the beauties of divine truth, and caused them to shine
on the understanding with resistless brightness; even his enemies who were sent
from the council to apprehend him, were astonished and overcome: the greatness
of the subject affected their minds, and its importance filled their
understandings: the warmth and tenderness with which he delivered his
discourses, fixed their attention and penetrated their hearts; they felt new
and uncommon emotions, and overwhelmed with the greatness of their admiration,
were fixed in silent astonishment; they were absolutely overcome, and could not
think of executing the commission which brought them to the temple; they blamed
themselves for having undertaken it, and returned to the rulers of Israel
without performing it.

IF we consider the remorseless disposition of the persons who are usually sent
about such business, and the nature of the subject which employed our great
Redeemer's eloquence, we shall have reason to join the officers in their
admirations, and to acknowledge that our great Redeemer's elocution was
superior to all praise: such surely that discourse must be, which addressed to
others, and on a divine subject, could disarm the resolution of the most
determined enemy, and penetrate the recesses of the most unfeeling heart.

NOR were the officers the only persons who were affected with this divine
discourse: for the surrounding multitude were sensible of very remarkable
impressions, and expressed their wonder in various conjectures; many of them
declared he must certainly be one of the old prophets, and others, that he
could be no less than the Messiah himself; others, led away with the common
mistake, that he was born at Nazareth, asked, with snearing disdain, if the
Messiah was to come out of Galilee, when the scripture has absolutely declared,
that he was to be born in Bethlehem, the native town of his father David. Thus
we are informed, Many of the people, therefore, when they heard this saying,
said, Of a truth, this is the prophet: others said, this is the Christ; but
some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Has not the scripture said, That
Christ comes of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where
David was. This dispute was carried to such an height, that some of them,
knowing that the officers were sent to apprehend our Redeemer, threatened to
lay hands on him: but divine Providence would not permit them to execute their
cruel design; for though some of them would have taken him, yet no man laid
hands on him.

THE officers now returned to the council, and were asked, with warmth, why
they had not brought JESUS of Nazareth, whom they were sent to apprehend? They
endeavored to excuse themselves, by relating the manner in which they were
overcome, and disarmed by his eloquence: No man, said they, spoke like this
man. But if they thought to soften the resentment of the council, by declaring
what a wonderful man JESUS CHRIST was, and what an heart-affecting strain of
divine eloquence flowed from his lips, they were very much mistaken: the
perjudices of the rulers of Israel were too de^^-rooted, and their rancour and
malice too inveterate to be so easily overcome: their ^ride scorned to submit
to the dictates of the unpopular and unlearned, and, with indignation and
scorn, they replied, Are ye also deceived! Have any of the rulers, or of the
Pharisees believed on him? But this people, who knows not the law, are
cursed. They thought it a piece of the most unparalleled impudence, that the
common people should presume to acknowledge JESUS to be the Messiah, when the
great doctors of the law, the chief priests and Pharisees, and all the learned
men of the nation, publicly opposed his preaching, defamed his character, and
determined to destroy him.

BUT their pride and envy soon received a severe reprimand from Nicodemus, who
had formerly attended on JESUS by night; and was convinced that he was the
Messiah, though he did not openly confess him, for fear of the Jews. On this
occasion he rebuked the pride and self-sufficiency of the enemies of JESUS, by
inquiring, Does our law condemn any man before he is heard. They had just now
condemned their officers for being ignorant of the law, when it appeared that
themselves where more ignorant, by pretending to condemn a person before they
had proved him guilty: they were acting directly contrary to the fundamental
principles of the law of equity, at the same time, that they boasted their
superior knowledge of, and closest attachment to its precepts.

THIS sharp reproof of Nicodemus, so highly exasperated the whole council,
that, with an air of indignation and contempt, they asked him, if he also was
one of those mean persons who had joined together to support the pretensions of
a Galilean, though the scriptures had plainly declared, that Bethlehem was the
place of the Messiah's nativity: to which they added, that, if he refused to
listen to them, he should search the scriptures, and he would soon be
convinced, that the great prophet, mentioned by Moses, was not to be born in
Galilee: Art thou also of Galilee? said they. Search and look: for out of
Galilee arises no prophet.

THE council soon broke up, after making this answer to Nicodemus, and our
Lord, well knowing their malicious intentions, retired to the Mount of Olives,
where he spent the night with his disciples; but early the next morning he
returned to the temple, and taught the people.

THE Scribes and Pharisees pursued him with unabating resentment, and were
determined either to render him odious to the people, or an offender in the eye
of the Roman governor. Accordingly, they brought before him, a woman who had
been taken in the act of adultery; desiring him to declare what punishment she
ought to suffer: This woman, said they to our great Redeemer, was taken in
adultery, in the very act. Now Moses in the law, commanded us, that such should
be stoned: but what say thou? Had JESUS presumed to pardon the adulteress,
and inflicted no punishment on her, they would, doubtless, have represented him
as a person who contradicted the law, and favored adultery, which would
certainly have rendered him odious in the eyes of the people. On the other
hand, had he ordered her to be stoned, it would have afforded an opportunity of
accusing him to the Roman governor, as a person who stirred up the people to
rebellion; the Romans having, at that time, taken the power of life and death
out of the hands of the Jews. But JESUS well knew their wicked intentions, and
therefore made them no answer, but stooped down, and with his finger wrote on
the ground, as though he heard them not. They, not satisfied, still continued
pressing him to give an answer; when, at last, JESUS, in allusion to the law,
which ordered that the hands of the witnesses, by whose testimony a criminal
was convicted, should first be upon him, said, He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her. Our Lord well knew the hearts, and the
secret crimes of these furious accusers, and he delivered these words in such a
manner, as convinced ^^ery person present, that he was acquainted with their
secret lewdness and debauchery. This sudden rebuke, had such an effect on them,
that they could not reply, but immediately departed, no doubt, fearing if they
had staid, JESUS would have exposed their most secret transactions, and
abominable crimes: they, therefore, durst not proceed in their accusation, but,
being convicted by their own consciences, went out one by one, beginning at the
eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman, who had
been standing in the midst. JESUS had been, all the while the Jews were
retiring, stooping down and writing on the ground, as though he did not
perceive what they were about: but now rising up, and looking upon the woman
who stood alone, he asked her, if she had been condemned? To which she answered
in the negative. Our Lord saw her covered with shame, and knowing her
repentance was sincere, he looked upon her with an eye of pity and forgiveness;
and dismissed her with these gracious words, Neither do I condemn thee; go and
sin no more.

CHAPTER XXI.
CHRIST declares himself to be the Light of the World, and justifies his
Doctrine against the Pharisees: He promises Freedom, through Knowledge of the
Truth, to those Jews who believed on him: Confuteth their vain Boast of being
Abraham's Seed, and the Children of God: Answers their Reviling, by showing
his Authority and Dignity; and, by Miracle, rescueth himself from their
Attempts to stone him: He restores to Sight, a Man that was born blind, who
relates to his Neighbors the Means of his Cure; and he is brought to the
Pharisees, who examine strictly into the Fact, and are offended with his
Acknowledgment of the divine Mission of the Author; they excommunicate him; he
is received of JESUS, and confesses him. CHRIST taxes the Pharisees with
spiritual Blindness: He declares himself to be the Door, and the good
Shepherd: Diverse opinions concerning him. CHRIST reproves the fiery Zeal of
James and John against the Samaritans, who would not receive him; and proposes
Terms to three Persons, who offer to follow him: He sends out the seventy
Disciples, a second time, to work Miracles and to preach: He pronounces a Woe
against Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum: The seventy return with joy; CHRIST
shows them wherein to rejoice: He thanketh his Father for having revealed his
Gospel to the Simple only: He teaches a Lawyer how to attain eternal Life;
and, by the Parable of the good Samaritan, shows whom we are to consider as
our Neighbor.

JESUS having, by an amazing display of his wisdom and penetration, defeated
the malice, and mortified the pride of the Scribes and Pharisees, and they
being sent away ashamed, under a full conviction that he knew the secrets of
their hearts and lives; our Lord having, by his superior wisdom, made use of
their own consciences to defeat their cruel and villainous designs, he turned
to the people, and with the utmost propriety declared, that he was the light of
the world; that light which could penetrate through the darkness of the human
heart, and discover and bring to light the dark designs and wicked devices of
the sons of men; that light which could pierce through the outside show of
sanctity and holiness, and discover the secret abominations of the most proud
and accomplished hypocrite; and that light which could discover the paths of
darkness and error, and lead those who are enabled to follow our Redeemer, in
the road to eternal blessedness and rest. Hence, our blessed Savior declared,
'I am the light of the world: he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life.' John viii.12.

SOME of the enemies of our Lord were amongst the people who heard this
declaration, and they were so highly provoked, that they told him, he must be a
deceiver because he boasted of himself: Thou bear record of thyself, said
they, thy record is not true. To this, the great Savior of sinners replied,
that he did not call himself the light of the world, from a principle of pride
and falsehood, but it was a title that justly belonged to him, which they would
acknowledge, had they conceived true ideas of the Messiah's kingdom: but their
carnal views had blinded their eyes, and corrupted, and depraved their
judgments, so that they did not know from what authority he had received his
commission, nor whether he should return when he had executed it: Though I bear
record of myself, said he, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and
whither I go: but ye cannot tell whence I came, and whither I go. Ye judge
after the flesh: I judge no man. Nor, added he, is there any truth or justice
in your remark, that I bear witness of myself, and have none to witness for me:
for, let it be known, that my Father is with me; and joins me in whatsoever I
say or do: And yet if I judge, said he, my judgment is true: for I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me. It is also written in your law, that
the testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the
Father that sent me, bears witness of me.

THE Jews then inquired, where is thy Father, the other witness to whom thou
appealest? To which our Lord replied, that their conduct and foolish inquiries,
sufficiently demonstrated, that they were strangers, both to him and to his
Father: for, had they known who he was, they would certainly have been at no
loss to know who it was that he called his Father: had they known that he was
the Messiah, they must have understood that his Father was the great JEHOVAH,
that all-wise and all-powerful Being, who was the great Maker, the all-wise and
all-potent Preserver, the supreme Governor, and King of the universe: Ye
neither know me, nor my Father, said our great Redeemer; if ye had known me, ye
would have known my Father also.

THIS discourse, the evangelist informs us, was held in the treasury, where the
chest was placed for receiving the offerings of all who came up to worship in
the temple, and must, therefore, have been a place of great resort, being
frequented by all sorts of people: but, notwithstanding the public manner in
which our Lord advanced his claim to the character of the Messiah, and the
pride and rage of the Scribes and Pharisees, no man attempted to seize him;
Divine Providence did not permit them to put their cruel designs into
execution, because his hour, or the time of his sufferings and death, was not
yet come.

AFTER this discourse was ended, JESUS repeated what he had before told them,
declaring that he should shortly depart from them, and that then they should
seek him, and not be able to find him: I go my way, said he, and ye shall seek
me, and shall die in your sins. Whither I go, ye cannot come. Perhaps, in these
words, he might allude to the state of the Jewish nation after his death, and
may be supposed to say, I soon shall depart from amongst you, and such
miseries, and calamities, will overspread the land, that you will be glad of a
prophet to direct your conduct, and to pray for you: the Roman armies will
spread such devastation and horror over the face of your country, that you will
then earnestly wish for the coming of the Messiah, in expectation of being
delivered, by his power from your cruel enemy: but ye shall then find your
mistake: ye shall die in your sins, and be for ever excluded the realms of
blessedness and rest.

BUT the Jews were very far from understanding what he meant by going from
them, they were so foolish as to imagine, that he designed to put an end to his
life, with his own hands; for they thought the only retreat where they could
not find him, must be the dark and silent chambers of the grave: Will he kill
himself, said they, because he says, Whither I go, ye cannot come. To this,
the blessed JESUS replied, your base insinuation, betrays at once, the
wickedness of your hearts, and the corruption and depravity of your natures: ye
are from the earth, and are partakers of all the corruption and depravity
consequent on the fall of man; and from the evil passions which arise in your
own wicked hearts, you form your conceptions of me; and, thinking me like
yourselves, conclude, that I can be capable of committing so horrid a crime as
self-murder: but you are mistaken in me; my extraction, and my disposition are
very different from yours: I am not of this world; I am no partaker of the
evils consequent on sin; I have no propensity to corrupt and evil passions; my
mind is not tainted with the corruption of human nature, the source of
temptation, and the fountain of all evil: I came from above, and if you believe
in me, you will find a remedy for those evils which flow from the bitter
fountain of the fall of man, and will be cleansed from that pollution which
flows from your earthly origin; but if ye still continue in unbelief, ye shall
die in your sins.

THE Jews, in order to vindicate themselves, inquired what sort of a person he
was, or who he pretended to be? To which our Lord replied, Even the same that I
said unto you from the beginning; meaning the light of the world, which he had
styled himself in the beginning of this discourse: adding, I have many things
to say and to judge of you: but he that sent me is true; and I spoke to the
world those things which I have heard of him. However plain this discourse may
appear, it was not understood by the stupid Jews; they did not perceive, that
he spoke to them of the Father. But JESUS told them, that when they had
crucified him, they would be convinced by the miracles attending that awful
hour, his resurrection from the dead, the descent of the Holy Spirit on his
disciples, and the destruction of the Jew^^h nation, both who he was, and who
the Father was, that sent him: When ye have lifted up the Son of man, said he,
then shall ye know that I am he, And that I do nothing of myself; but as my
Father has taught me, I speak these things. And he that sent me is with me;
the Father has not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.

AS he spoke these words, many of the Jews believed him to be the Messiah;
perhaps, by his being lifted up, they did not understand his crucifixion, but
his being exalted to the throne of David: but JESUS told them, if they
persevered in the belief of his word, they should really become his disciples,
and being fully instructed in every doctrine of the gospel, they should not
only be freed from the slavery of sin, but also from the ceremonial part of the
law of Moses: If ye continue in my word, said he, then are ye my disciples
indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

THE Jews, on hearing him declare, that they should be made free, hastily and
warmly replied, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man.
This assertion, if taken in a literal sense, was absolutely false, the whole
nation being, at that very time, in bondage to the Romans; nor were their
ancestors any strangers to bondage and slavery, having severely felt the
tyrannical yoke of the Egyptian, Assyrian, and Babylonish kings. It must
therefore be supposed, that the expression was meant in a metaphorical sense,
and alluded to spiritual bondage: in this sense, it was a freedom in respect to
religion which they asserted, and they meant, that they were the descendants of
illustrious ancestors, who, in the worst of times, had preserved sentiments in
religion and government worthy the posterity of Abraham; nor had the hottest
persecution of the Assyrian kings, been able to compel them to embrace the
religion of the Heathens; in respect to truth, they were never in bondage to
any man, and they asked our Redeemer, How say thou, ye shall be made free?

IN answer to this question, JESUS replied, that they who gave themselves up to
a vicious course of life, and to the gratification of their sensual appetites,
were the worst of slaves, and it was highly necessary for them to consider
whether this character did not belong to themselves: Verily, verily, I say unto
you, said he, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. And, as a slave
connot be assured of the continuance of his master's favor, nor of abiding in
his house continually, so our great Redeemer observed, that his Father might
justly, for their sins, deprive them of the external privileges which they had
so grossly abused: as their sins had rendered them bondslaves to Divine
justice, they might expect to fall under the severest marks of his displeasure,
except they prevented the dreadful evils, consequent on their wickedness, by
believing on his Son, and receiving him, who alone was able to make them free
indeed, and place them in the heavenly Jerusalem. Our Lord then proceeded to
inform them, that though, in a natural sense, they were the seed of Abraham;
yet, in a moral sense, they were the offspring of Satan, which was fully
manifested by their unjust, and cruel design to destroy their great deliverer:
I know, said he, that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my
word has no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and
ye do that which you have seen with your father. To this the Jews hastily and
angrily replied, Abraham is our father: but our Redeemer informed them, that it
appeared from their conduct, that they were of another original: If, said he,
ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek
to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this
did not Abraham.

OUR Lord having declared to the Jews, that it was manifest from their deeds,
and their wicked inclinations, whose children they were; they, willing to
justify themselves, replied with some warmth: We be not born of fornication: we
have one Father, even God. By these expressions, the Jews did not mean a
natural, but a spiritual lineage, and by their not being born of fornication,
their being free from idolatry, which, in the language of the prophets, is
represented as fornication and adultery: they were not idolaters themselves,
nor born of idolatrous parents, and therefore, they styled themselves the
children of God. But JESUS gave them to understand, that if they were the
children of God, they would manifest their relation by their love to his Son:
If God were your Father, said he, ye would love me: for I proceeds forth and
came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me: but ye, continued our
great Redeemer, are of your father the devil; ye appear in his likeness, and
continue to gratify the evil inclinations, and diabolical passions, which ye
have learnt of him, and derived from him; falsehood, pride, and cruelty, are
the passions which he constantly inspires, and these are abundantly manifested
in your temper and conduct; he delights in murder and blood, and you are
plotting against the life of the innocent; falsehood and lies are natural to
him, and he never speaks the truth, but to put off some lie which he has
joined to it: Ye are, said the exalted Savior of sinners, of your father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because their is no truth in him. When
he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of
it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.

OUR Lord then publicly challenged all his enemies, to prove him guilty of any
falsehood: Which of you, said he, convicteth me of sin? Are any of you able to
show that I have done any thing which renders me unworthy of belief? Can you
prove that I have taught false doctrine? Have I reproved you unjustly for your
actions? Have I charged you with crimes you were not guilty of? And can any of
you prove me guilty of any sinful action, or prove any part of my conduct to be
inconsistent with the character I have assumed? If none of you can do this, but
must confess that my doctrine and life are such as might be expected from a
messenger sent from God; Why do ye not believe me? But the reason is plain, you
do not belong to God, ye have no interest in his favor, nor are partakers of
his grace: He that is of God, hears God's words; ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.

THIS declaration exasperated and enraged the Jews to the highest pitch, and
with a mixture of disdain and contempt, they replied, Say we not well, that
thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? His calling the descendants of Abraham
the children of the Devil, they thought was a sufficient proof, that either he
must be a profligate wretch, which they meant by calling him a Samaritan, or
else must be instigated by some evil spirit. But JESUS replied, that he was not
under the dominion of any evil spirit, but spoke the words of eternal truth; he
was not in league with hell, nor in alliance with the prince of darkness: on
the contrary, he honored his Father, by speaking the words of truth, which he
sent him to deliver: I have not a devil, said he, but I honor my Father, and
ye do dishonor me, and I seek not mine own glory; there is one that seeks
and judges. Our great Redeemer, by these words, gave them to understand, that
he did not court their applause, or fear their reproaches: for there was one
concerned, that was able to vindicate his honor, and severely punish all who
should dare to attack him with unjust and malignant reproaches.

OUR great Redeemer, having vindicated his character, proceeded to make a
declaration, which very much surprised the Jews with whom he was conversing,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, said he, if a man keep my words, he shall never
see death. The Jews, thinking these words had reference to a natural death,
cried out with an air of triumph* Now we know that thou have a devil. Abraham
is dead, and the prophets: and thou say, if a man keep my saying, he shall
never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead?
And the prophets are dead; whom make thou thyself? John viii.52, 53. To this
our great Redeemer replied, that as they had lately objected to the testimony
which he bare of himself, he should not rest the cause on that foundation, but
refer it to his Father, whom they acknowledged to be the supreme Lord of heaven
and earth: but, though they pretended to worship the true God, they were
totally ignorant of him; they neither formed just conceptions of him, nor
worshipped him in the manner they ought; they were not the persons by whom he
required to be worshipped, and whom he always accepted: on the contrary, JESUS
declared, that he formed just ideas of God, and obeyed his precepts; if he was
to say he did not know him, he would be a liar, like the Jews with whom he was
conversing. And as to the patriarch Abraham, of whom they boasted so much, he
earnestly desired to see the day of the Messiah, and had so much of it revealed
to him, as filled his heart with gladness: If I honor myself, said our great
Redeemer, my honor is nothing: it is my Father that honors me; of whom ye
say, he is your God, yet ye have not known him, but I know him; and if I should
say, I know him not, I should be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep
his saying. Your father Abraham rejoiced, or desired, to see my days; and he
saw it, and was glad.

THE Jews understanding these words in a natural sense, concluded that he
affirmed, that he was before Abraham, and knowing that he was under fifty years
old, they considered this declaration as absolutely impossible, and highly
ridiculous. They had no conception of his divine nature, though he had so often
told them he was the Son of God, and, of consequence, existed with the Father
before the commencement of time. This gross stupidity and perverseness, induced
our great Redeemer to assert his dignity in the plainest terms; Verily, verily,
I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. This declaration so enraged the Jews,
that they rushed upon him with the utmost violence and fury; and, as nothing
less than his immediate death would satisfy them, they took up stones to stone
him: but JESUS, either rendering himself invisible, or filling the minds of his
enemies with confusion, and absence of thought, passed immediately and
imperceptibly through the crowd, and departed out of the temple.

WHILE JESUS remained in Jerusalem, he saw in one of the streets of the city, a
man who had been blind from his birth: the sight of so distressed an object,
soon excited the compassion of the kind and benevolent Savior of sinners; the
various affronts and indignities which he had so lately received from the Jews,
could not prevent him from the exertion of his omnipotence in favor of such
objects as these, though they belonged to that cruel, malicious, and
unbelieving nation; he was not to be provoked by their crimes, so far as to
withhold his blessings from them. Accordingly, he beheld this poor blind man,
not with a short and careless view, but with a steady and fixed attention; he
cast on him the eyes of his divine compassion, and determined to afford him
unexpected relief.

THE disciples, remarking their Lord's attention to this distressed, helpless
person, and, doubtless, imagining that as he had engaged the pity of the only
person who was able to help him, he would soon, by divine power and goodness,
be restored to sight, asked their Master, what was the cause of his blindness:
and they were the more solicitous to be satisfied in this matter, as the
disorder had commenced before his birth: they had learned from the law, that
sin was the cause of affliction and bodily distemper, and that the Lord visits
the iniquities of the fathers upon their children; and therefore, they inquired
of their Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?
To this question, our Lord replied, that this disorder was not the immediate
consequence of the man's own sin, nor that of his parents, but that he was born
blind, that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

BY this reply, our blessed Savior has taught us, that a curious inquiry into
the cause of those afflictions and distresses of particular persons, which seem
very extraordinary, and are peculiarly affecting, and unaccountably deplorable,
is impertinent and vain; and our censure of such persons as the greatest of
sinners, and bringing down remarkable vengeance from heaven on their
wickedness, is cruel and unjust; the designs of the great Governor of the
universe are not open to our view; he is perfectly and immutably wise; we are
full of blindness and folly; he knows how to answer the ends of his own
government, and accomplish the designs of his grace, by the afflictions and
distresses, which he sometimes permits to fall upon his own people: while the
narrowness of our hearts, and our foolish pride and vanity, are prone to
ascribe those afflictions to a man's own personal vices, which are for the
glory of God, and intended to work out the superior good of the suffering
person, or some way or other to promote the real advantage of mankind.

OUR blessed Savior having declared the cause of this man's blindness, namely,
that the works of God should be made manifest in him, further declared, I must
work the work of him that sent me, while it is day; the night comes, when no
man can work: declaring to his disciples, and all the world, his unwearied
labor, and ceaseless attention and care in the work of his Almighty Father; in
this he labored incessantly, both day and night, during the time of his
sojourning in the flesh; to this only he directed his thoughts, with unwearied
ardour, and unremitting diligence: this he esteemed even as his meat and drink,
and suffered the neglect of his ordinary food, that he might finish the great
work which he came into the world to accomplish, and bring about the salvation
of lost perishing sinners: to accomplish this he left that glory which he had
with his Father in the highest heavens, came down into a world of labor and
sorrow, and went about doing good.

AS it was now the Sabbath Day, and our Lord was about to perform an act of
mercy and benevolence, which required some little labor, it appears, that the
above declaration CHRIST restoring BARTIMEUS to Sig^^ Mark X.52.

(...) immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus in the way.

had some reference to this, and seems to intimate, that, as his time for such
acts of mercy was now so very short, it was not proper to defer it till the day
of rest was over.

BUT before our Savior p^oceeded to the miracle of restoring sight to the man
who was born blind, he took occasion to speak of himself, as a person appointed
to illuminate the minds of men, which lay involved in darkness, more deplorable
than that which so many years had beclouded the poor object before him: As long
as I am in the world, said he, I am the light of the world.

HENCE it may be observed, that the miracles wrought by our great Redeemer,
were not only plain proofs of his mission, and full evidences of his being the
Messiah, but had a reference to the spiritual nature of his kingdom, and were
emblems of the various parts of his divine character, and victorious deeds.
Thus, his miraculously feeding the multitudes with common bread, was a plain
indication, that he came into the world to seed the b^lievers in his name with
the bread of life, that all-nourishing food for the soul. His restoring sight
to the blind, was a lively emblem of the tendency of his doctrine, and efficacy
of his power, to dispel the darkness of the soul, and illuminate the blinded
understanding of men. His healing their bodies, represented his power to heal
the soul, and was an evidence of his authority to forgive sins, as all bodily
disor^^rs are the consequences of sin; and a removal of the punishment,
strongly implied a power equal to the removal of the guilt. His casting out
devils, was an earnest of his final victory over the prince of darkness, and
his future triumph over all the powers of hell. His raising particular persons
from the dead, was the beginning of his triumph over death, and a demonstration
of his ability to accomplish a general resurrection. And finally, his curing
all promiscuously, who applied to him, showed that he was the friend of
sinners, and that none who came to him would be rejected, let their sins be
ever so numerous, or their case ever so deplorable. Such are the spiritual
truths which may be collected from the miracles of the Son of God; and
accordingly, we find, that this exalted person himself, at, or soon after the
performing his miracles, while the great events were fresh on the memory, often
turned his discourse to the spiritual things they represented.

OUR blessed Savior having declared, that he was the light of the world, he
spit on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed the eyes of the
blind man with the clay, and said unto him, Go wash in the pool of Siloam
(which is by interpretation, sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and
came seeing.

THERE is no doubt but our blessed Savior, could have performed this miracle
without any external means; indeed the means he used on this occasion, were so
far from being likely to effect the cure, that they seemed calculated to
produce a contrary effect. We must therefore conclude, that these means were
designed, to direct our attention to higher mysteries, and show us, that it can
be no other power than that which first created man out of clay, that
enlightens the dark mind of the dead sinner, and gives spiritual light to those
eyes, which are closed by the thick darkness of guilt.

WHETHER the blind man, whose case we are now considering, was acquainted with
the name and character of our Redeemer, the evangelists have not informed us:
but as his miracles had been published in Jerusalem so often, as well as in all
the country round, it cannot be supposed, that this man, who resided at
Jerusalem, could be totally ignorant of them; and it seems, by his ready
obedience to the directions of the Son of God, though the means directed,
seemed to have no tendency to promote the cure, that he knew who it was that
gave him those directions: and we find, that he was amply rewarded for the
readiness of his obedience, by receiving the gift of sight.

SO wonderful an event, could not fail of engaging the attention, and exciting
the surprise of all that beheld it; and those who had often seen the blind man
in his dark and deplorable condition, it may be expected, would be very
particular in their inquiries into the means of so singular, and surprising an
event: it was, doubtless, the subject of general conversation: and one would
have thought, it might have been the cause of general conversation; but the
obstinacy and perverseness of the Jewish nation, was not to be overcome; their
unbelief and hardness of heart, would not give way to the clearest evidence.
Great was the surprise of the neighbors, and friends, of the restored person:
They which before had seen him, that he was blind, said, is not this he that
sat and begged? Some said, this is he; others said, it is like him; but he
said, I am he.

THE poor man's heart was full of gratitude and joy, and therefore, perceiving
his neighbors to doubt the identity of his person, he proclaimed himself to be
the very same whom they had lately seen begging in total darkness; I am he,
thus wonderfully blessed with sight by the mighty power of God, said he; I am
the man who was blind from my birth, whom ye have all seen, and many of you
have relieved me in my deplorable distress; I am he who was even, from my
mothers womb, involved in pitchy darkness, but now with joy and wonder, which I
cannot express, behold the beauteous beams of day.

ON hearing so frank and full a declaration, they were anxious to know how this
great event was produced; and they hastily inquired, How were thine eyes
opened? To which the man replied, a man, that is called JESUS, made clay, an
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I
went and washed, and I received sight. They then asked him where the person was
who had performed so wonderful, merciful, and beneficial a work? To which the
man replied, I know not: for JESUS had retired while the man went to wash in
the pool of Siloam; perhaps our Lord chose to retire, to avoid the applause of
the people, which would naturally follow so stupendous a work, and which, we
frequently find in the gospels, he was particularly careful to shun.

THE persons who were witnesses of this wonderful event, either out of envy
against JESUS, or being desirous to search the affair to the bottom, brought
the man who was the subject of this miracle, before the council, as proper
judges of the matter: accordingly, as soon as he was placed before the
assembly, the Pharisees began, in a browbeating way, to question him how he
recovered his sight? However awful and terrible such an assembly might be to a
poor beggar, the man boldly mentioned the name of JESUS, and positively
declared -- He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. The
Pharisees, having heard this account of the miracle, maliciously declared, that
the person who had performed it, was a deceiver: for, if he was a prophet, he
would be an observer of the law, which he had openly violated, by working this
work on the Sabbath Day. But some in the council, with a spirit of greater
candor and moderation, gave it as their opinion, that no deceiver could work
so great and beneficial a work; for no wicked man would have either inclination
or power to perform it.

THE court, being thus divided in their opinion with regard to the character of
JESUS, they asked the man, what he thought of the person who had restored him
to fight? To which he boldly and plainly replied, He is a prophet. But the
Jews, still hoped to invalidate the miracle, and therefore insinuated, that it
was not true, that this man was really born blind: to come to the bottom of
this matter, they sent for his parents, and asked them, whether he was their
son, and if he really was born blind, and by what means he had received his
sight? To which they answered, that he was most certainly their son, and was
born blind; but by what means he had received his sight, or what person had
conferred this great blessing upon him, they could not tell: but, as their son
was of age to answer for himself, they referred them to him: These words spoke
his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already,
that if any man should confess that Jesus was the Christ, he should be put out
of the Synagogue.

IN the conduct of the parents of this poor man, we may behold the great evil
of the fear of man, and how powerfully this slavish principle acts on the mind;
they well knew by what means their son had received his sight; and, like him,
they should, with gratitude and joy, have confessed the divine hand which had
wrought this wonderful work; and dared to have acknowledged this extraordinary
person before all the world, whatever the consequences of such conduct might
have been. Let us hence learn the weakness of human nature, and never presume
too much on our own strength, but implore the assistance of the Holy Spirit at
all times, and not love the praise of men more than the Favor of God.

THE Pharisees, finding all their attempts to disapprove or lessen this
miracle, did but tend to establish the matter of fact, and make it shine with
greater luster, proceeded to their old method of calumniating the divine author
of it: They called again the man that had been born blind, and said unto him,
Give God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner. To which the man
answered, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that,
whereas I was blind, now I see.

THIS answer was not sufficient to satisfy the proud and envious opposers of
the Son of God, but they sought to confound the poor man, who had thus plainly
and boldly affirmed the truth respecting a matter of fact, in which it was
impossible he should be mistaken, with a multiplicity of questions, and would
meanly lead a poor simple beggar into all the windings of sophistry; and with
this view asked him 'What did he to thee? How opened he thine eyes?' These
questions they had asked before, and received plain and positive answers to
each: but they seemed now to repeat them with a design, that the man, by
repeating the manner in which he received the cure, might be sensible that
JESUS had, by effecting this miracle, violated the Sabbath, and must, of
consequence, be an imposter. Thus the enemies of our Redeemer would have
persuaded the person who had received the invaluable blessing of sight, to join
with them in the judgment they formed of the great person who had been his
generous benefactor: but their obstinacy and perverseness appeared so plain to
him, that he boldly answered, I have told you already, and ye did not hear:
wherefore would ye hear it again? Will ye also be his disciples?

THIS answer was received by the council with indignation, scorn, and contempt;
for they reviled him, and said, thou art his disciple, but we are Moses's
disciples. We know that God spoke unto Moses: as for this follow, ye know not
whence he is. The poor beggar was surprised, that so extraordinary a person,
and one who possessed such wonderful powers, and exerted them for the good of
mankind, should be unknown to the rulers of Israel, Why herein is a mavelous
thing, said he, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine
eyes: we know that God hears not sinners; but if a man be a worshipper of
God, and does his will, him he hears. Since the world began, it was not
heard, that any man opened the eyes, of one that was born blind. If this man
were not of God, he could do nothing.

SUCH was the plain and powerful reasoning of this poor man; his inference was
just and natural, and founded on a plain matter of fact, and principles which
could not be denied: they all knew, nor durst they deny, that God hears not
sinners: they all knew, that God had heard JESUS; the miracle which he had just
now wrought, and which could not be denied, plainly proved this; for it was a
miracle which never had been performed by any man since the beginning of the
world: it was far above the reach of the powers of nature, or the seize
of human art; and, therefore, its origin must be truly divine. It therefore
undeniably followed, that JESUS was not a sinner, but sent from God, otherwise
he could do nothing.

THE Pharisees were not ignorant, that this argument was conclusive; they felt
its whole force, and well knew that it could not be resisted; accordingly, they
did not attempt to answer it, but had recourse to punishment, and abusive
language: Thou wast altogether born in sins, and do thou teach us, said they:
th^^ impudent illiterate mortal, whose understanding is as dark as thy body
lately was, do thou presume to judge and determine, and dissent in opinion
from the wise and learned! Thou, who wast born under the heaviest punishment of
sins, do thou pretend to instruct the rulers of the people, who are eminent
for their knowledge of the law! Having thus vented their pride and envy, in
reviling the poor man, the evangelist adds, they cast him out: that is, they
passed on him the sentence of excommunication, which is the highest punishment
it was in their power to inflict: but, though he was cut off from the Jewish
synagogue and society, he was received into a society, whose privileges are
great, and from which he could never be excluded by any unjust sentence, by any
body of men, however powerful: he was united to a society whose members are
never cut off, but will unite in happiness, love, joy, and glory, during a
boundless eternity.

THAT this poor man was received amongst the number of the disciples of CHRIST,
is manifest from the conversation which soon after passed between the restored
person and our great Redeemer: Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when
he had found him, he said unto him, Do thou believe in the Son of God.

THE man did not know how to answer this question, till he knew who was the
great person which JESUS had mentioned to him; and therefore, he inquired, Who
is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? Our great Redeemer would not keep him
in suspense, but immediately and explicitly replied, Thou have both seen him,
and it is he who talks with thee. The poor man answered, with gratitude and
joy, Lord I believe; and he worshipped him. Our Lord graciously accepted of his
adoration, and glancing at the pride, and perverseness of the Pharisees, he
said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not, might
see; and that they which see, might be made blind. Some of the Pharisees, which
were with him, heard these words, and perceiving the reference to themselves,
they asked, are we blind also? To which our Lord replied, If ye were blind, ye
should have no sin: but now ye say, we see, therefore your sin remains.

OUR Lord then, to show the disparity between himself, and those proud,
hypocritical teachers, assumed the character of a shepherd, and displayed his
love, tenderness, and care for his chosen followers, by the similitude of the
care and watchfulness of a good shepherd over his flock, while such false
pretenders, and hypocritical teachers as the Pharisees, might fitly be compared
to a gang of thieves, whose only view is to disturb and destroy: The thief
comes not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that the
sheep might have life, and they might have it more abundantly. I am the good
shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep.

AND further to show the absolute necessity of believing in him, and receiving
his doctrine, our great Redeemer compared himself to a door; Verily, verily, I
say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers. He that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but
climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief, and a robber.

THOUGH these similitudes contained a very severe reproof, directed to the
false teachers of Israel, they did not understand the meaning of them, and the
people were much divided in their sentiments concerning him and his teaching;
some said, He has a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? Others said, These are
not the words of one that has a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

FROM the pride, envy, obstinate perverseness, and implacable resentment of the
Pharisees, we should learn to contemplate the crafty insinuation, and subtle
endeavors of the enemies of the cross of CHRIST in these latter times: nor
need we be surprised, if we find the same malicious insinuations in different
shapes levelled against ourselves, if we are enabled to embrace the truths of
the gospel, and to confess before all men the glory, honor and dignity of him
who has opened our eyes, and brought us out of darkness into his mavelous
light. It is contrary to the nature of the world, or worldly minded men, to
love our Lord JESUS CHRIST, or to esteem those who profess to know him, and
bear witness concerning the world, that its works are evil. Let us not,
therefore, be discouraged if we find the world to hate us, and load us with
unjust reproaches for our attachment to the cause of our great Redeemer; but,
like the blind man, whose case we have been considering, let us openly and
boldly profess the truth, and declare the power of God, who has illuminated
our dark minds, and led us in the paths of everlasting light and happiness.

THE feast of dedication now drew near, and our Lord prepared to go to
Jerusalem, to be present at the solemnity. This feast was not appointed by
Moses, but by that noble warrior, and heroic reformer, Judas Maccabeus, in
commemoration of his having cleansed the temple, and restored its worship,
after both had been profaned and polluted by that abominable tyrant Antiochus
Epiphanes.

BUT, though this feast was of human institution, our Lord chose to be present
at it, although he knew that fresh attempts would be made against his life; his
time on earth he knew was short, his public ministry was drawing to a period,
and, therefore, he would not omit any opportunity of preaching to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, and doing good to the children of men; nor did he
now, as he had formerly done, travel in private, but openly declared his
intention of going to Jerusalem.

THE road to the capital from Galilee, to which our Lord had retired after the
miracle of restoring sight to the blind man, lay through Samaria. The
inhabitants of this country entertained the most inveterate hatred against all
who worshipped in the temple at Jerusalem: JESUS was no stranger to this
disposition of the Samaritans, and therefore he sent messengers before him,
that they might find reception for him in one of the villages: but the
Samaritans being informed, that the intention of his journey was to worship at
the temple in Jerusalem, they suffered their old national prejudice to prevail
so far, as to induce them to refuse him admittance.

THE messengers who had been sent on this business returned, and gave an
account of the inhospitable treatment they had received; which so exceedingly
offended the disciples, that they prevailed on James and John, to propose to
their Master the calling down fire from heaven to destroy them, pleading the
example of the prophet Elijah for such precipitate and violent proceedings:
Lord, will thou, said they, that we command fire to come down from heaven, and
consume them, even as Elias did?

BUT the blessed JESUS, whose meekness on all occasions was beyond example,
rebuked them for entertaining so hasty and unbecoming a resentment: Ye know
not, said he, what manner of spirit ye are of: ye are ignorant of the
sinfulness of the disposition which ye have now expressed, nor do ye consider
the difference between the dispensation of the law and the gospel: the severity
of the prophet Elijah was a just punishment to a wicked and cruel, as well as
idolatrous king, and a people who had consented to his crimes, and had forsaken
the worship of the God of their fathers; it was a punishment very proper for
the times, and what the nature of the offense required; it was consistent with
the character of the prophet, and not unsuitable to the Mosaic dispensation:
but the gospel breathed a very different spirit; the design of our Redeemer's
coming into the world, not being to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

BEHOLD here, ye despisers of the gospel dispensation! Ye advocates for the
purity and dignity of human nature, and despisers of the cross of CHRIST!
Behold here an instance of patience under an unprovoked injury, which cannot be
matched amongst all the boasted heroes of antiquity; an instance of patience
which expressed infinite sweetness of disposition, worthy to be imitated by all
the human race, especially by those who call themselves the disciples of CHRIST.

ENTERTAINMENT and reception being denied by the inhospitable inhabitants of
this Samaritan village, our great Redeemer, with his disciples, directed their
way toward another; and as they were on the way, he was met by a stranger, and
accosted with this language, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go.
The blessed JESUS, to whom the hearts of all mankind were open, well knowing
that it was only the riches and honors, of the Messiah's expected temporal
kingdom, which excited this person to make the declaration; he thought proper
at first to undeceive him: Foxes have holes, said he, and the birds of the air
have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head; alluding to the
conduct of the inhospitable Samaritans, and foretelling what they must expect
to suffer, who espoused the cause, and joined the train of our great Redeemer.

SOON after, our blessed Savior met with one who had formerly been his
disciple, and commanded him to disengage himself from worldly concerns, and to
join in his train; but this person excused himself, under pretense of filial
piety, and a desire to attend on, and administer relief, to his aged parents:
Lord, said he, suffer me first to go and bury my Father: but our great Redeemer
replied, Let the dead bury their dead; but go thou and preach the kingdom of
God. Let those who are immersed in worldly affairs, follow the concerns of the
world, but let those who have received the great truths of the gospel, and made
a profession of our Redeemer's name, do every thing in their power to spread
the glad-tidings of salvation over the whole earth.

A third person proposed to follow our Lord, but desired liberty to return to
his house, and take his leave of the family: but, though our Lord would not by
any means discourage prudent care in the domestic affairs of life, yet he gave
this person to understand, that the salvation of the soul was the principal
concern, and required our first, and chief regard; and we should by no means,
let the concerns of time, and sense, have such an influence on our minds, as to
make us lose sight of this great object. Great is the danger of coldness and
declension in our spiritual affairs; for our Lord himself declared, in answer
to this person's objection: 'No man having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.'

AS our blessed Savior's ministry was from this time till its final period, to
be confined to Judea, and the countries beyond Jordan, it was necessary that
some messengers should be sent to every town and village, to prepare his way:
accordingly, he called his seventy disciples, and gave them proper instructions
concerning their behavior, and the doctrines they were to preach. Having laid
before them the particular duties of their mission, he sent them into different
parts of the country, and ordered them to visit those particular cities, towns,
or villages, where he intended himself to follow them, and preach the doctrine
of the everlasting gospel to the inhabitants.

THE reason which our great Redeemer assigned for sending these seventy
disciples on this important message, was the same which he had before advanced
for the mission of the twelve: The harvest truly is great, but the laborers
are few. And being never more to preach in Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum,
the cities wherein he usually resided, and where he had so often delivered his
heavenly discourses, and displayed his miraculous power, and divine
benevolence, in many wondrous works, he was naturally led to reflect on the
reception which himself and his doctrines had met with, from those wicked,
impenitent cities. He was sensible of the terrible evils which would flow from
rejecting the Son of God, and persisting in the obstinacy of unbelief,
notwithstanding the mighty works, which they had seen, and all the
opportunities which they had for instruction and improvement; and though he was
grieved for their obstinacy and perverseness, he pronounced the following
sentence against them: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! Woe unto thee, Bethsaida! For,
if the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while ago repented; sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But
it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, at the day of judgment, than for
you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to
hell. To this our exalted Redeemer added, as a consideration which ought to
administer comfort, and give encouragement to his disciples: He that hears
you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me.

THIS kind and encouraging declaration, was particularly calculated to comfort
and support the disciples he was now sending out, under the contempt and
ill-usage they would meet with in executing the duties of their mission: they
could not be ignorant, that the preaching of CHRIST himself had often been
unsuccessful, and that he had been opposed, reviled, and despised; and
therefore, they had no reason to conclude, that they should find a welcome
reception, and be received, honored, and esteemed: but it would, at the worst
of times, afford them great consolation to reflect, that the eternal God was on
their side, and, however they might be despised and rejected by men, they were
sure to be received, honored, and esteemed by their maker.

THE seventy disciples, having received their commission, and instructions, and
being by their Master invested with the power of working miracles, they
departed and preached according to the tenor of their commission, in the cities
and villages of Judea and Petrea; and after visiting several places, publishing
the glad-tidings of salvation, and working many miracles in confirmation of the
truth, they returned to their Master with great joy, saying, Lord, even the
devils are subject unto us, through thy name.

FROM these expressions, it seems reasonable to conclude, that the disciples,
when they set out on this journey, did not know that their power extended so
far as to cast out devils, and they were, no doubt, pleasingly surprised, to
find that the apostate spirits trembled at their Master's name. To this our
great Redeemer replied, I beheld Satan, as lightning, fall from heaven: as much
as to say, you need not be astonished at the subjection and dismay of the
apostate spirits, their prince is fallen, I saw him fall as swift as lightning
from heaven: I have triumphed over him, I came down from heaven, and was
manifested in the flesh to destroy his works, and he knows I shall finally
conquer him and all his legions, and put them down for ever.

OUR Lord then, for the further encouragement of his disciples, informed them,
that he would enlarge their power, and increase their authority, not only over
evil spirits, but over whatever in this world, had power to hurt or annoy them:
Behold, said he, I give unto your power to tread on serpents, and scorpions,
and over all the powers of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
At the same time, our Lord was pleased to inform them, that these miraculous
powers were the least part of their privilege, and the consequences attending
them, not so much to be rejoiced in, as their title to the eternal reward,
which he would bestow on all his faithful followers: Notwithstanding, said he,
in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice,
that your names are written in the book of life.

NOR could the blessed JESUS reflect on the wisdom, and goodness of the divine
dispensations, and the particular care and tenderness, which the supreme
Governor of the universe, manifests to the objects of his love, however mean
and despised they may be in the eyes of the world, without feeling
extraordinary joy; so that his benevolent heart overflowed with streams of
gratitude and praise; 'I thank thee' said he, 'O Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes: even so Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.'

THE disciples being returned from their tour, JESUS left Samaria, and
journeying into Judea, he was met on the road by a certain lawyer, who, in the
language of the New Testament, is a person whose employment is the expounding,
and explaining the law of Moses. This person was desirous to know whether the
doctrine which JESUS advanced, were the same as the precepts of the law; and
with this view, he asked our Redeemer what he must do to inherit eternal life.
Such was the pride of this teacher of Israel, that it seems by the sequel, that
he asked this important question, to tempt, and not to be instructed: but,
though our Lord well knew the secrets of his heart, he did not answer him with
such a rebuke as he deserved, but in such a manner as to turn his base design,
and sophistical evasions against himself: What, said he, is written in the law?
how read thou? The Scribe answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.

THIS reply our Lord received with approbation, and said to the lawyer, Thou
have answered right; this do, and thou shall live; if thou art able to fulfill
these great precepts of the law, thou may claim an interest in the divine
favor, on the footing of the eternal rules of righteousness; and as a right to
that happiness which is assigned to the keepers of the law: for on these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

THE lawyer now perceived himself taken in his own snare: his conscience could
not acquit him of violating these great duties; he was at a loss and
confounded, and knew not what to reply: but, yet being willing to say something
to justify himself, he inquired, and who is my neighbor? A question very
natural to be asked, by a bigoted Jew, whose narrow, selfish conceptions led
him to despise all who were not the children of Abraham.

TO correct the low littleness of such a private party spirit, to open and
enlarge the heart to a more generous and noble way of thinking, to show them
the only foundation of true love, and the extensive relation which they and all
mankind stood in to each other, our Lord delivered the following most beautiful
and instructive parable.

A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell amongst thieves,
which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way; and when he
saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at
that place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a
certain Samaritan, as he journied, came where he was: and when he saw him, he
had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil
and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took
care of him. And on the morrow, when he departed, he took out two pence, and
gave them to the host, and said unto him, take care of him; and whatsoever thou
spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.

BY this well-chosen, and most elegant and affecting parable, our exalted
Savior beautifully inculcated an open and generous disposition, and greatness
of mind, which lays aside all selfish views, and diligently exerts itself in
the great work of doing good to mankind, readily relieving all objects of
distress, let their national quarrels and religious disputes be what they will.
No persons were more hated by the Samaritans than the Jews; for which reason,
our Lord represents a Samaritan relieving and succouring a distressed Jew, when
a Priest and Levite, of his own nation and religion, had forsaken him. And this
affecting parable our Lord laid down as an answer to the question proposed by
the lawyer, Who is my neighbor? and then put it to his own feelings to
determine the matter: Which now of these three, think thou, said he, was
neighbor unto him that fell amongst the thieves? The case was so plain, that
the lawyer could but reply, He that showed mercy on him. To which our Redeemer
immediately returned, with a look which gave the lawyer to understand that he
knew he was silenced, Go and do thou likewise.

CHAPTER XXII.
JESUS journeying to Jerusalem to be present at the Feast of Dedication, lodges
at Bethany, and is entertained by Martha and Mary: when he arrives at
Jerusalem, he attends at the Feast, and disputes with the Jews in Solomon's
porch: The Feast being over, he retires beyond Jordan, and teaches his
disciples to pray: He casts out a Devil: He dines and disputes with the
Pharisees, whom he reprehendeth for their outward Show of Holiness, and
pronounces woes against them and the Scribes and Lawyers. CHRIST teaches his
Disciples to avoid Hypocrisy, and not to be fearful in publishing his Doctrine:
He refuses to be a Judge in a civil Cause, and warns the people to beware of
Covetousness by the parable of a rich Man, who boasted himself in his
multiplied Stores: He exhorts his Disciples to lay up Treasure in Heaven by
giving alms; and to be always ready against their Lord's coming.

AFTER our blessed Lord had effectually silenced the cavilling lawyer, he
continued his journey toward Jerusalem, to be present at the feast of
dedication. In the evening he retired to Bethany, a small village about two
miles from Jerusalem. In this village dwelt Martha and Mary, two pious sisters,
who dwelt together in the same house with their brother Lazarus. In this little
family, our great Redeemer took up his abode, and was joyfully received by the
religious young man and his virtuous sisters. Whether any former acquaintance
had subsisted between this family and our great Redeemer, the evangelists have
not informed us; but it seems they were not unacquainted with his character,
for he was kindly received and generously entertained. JESUS, as his custom
was, wherever he went, took the opportunity of dispensing his divine
instructions, and teaching his hospitable friends those things which concerned
their everlasting peace. Martha was desirous of expressing her regard to her
noble guest, by providing a grand entertainment; but Mary, being of a
contemplative disposition, was taken with his divine discourses, and sitting at
the feet of our great Redeemer, she listened to his words with the most earnest
and steady attention: Martha, being greatly fatigued with the burden of the
service, was offended at her sister, because she did not help her, and
complained to our Lord of her omission: Lord, said she, do thou not care that
my sister has left me to serve you alone? Bid her therefore that she help me.

BUT JESUS, by his answer to this discontented sister, gave her to understand,
that it was more pleasing to him, when persons attended on his instructions,
and listened to his words, than all their endeavors to provide sumptuous
entertainments for himself and his disciples: he was not insensible of any
regard which persons had for him, nor unthankful for their kindness, in what
way soever it was expressed; but as the good of mankind was his constant
endeavor and care, he always approved those expressions of kindness best,
which were most conducive to that end: nor could he esteem himself being fed
with the food which perishes, of equal consequence with his bestowing on
others, that which endures to everlasting life: Martha, Martha, said he, thou
art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful: and Mary
has chosen that good part, which shall not be taken from her.

FROM this little village JESUS departed to Jerusalem, and attended at the
feast of dedication. Being in the temple, and standing in Solomon's porch, he
was accosted by the Jews, who desired him to tell them plainly, whether he were
the Messiah or not? Well knowing, that they did not ask this question for
information, but to gain an opportunity of accusing him to the Romans as a
seditious person, who pretended to be the great son of David, promised by the
prophets, and by this means, designing to stir up the people to rebellion, and
seize on the kingdom; our great Redeemer told them, that they must form a
judgment of him from his actions: I told you, said he, and ye believed not: the
works I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. It is in vain to dispute,
or lay down reasons, and arguments to persons of your temper and spirit; you
are under the dominion of your headstrong passions and wicked hearts, and your
inveterate prejudices will not be overcome; you are not of the number of those
whom my Father, by his powerful grace, will bring unto me, and cause to believe
in my name; these happy persons are assisted by the power from on high, they
carefully and heartily examine the proofs I have given of my mission, and they
believe in me, and receive me, with all their hearts: nor will these my
followers and friends lose their rewards; for I will willingly receive them,
and make them partakers of eternal life and glory: these persons I will support
and defend; I look upon them as my own, and however industrious, or assiduous
the wicked of this world, or the powers of darkness, may be to deceive and
destroy them, they shall never effect their purpose; for I stand determined to
bring them safe to my heavenly kingdom, and all their enemies may rage in vain:
my Father has given them to me: all power, both in heaven and earth, is in his
hand, and his omnipotence is engaged in their defense: none is able to contend
with him, to prevent the accomplishment of his will, or to hurt the persons
whom he defends: none is able to contend with me, or wrest my people from me;
for I and the great eternal Father of the universe are one: My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me. A stranger they will not follow:
for they know not the voice of strangers. And I give unto them eternal life;
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My
Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Father's hand. I and my Father are one.

THESE words highly provoked the Jews, they considered them a blasphemous, and
were so enraged, that they took up stones to stone the exalted Savior of
sinners; they thought they acted in conformity to the law, which commands, that
all blasphemers shall be stoned; but JESUS asked them, which of the benevolent
miracles he had wrought amongst them, deserved such treatment: Many good works,
said he, have I showed you from my Father: for which of these works do ye stone
me. As if he had said, I have fed the hungry in the desert, I have restored
strength to the lame, I have cleansed the lepers, I have healed the sick, I
have cast out devils, I have raised the dead; for which of these works are ye
going to stone me? Do such miracles as these admit of the supposition, that the
author of them is an imposter? Can you be so stupid as to imagine, that the
all-powerful and all-wise Governor of the world, would permit any person to
perform such works: with no other intention than to deceive mankind, and to
propagate falsehood and error? The Jews replied, we do not suppose, that thou
deservest punishment for any good work which thou have performed; punishment
which we are preparing, is disigned to chastise thee for thy blasphemous
speeches; for thou though, a weak mortal like ourselves, arrogantly assumest
the power and majesty of the most High, and, by claiming the incommunicable
attributes of deity, make thyself God: For a good work, said they, we stone
thee not; but for blasphemy, and because that thou, being a man, make thyself
God. JESUS replied, Has not the Scripture expressly called those gods, and the
sons of God, who were commissioned to govern God's people, and who by the
communication of his Holy Spirit, were qualified for the important office with
which they were invested; can you, therefore, impute to that person whom the
Almighty has sanctified, and sent into the world, on the most important
business that ever any person was sent into the world to execute, no less than
the salvation of lost sinners; can you, I say, impute blasphemy to this person,
for taking on himself the title of the Son of God? If my own declaration be not
sufficient to induce you to believe, consider the works which I have performed,
and let them speak for me: is it not abundantly evident, that they must be the
works of the most High, as only omnipotence could perform them? Is it not then
fully manifest, that I and the eternal God are so united, that whatever I say
or do, is approved by him? Is it not written in your law, said our great
Redeemer, I said, Ye are gods. If he called them gods, unto whom the word of
God came, and the scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him whom the Father
has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I
am the Son of God? If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not: but if I
do, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may know, and believe
that the Father is in me, and I in him.

THIS argument, however plain and conclusive, was far from satisfying the Jews;
their wicked hearts were hardened against the truth, and their deep rooted
prejudices were not to be overcome: so that what might have convinced an
honest, impartial inquirer after truth, had no tendency but to enrage them the
more; and our Lord well knowing that it would be to no purpose to reason with
so obstinate and envious a race, he, either by rendering himself invisible, or
casting confusion on their minds, departed imperceptibly from amongst them, and
so escaped their evil designs.

THE feast of dedication being over, our Redeemer departed from Jerusalem, and
retired into the country beyond Jordan, where he was received in a far
different manner than he had been at Jerusalem. The people in these parts had
attended on the preaching of John the Baptist, and no doubt remembered the
character he gave of the Messiah, who was shortly to appear; and finding the
predictions of the Baptist fully answered, and fulfilled in JESUS, great
numbers were excited to believe.

How long our exalted Savior, with his train, continued in this country,
cannot be clearly determined; but we have no account of his leaving these parts
till he was sent for to Bethany, to raise Lazarus from the dead: perhaps, the
inhabitants of this country enjoyed the unspeakable blessing of the presence of
the Son of God for a considerable time; and we are informed by the evangelists,
that while he continued in this country, he prayed with such fervency, that one
of his disciples, who was exceedingly affected both with the matter and manner
of his address, begged he would teach them to pray. It is probable this
disciple was not with JESUS in the beginning of his ministry, when he gave his
directions to his disciples concerning their devotions: our Lord, however, gave
them the same form of words as he had done before, and gave them some
directions respecting their conduct, and exhorted them to constancy and
fervency in their prayers: And I say unto you, said he, ask, and it shall be
given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
every one that asks receives: and he that seeks finds; and to him that
knocks it shall be opened.

AND, for their encouragement in the great duty of prayer, he referred to their
own feelings with respect to their children, and called upon them to judge by
these, of the readiness of their heavenly Father, to hear and grant their
petitions: 'If, said he, a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father,
will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? Or
if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?'

AFTER these things, our great Redeemer was applied to by the friends of one
who was possessed with a devil; he graciously condescended to grant the
request, and cast out the evil spirit, restoring the disordered person to
perfect tranquillity of mind: but some of the envious and unbelieving Jews were
present, and, as the Pharisees had formerly done, ascribed this stupendous work
to the power of the devil. The evangelist informs us, that he was casting out a
devil, and it was dumb; and it came to pass, when the devil was gone out the
dumb spoke; and the people wondered. But some of them said, 'He casts out
devils through Beelzebub, the chief of the devils.'

HOWEVER weak and frivolous this argument may seem, and however inconsistent
and absurd it may appear to impartial judges, it had considerable influence and
effect on the ignorant and illiterate, especially on such whose prejudices and
interests it favored. The Pharisees were exasperated at our great Redeemer's
conduct, in exposing and condemning their foolish traditions, and they indulged
a fixed and habitual hatred against him: these traditions were considered, by
the learned men and teachers of the age, as the very essentials of religion;
and by his opposing these, and exposing them to ridicule and contempt, they
concluded, that he must be a very wicked person. They had inspired the common
people with the highest veneration and reverence for these external ceremonious
performances, and, therefore, it is no wonder that they were ready to join them
in their resentment, and oppose and persecute a person who had spoken lightly
of things which they esteemed so sacred: the great men and leaders of the Jews,
had also a ^otion, that a false prophet had the power of working signs and
wonders, and received this power from, and exerted it by, the assistance of
wicked spirits; and, therefore, they were very ready to believe that our
Savior was in league with hell, and performed his miracles by the assistance
of the prince of darkness, with design to seduce the people with lying wonders,
and turn them from the worship of the true God.

AND wha^ ^nduced them the more readily to embrace this opinion, was the
testimony of the devils themselves, who, when they were cast out, very
frequently and without hesitation, confessed that JESUS was the Son of God;
which the Pharisees supposed they would not have done, except it was to carry
on the deception: the blinded rulers of Israel, not perceiving that the devils
were forced to confess the Messiah, and to submit to superior power. How absurd
and ridiculous soever this argument appears to the judicious and impartial, yet
as it coincided with the prejudice of the Jews, it had great influence on their
minds, and tended to fix them in final unbelief: and however we may be
surprised that such weak reasons should have any effect, considering what
multitudes were witnesses to the many miracles which the blessed JESUS
performed, and considering the nature of those miracles was such, as it is not
easy to suppose the Devil would have any hand in performing; yet experience
has abundantly convinced us, that such kind of argument^, joined with their
own prejudices, and superstitious opinions, had a great influence in fixing
that obstinate people in their infidelity.

BUT though some amongst the multitude of spectators, were content to ascribe
this miracle to the power of the Devil, others were not willing so hastily and
inconsiderately to form so base a conclusion, but desired to suspend their
opinion till other proofs might be produced, or our Redeemer might have an
opportunity to establish his character by a different kind of evidence; and
therefore, they desired him to prove himself the Messiah, by given them a sign
from heaven. But JESUS knowing their thoughts, and being privy to the rancour,
and wickedness of their hearts, refused to grant their request: but told them
that they were a wicked race of mortals, and discovered a very obstinate and
perverse disposition, by seeking a sign from heaven, after such a number of
miracles had been performed, as were sufficient to convince any impartial and
unprejudiced mind. He therefore informed them that no sign should be given
them, but that of the prophet Jonas, This, said he, is an evil generation: they
seek a sign; and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the
prophet.

WHEN JESUS had ended his discourse, one of the Pharisees present invited him
to dine with him; our Lord accepted the invitation, though probably it was not
love and good will which excited the Pharisee to make it; he accompanied the
inviter to his house, and sat down at the table without performing the ceremony
of washing, so carefully observed by the other guests: an omission of this kind
could not fail of surprising the Pharisee, as JESUS thereby showed an open
contempt of their traditions. Our Lord, who well knew the thoughts of this
bigoted, self-conceited Pharisee, said unto him, you Pharisees are remarkably
careful to keep every thing clean which touches your food, lest, by eating it,
your bodies should be polluted; but you take no care to cleanse your minds from
the pollution of wickedness. You cannot be ignorant that he who created the
body, also formed and inspired the soul; and can you imagine that the Almighty,
who approves of purity of body, because it is the work of his hands, and
because it conduces to the health thereof, will not also insist on a greater
purity of the soul, which is doubtless the far noblest part possessed by man.
Instead therefore, of that scrupulous care and exactness in washing your hands
when you sit down to meat, ye should be careful to cleanse your hearts from all
pollution, and fervently pray to the God of Israel to purify your minds; this
(...) under it i^^ossible for any external thing to defile you, and will at all
times be looked upon with complacency and delight by the God of purity. Now,
said he, do you Pharisees ^^ke clean the outside of the cup of platter; but
your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools, did not he that
made that which is without, make that which is within also? but rather give
alms of such things as ye have; and behold, all things are clean unto you.

SUCH was the language of the Son of God, but the proud self-conceited
Pharisees would not hear; however clear and convincing, however mild and
persuasive, the reasonings of our great Redeemer were, the inveterate
prejudices and rooted unbelief of these men, prevented these excellent
discourses from having their proper effect. Our blessed Savior therefore
treated them with more severity, and denounced against them the most heavy woes
for their hypocrisy, which was manifest in their scrupulous exactness in the
performance of the minutest part of the ceremonial observances, contained in
their traditions, while they were most scandalously careless and negligent in
the weightier matters of the law: Woe unto you, Pharisees! said he, for ye
tithe mint and rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment, and the
love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and
greeting in the markets. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for
ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not
aware of them.

THOUGH this discourse was principally assigned to affect the Scribes and
Pharisees, a certain lawyer, who sat at the table, thinking that this rebuke
a^^^cted persons of his profession, was very much offended; but our great
Redeemer, who regarded not the persons nor professions of men, plainly told him
what was his real character: Woe unto you also, ye lawyers, said he, for ye
lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the
burdens with one of your fingers.

THE blessed JESUS also blamed the conduct of the Scribes and Pharisees, for
building the sepulchers of the prophets, whom their fathers had murdered;
because they did not erect these edifices so much out of respect to the memory
of the deceased worthies, as to exhibit the utmost ostentation of piety, and
make themselves admired for their noble sentiments; while, by their constant
line of conduct, they gave reason to conclude, that they secretly entertained
the same hatred to reproof, and unconquerable obstinacy and perverseness, which
excited their fathers to the most unreasonable and cruel of their actions: 'Woe
unto you,' said he, 'for ye build the sepulcher of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your
fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build them sepulchers. Therefore
also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some
of them they shall slay and persecute: that the blood of all the prophets,
which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this
generation: from the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished
between the altar and the temple: verily, I say unto you, it shall be required
of this generation.' As our Redeemer well knew that this hardened and
unbelieving generation, would spill the blood of the Son of God, and of
consequence be guilty of the blackest, and most impious and horrid martyrdom,
which could be committed: he might justly represent them, as the most black,
horrid, and hateful race of murderers, as guilty in themselves, as much to be
abhorred, and equally deserving peculiar and distinguished vengeance, as if
they had shed all the innocent blood which ever had been spilt in the world.

OUR great Redeemer, after pronouncing these woes, turned his discourse against
the lawyers, and condemned them for filling the minds of the people with wrong
notions, arising from forced interpretations of the scriptures; by which means
the minds of the people were prejudiced against the gospel, and prevented from
receiving the truth: Woe unto you lawyers! said he, for ye have taken away the
key of knowledge: ye enter not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye
hindered.

HOWEVER just and reasonable these discourses were, the severity of the rebukes
contained in them, was highly provoking to those Scribes and Pharisees; they
were conscious of being guilty of the crimes laid to their charge, but their
pride could not bear the thoughts of being sunk in the opinion of the people,
who heard these remarks; their minds were agitated with conflicting passions,
but pride and envy urged them to the most base and despicable actions; their
rising resentment studied revenge, and they were so mean as to urge our exalted
Redeemer to discourse on various subjects, with no other view than to ensnare
him, and by that means render him obnoxious, either to the Roman government, or
to the common people amongst the Jews, the evangelist informs us, that, as he
said these things unto them, the Scribes and Pharisees began to urge him
vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things, laying in wait for him,
and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.

OUR great Redeemer baffled all their attempts, and leaving the house of the
Pharisee, he went amongst the multitude, which was waiting at the door; so
great were the numbers, and so hard did they press to get near the exalted
person of our Savior, that they trod one upon another. The first discourse he
held with the multitude, after he had left the Pharisee's house, was to warn
them against the pernicious poison of the Pharisee's example, who appeared in
disguise, and pretended to be the most strict in the observance of the law, the
most simple in their manners, and pure and spotless in their conversation,
when, at the same time, they were privately guilty of the most gross and
scandalous vices: our Lord, therefore, exhorted the multitude to be very
careful not to do any thing which would not bear the light, but let the whole
of their behavior be honest, open, and upright; for the time would come, when
all secrets will be revealed, and all the works of darkness brought to light:
'Beware ye,' said he, 'of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. For
there is nothing covered, which shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall
not be known. Therefore, whatever ye have spoken in darkness, shall be heard in
the light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the house tops.'

OUR Redeemer proceeded to observe, that an open, honest course of conduct,
above hypocrisy, and disdaining all disguise, would enable them to put their
trust in their Maker; while the contrary conduct tended to fill the mind with
that fear of man, which is so prejudicial to the welfare of the soul: he
therefore exhorted them, not to fear the malice or power of any of the sons of
men; these can extend no further than the death of the body, but cannot touch
the immortal soul, which may bid defiance to the impotent rage of the gloomy
tyrant, and never tremble at the fury of the oppressor: such weak and feeble
creatures as men, are not to be feared, but the wrath of the eternal God ought
rather to be dreaded; he is able, after he has destroyed the body, to confine
the soul in eternal torments. How happy are the persons who are under his holy
protection: all things are in his power, nothing can escape his notice, nor any
thing happen without his permission: And I say unto you, my friends, said our
great Redeemer, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that, have
no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: fear him,
which, after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you
fear him. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God? But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.

THE blessed JESUS thought fit to add, that the fear of man would be a snare to
great numbers, and prevent them from confessing the truth; but whoever were
overcome by this prevailing principle, and were ashamed to acknowledge our
Savior, would be finally rejected at the awful day, when he would sit in
judgment, and own and reward all his faithful followers: and whoever were
induced to speak evil of the Spirit of God, the grand agent in carrying on the
Messiah's kingdom in the hearts of men, our Redeemer informed them, should be
punished with peculiar and distinguished vengeance, by a justly provoked, sin
avenging God: Also I say unto you, said he, whosoever shall confess me before
men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God. And
whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him:
but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven.

HAVING shown the necessity of boldly confessing him before men, he proceeded
to encourage his disciples with the promise of immediate assistance, when they
were brought before princes, and the great men of the earth; which divine
assistance would deliver them from all embarrassment, respecting what they
should answer, when they were examined concerning their faith: And when they
bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no
thought how, or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say; for the Holy Ghost
shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought to say.

WHILE the blessed JESUS was delivering these exhortations to his disciples, a
person amongst the surrounding multitude, begged that he would interpose his
authority with his brother, in order to oblige him to divide the paternal
inheritance with him; but, as this decision properly belonged to the
magistrate, our blessed Savior, who did not come into the world to settle
worldly affairs, but to attend to those things which concerned the immortal
soul, declined the task, with this reply, Man, who made me a judge or a divider
over you? He took occasion, however, from hence, in the most solemn manner, to
caution his hearers against covetousness: for he observed that neither the
length nor the happiness of life depended on the largeness of possessions:
'Take heed,' said he, 'and beware of covetousness; for a man's life consists
not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.'

AND to enforce this important exhortation, he placed before them, in the
strongest, and most alarming point of light, an example of the bewitching
influence of wealth in the parable of the rich glutton, who was suddenly cut
off in the midst of his projects, and became a dreadful example of the folly of
amassing the riches of this world, and depending on the goods of this life,
without any regard to the government of God, or the interests of the immortal
soul. This wretched man, forgetting his mortality, made preparations for a long
and luxurious life, pleasing himself with the thoughts of a long succession of
sensual enjoyments: but, alas! whilst he was providing repositories for his
vast riches, he was arrested by the king of terrors, and hurried, without time
for consideration, into the eternal world. The parable which our great Redeemer
put forth on this occasion, is contained in these words: 'The ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully: and he thought within himself,
saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And
he said, this will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and
there will I bestow all my fruits, and my goods. And I will say to my soul,
soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry. But God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?'

WHAT an awful summons was this! How unexpected, how alarming, how dreadful!
The man lying on his bed, full of anxiety, care, and solicitude, not to acquire
wealth, but how to make room to lodge it, and how to enjoy it: doubtless he
thought, that riches gave him a title to every gratification and enjoyment
which the world can afford, or the sense and appetite of man partake of: his
restless thought ranges though the wide fields of dissipation and pleasure, and
such numerous scenes of imaginary delight press on his ravished senses, he
knows not where to fix. In the midst of this pleasing perplexity, a strange
messenger strikes at his breast. Who is it that thus alarms him? It is the
great king of terrors, he comes commissioned to destroy; the case admits of no
refusal or delay. Is there no refuge! is there no deliverer! Call the
physicians: they instantly attend, but with looks solemn and sad. What! is
there no hope? So often as you have partook of my bounty, and such obligations
as you are under to me. They all, with grief, declare the case beyond their
art. -- Then say, how long I have to live. -- The compass of the night
concludes your earthly race. -- How short the warning, and with what hasty
steps the dread destroyer advances to stop my breath! But is there no way to
appease him, and engage him to hold his hand? Will he not be persuaded? He
makes no agreement nor league with any. Will not pity excite him, or petitions
move him? He knows no pity, and he hears no prayers. Will not my riches bribe
him? Riches are unavailable in the hour of death; nor will mountains of gold
delay the awful stroke one moment. But how many wretched creatures are there,
who would be glad of his friendly aid to destroy a loathed existence? Why then
should he attack one who had such vast prospects of pleasure and delight before
him, and gloried in the expectation of many happy years to come? He acts
according to his commission from above, and the awful stroke no mortal can
escape or evade a moment. Then all is over! let me think who shall be my heir.
But reason failed; and, before that important point could be settled, the poor
deluded mortal expired. And now, instead of a long succession of sensual
delights, an awful eternity presents itself to view, and the poor soul is
terrified and plunged into the depths of despair and horror, at the prospect of
judgment to come. A dark night of horror in an instant overwhelms that soul,
which had promised itself so much ease and pleasure; and, instead of eating,
drinking, and making merry; instead of gay scenes of dissipation, and a variety
of sensual delights; eternal tortures, unspeakable thirst, weeping, wailing,
and gnashing of teeth, must be the portion of this miserable being to all
eternity.

So is he, added our great Redeemer, that lays up treasure for himself, and
is not rich toward God. Thus shall he be taken away from all that his soul
desires; thus shall he be torn from all his temporal prospects and pleasures;
none of his beloved enjoyments shall follow him; naked as he came shall he
depart out of the world; nor could all his riches, could he take them with him,
be able to procure him the least comfort or respite in this world of horrors.
How should this reflection awaken us from our pleasing dreams of comfort and
happiness, in this world of misery, this vale of tears: how should it convince
us of the uncertainty of all sublunary good, and the utter impossibility of the
things of this world to satisfy the soul, or made us truly happy: how should it
alarm us, when, planning fancied schemes of worldly pleasure or advantage,
without the least consideration of the great Disposer of all events: how should
it reconcile us to the disposal of infinite Wisdom, when our portion of
temporal things is small and scanty; and we are surrounded with difficulties
and troubles, without the assistance of the great King of the universe, all our
promises of security are vain and foolish; he can render all our labors
abortive; and the richest and most opulent person, when they think themselves
secure, and are planning schemes of pleasure and gratification, may, in a
moment, be stripped of all their possessions, and torn from all their comforts;
when the soul, naked and defenseless, and clothed in all its guilt, will enter
into an awful eternity, and be brought, trembling and astonished, to the throne
of its offended Maker.

OUR blessed Savior, having delivered this awakening parable, proceeded to
apply it to his disciples; and from hence took occasion to warn them of an over
solicitous care, concern, and desire after the things of this world. He rather
advised them to trust in God, whose fatherly care extends itself over all his
creatures: the fowls of heaven are fed by his bounty, and the lilies are
clothed in brighter hues, and more glorious raiment than the greatest monarch.
If, therefore, argued the blessed JESUS, the great Governor of all things so
carefully provides for the inferior part of his creation; if he feeds the
ravens and clothes the lilies; surely the children of men have the highest
reason to depend on his all-preserving, and all-supporting goodness; especially
those who have the well-grounded hopes, that the great Eternal Maker and
supporter of all things, has appointed them to happiness in a future state,
have little reason to doubt that he will not provide them all that is necessary
for their comfort and support in this: Fear not, said he, little flock: for it
is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. At the same time, he
gave his disciples another precept, particularly calculated for those times in
which the profession of the gospel exposed men to the loss of their substance:
sell that ye have, said he, and give alms; provide yourselves bags, which wax
not old, a treasure in the heavens, that fails not, where no thief
approaches, neither moth corrupts: for where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.

HAVING thus exhorted them to the disengagement of their affections from the
things of this world, he advised them to be at all times ready for the
discharge of their duty: Let, said he, your loins be girded about, and your
lights burning; and ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when
he will return from the wedding; that when he comes and knocks, they may
open unto him immediately.

THIS was spoken in allusion to the customs of the eastern countries, where
anciently great entertainments were made in the evening; and on these
occasions, servants demonstrated their diligence, by watching, and keeping
their loins girded that they might be ready to open the door on the first knock
of their master: nor was it uncommon for the master, in order to reward such a
servant, to order him a repast, and sometimes even to give it him with his own
hand. In allusion to which custom, our blessed Savior added, 'Blessed are
those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find watching: verily, I
say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat,
and will come forth and serve them.'

CHAPTER XXIII.
JESUS remarks the Ignorance and Stupidity of the Jews, in not discerning the
Times; and shows the Danger of neglecting the Means of Reconciliation offered
them: He shows, that temporal Calamities are no sure Signs of Sinfulness, but
that others should take warning by them, and repent: He delivers the Parable of
the Fig Tree, that was ordered to be cut down for being fruitless: He heals a
Woman that had been long bowed together, and puts the hypocritical Ruler of
the Synagogue to silence. CHRIST being asked of the number of the Saved, he
exhorts to strive to enter in at the straight Gate: He is warned to leave the
Dominions of Herod, but will not be diverted from his Course through Fear; and
lamenteth over the approaching Desolation of Jerusalem: He heals the Dropsy
on the Sabbath, and justifies his doing so: He recommendeth Humility, and
Hospitality toward the Poor: And delivers the Parable of the Marriage-Supper,
and of the Guests, who making excuses, were excluded, and their Rooms filled by
others.

HAVING concluded his instructions to his disciples, our Lord then addressed
the multitude, and remarked the prevailing infidelity of the Jewish nation, and
observed, that the evidences of his being the Messiah, were clearer and
stronger than those marks in the sky, which denominated fair o^ rainy weather
to be approaching: and though the people were very accute and segacious in the
one, they were unaccountably blind and undiscerning in the other: 'When ye see
a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There comes a shower; and so
it is. And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it
comes to pass. Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the
earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?'

BUT he proceeded to let them know, that their blindness, obstinacy, and
rebellion, should be severely punished, and that he would come in as unexpected
a manner, as a thief comes in the night: he therefore exhorted them to a
speedy reformation, telling them that they ought to consider well what way
their peace was to be expected, and diligently attend to those things which
would preserve them from the consequences of their rebellion. 'When thou go
with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence
that thou may be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison: I
tell thee thou shall not depart thence, till thou have paid the very last mite.'

SOME of his hearers thought proper to confirm this doctrine, by giving what
they thought an example of it: There were present at that season, some that
told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices; thinking that these persons had been guilty of some extraordinary
crime for which providence had permitted this dreadful punishment to befall
them: but our blessed Savior expressly told them, that they were much mistaken
in this conclusion, for this deplorable calami^y was no indication that these
Galileans were greater sinners than their countrymen. At the same time, he
exhorted them to improve such instances of calamity and misery, as incitements
to their own repentance, assuring them that if they neglected so just and
necessary a work, they should all perish: And Jesus answering, said unto them,
Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because
they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: but, except you repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

HE further illustrated this doctrine, by remarking, that this way of
interpreting the dispensations of providence, would lead them to erroneous
conclusions, whenever they heard of unexpected and dreadful evils falling on
the sons of men; and instanced the case of the eighteen persons on whom the
tower of Siloam fell, and crushed them to pieces: Or, said he, those eighteen
upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were
sinner above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay: but, except you
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

OUR Lord also endeavored to rouse them to the consideration of their state,
by the parable of the fig tree, which the master of the vineyard, after finding
it three years barren, ordered to be destroyed, but at the earnest request of
the dresser of the vineyard, it was spared one year longer: A certain man, said
he, had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit
thereon, and found none. Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it
down, why cumbereth it the ground? And he answering, said unto him, lord, let
it alone this year also, till I dig about it, and dung it: and if it bear
fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.

BY this parable, our Lord represented the goodness, and forbearance of his
Almighty Father, manifested toward the Jewish nation, where his Son had now
been about three years, preaching the kingdom of God; and though they might be
justly destroyed for their obstinacy and perverseness, yet the awful stroke was
delayed, and space was given them for repentance; but he gave them a strong
intimation, in this parable, that if they persisted, they must expect that
vengeance will not always sleep, but, after all the divine forbearance had been
abused, would awake to their sudden and dreadful destruction.

WHEN our Lord was teaching in one of the synagogues in Perea, on the
Sabbath Day, he observed a woman, who, for the space of eighteen years, had not
been able to stand upright: a person laboring under so dreadful a disorder,
could not fail of exciting the compassion of the benevolent Savior of sinners,
he beheld this affecting object with pity, and he removed her complaint; she
who came to the synagogue bowed down to the ground with an infirmity, returned
to her house upright, being by the all-powerful Son of God, restored to perfect
health.

THIS benevolent action, which surely deserved the thanks of the whole
congregation, so highly offended the master of the synagogue, that he openly
testified his displeasure, and reproved the people, and represented them as
Sabbath Breakers, because they came that day to be healed: There are six days,
said this surly, self-conceited ruler to the people, in which men ought to
work: in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath Day.

BUT our Lord soon silenced this self-conceited Pharisee, by observing that he
had not deviated from their own avowed practice: they made no scruple of
loosing their cattle, and leading them to the water on the Sabbath Day, because
the mercy of the action sufficiently justified them for performing it; and
surely his action of loosing, by a single word, a woman, a rational creature, a
daughter of Abraham, who had been bound by an incurable distemper, the tedious
space of eighteen years, was abundantly justified: nor could this bigoted ruler
have thought otherwise, had not his reason been blinded by his superstition.
Such was the sentiment of the Son of God, who answered him with this severe
rebuke, 'Thou hypocrite, does not each one of you on the Sabbath, loose his ox
or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering? And ought not this
woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo, these eighteen
years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath Day?' And when he had said these
things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all the people rejoiced for all
the glorious things that were done by him.

FROM this instance we may remark the evil effects of superstition and a
bigoted attachment to customs and ceremonies, which have no foundation in
reason nor the revealed will of God; these pernicious principles oppose the use
of the faculties, root compassion out of the heart, and destroy the feelings of
humanity.

OUR Lord having silenced the proud ruler of the synagogue, and received the
acclamations and applauses of the people, he reflected with pleasure on the
truth, reason, and divine power from above, which support his kingdom; and, on
this occasion, he repeated the parables of the grain of mustard seed, and the
leaven, to show the future success of the gospel, and the power and influence
of his religion on the hearts and lives of men, and its rapid progress through
the world, notwithstanding the opposition of the great men of the earth, and
the fury of the unthinking multitude.

OUR Lord having thus sown the seeds of the gospel in the country of Perea, he
crossed Jordan, and proceeded by slow and short stages toward Jerusalem,
preaching the gospel in every village, and publishing the glad-tidings of
salvation to the inhabitants of the countries he passed through.

WHILE he was thus prosecuting the great work of instructing mankind, one of
the persons who accompanied him, inquired, 'Lord, are there few that be saved.'
Probably the person who proposed this question, had heard our Lord describe the
success of the gospel, by the parables of the mustard seed, and the leaven; and
had no further views of the kingdom of the Messiah, than the setting up a
temporal dominion. These notions were entertained by the Jews in general, and
induced them to conclude, that CHRIST hereby meant no more than a temporal
salvation. JESUS, to convince this curious inquirer, and the rest of the Jews,
that he had no intention to erect a secular kingdom, answered his question in a
spiritual manner, by which he gave the Jews to understand, that very few of
them would be partakers of the honor and happiness of his kingdom; and he
exhorted them to use their utmost efforts to know the truth, and become members
of the church, and heirs of glory, by improving the means which were afforded
them; for the time would soon come, he assured them, when the means which they
now enjoyed would be taken away, and they would perceive their state to be
finally and irrevocably determined, and then, however earnestly they might
desire such opportunities as they now enjoyed, they should not be able to
attain them: Strive, said he, to enter in at the straight gate: for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. When once the Master of
the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand
without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and be
shall answer, and say unto you, I know you not whence you are. This sentence
our Lord informed them would be final, and not to be altered by their most
earnest petitions and expostulations: Then, added our great Redeemer, shall ye
begin to say, We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in
our streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are;
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. There shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. And they shall
come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South,
and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And behold, there are last which
shall be first, and there are first which shall be last.

SOON after our blessed Savior had delivered these sentiments, some of the
Pharisees thinking to intimidate him, and cause him to depart out of the
country, came to him and pretended that Herod had a design against his life. It
is not likely that Herod, who had suffered so much remorse on account of his
having put John the Baptist to death, should so soon attempt the life of one
whose works declared him to be a greater prophet; perhaps, that prince might
wish JESUS to depart out of his territories, though he durst not use force
against him: nor is it unlikely that the Pharisees were desirous of his
departure out of the country, because his discourses tended to expose their
hypocrisy, and lessen them in the opinion of the people. The answer which our
great Redeemer made to this message, is contained in the following words: 'Go
ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures today, and
tomorrow, and the third day I shall be perfected. Nevertheless, I must walk
today, and to morrow, and the day following: for it cannot be, that a prophet
perish out of Jerusalem.'

HAVING returned this answer to the Pharisees, and considering the treatment
which the prophets had met with from the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and well
knowing the wickedness of that unbelieving city, and their designs against his
life, he pathetically lamented their obstinacy and perverseness, and the
terrible desolation which would soon overtake them for their sins; O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, said he, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent
unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen
gathers her brood under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is
left unto you desolate; and verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until
the time come, when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord.

ONE of the chief of the Pharisees, soon after our Lord had made this pathetic
exclamation, invited him to his house, to take a repast: JESUS well knew, that
this invitation did not proceed from hearty good will: but, as he never shunned
an opportunity of doing good, even to his most implacable enemies, he thought
fit to accept it. It was the Sabbath Day, and when he had entered the
Pharisee's house, a man was brought before him who was diseased with a dropsy.
The Pharisees well knew the benevolent disposition of our great Redeemer, and
they thought so miserable an object would not fail of exciting his compassion,
and cause him to work a miracle on that day, which would give them the
opportunity of accusing him as a prophaner of the Sabbath. JESUS, who knew the
secret thoughts of their hearts, asked the Pharisees, and lawyers, whether it
was lawful to heal on the Sabbath Day? But they refusing to give any answer to
the question, our Lord laid his hand on the diseased person, and immediately
his body was reduced to its former dimensions, and his health and strength
returned. So kind, so salutary and benevolent, as well as wonderful an action,
ought to have convinced the Pharisees, that the person who wrought it, must be
endowed with power from on high, as no less than the mighty power of God could
produce such events; or if they could suppose that wicked agents had the power,
that is not the way in which they might be expected to exert it; but these
hypocritical wretches, instead of being persuaded that JESUS was sent from God,
and exerted his miraculous powers for the good of mankind, were laboring to
turn this miracle to his disadvantage. But our Lord soon put an end to their
wicked designs, by proving, that according to their own allowed practice, he
had done nothing but what was lawful: Which of you, said he, shall have an ass,
or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the
Sabbath day? Our Lord's argument stood thus, If a misfortune happens to one of
your beasts, you make no scruple of assisting it on the Sabbath, though the
action be attended with considerable labor: and surely, I may relieve a
descendant of Abraham, when nothing more is required, than touching him with my
hand. This reasoning was so strong, forcible, and conclusive, and, at the same
time, so simple and easy, that the most illiterate of mankind, must see its
propriety and feel its force, and the most prejudiced could not contradict it.
This was manifest from the profound silence with which these remarks of our
Lord were heard, and which continued after he had done speaking. None of his
adversaries, however inveterate their malice, or hot their resentment, durst at
this time appear against him, for they could not answer again to these things.

BEFORE they sat down to meat, our blessed Savior had an opportunity of
remarking the pride of the Pharisees, which manifested itself by an anxious and
eager desire to obtain the most honorable place at the table; nor did he fail,
on this occasion, to give them such a rebuke, as their ridiculous behavior
deserved. To make them sensible of their folly, our Lord called upon them to
consider, that pride generally exposes the person to frequent mortifications,
and many affronts, while an humble deportment is a sure way to honor and
respect: 'When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding,' said he, 'sit not down
in the highest room; for lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden, of
him; and he that bade thee and him, come and say to thee, Give this man place;
and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden go
and sit down in the lowest room; that when he that bade thee comes, he may say
unto thee, Friend, go up higher: then shall thou have worship in the presence
of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever exalts himself shall be
abased; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.'

HAVING directed this discourse to the Pharisees in general, our Lord turned to
the master of the house, and said unto him, 'When thou make a dinner, or a
supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy
rich neighbors. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, and the blind:' limit not thy hospitality to the rich an great, but let
the poor and needy be partakers of thy bounty: and thou shall be blessed, added
our Lord, for they cannot recompense thee; but thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the (...).

WHILE our Lord was thus discoursing, one of the Pharisees, seeming to be
ravished with the delightful prospect of the happiness which good men will
enjoy in the heavenly world, cried out, 'Blessed is he that shall eat bread in
the kingdom of God.' Our Lord, in answer to this, took occasion to deliver to
the company at the table, the parable of the marriage-supper: 'A certain man,'
said he, 'made a great supper, and bade many; and sent his servant at
supper-time, to say to them that were bidden, Come: for all things are now
ready. And they all with one consent began to make excuses. The first said unto
him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray
thee have me excused. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I
go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused. And another (...), I have
married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. So that servant came, and showed
his lord these things. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his
servant, go out quickly into the streets, and lanes of the city, and bring in
hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. And the servant
said, lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. And the
lord said unto the servant, go out into the highways and hedges, and compel
them to come in, that my house may be filled: for I say unto you, that none of
those men which were bidden, shall taste of my supper.'

BY this parable, our Lord elegantly and beautifully described the infidelity
of the Jews, and their final rejection of the heavenly message, while the poor,
blind, despise^ Gentiles, brought by a powerful grace, like the persons who
were compelled to com^ in from the highways and hedges, would be enabled to
believe in the Son of God, (...) become thereby partakers of those blessings,
which the unbelieving Jews rejected and despised.

CHAPTER XXIV.
JESUS being surrounded by vast multitudes of People, he advises those who are
willing to be (...) Disciples, to examine beforehand their resolution in Case
of Persecutions. The Pharisees murmur at CHRIST for receiving Sinners: He
delivers the Parable of the lost Sheep, and Piece of Silver; of the Prodigal
Son, and of the unjust Steward. CHRIST reproves the Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, who were covetous, and derided him: and delivers the Parable of the
rich Man and Lazarus the Beggar.

AFTER our blessed Savior had departed from the Pharisee's house, great
multitude^ of people thronged about him, to hear his doctrine, and to behold
his wondrous works: but the people in general, mistook the nature of his
kingdom; for it (...) the general expectation that he was going to establish
the Messiah's throne in Jerusalem, and from thence to conquer all the nations
in the world, and render them tributary to his power.

As our Lord well knew that the people followed him with such expectations, he
took the first opportunity to undeceive them, and to declare in the plainest
terms, that his kingdom was not of this world, and, of consequence, those who
followed him for temporal advantage, would be sure to find themselves mistaken;
for, on the contrary, (...) disciples must expect^^^ be persecuted from city to
city, and hated of all men for hi^ name's sake. And he further observed, that
it was necessary for all who would be hi^ true followers, to prefer his service
to the riches, grandeur, and pleasures of the world, and to manifest by their
conduct, that they had a greater value for him, than for (...) dearest objects
of their affections: If any man come to me, said he, and hate not his father
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, an^ his own
life also, (...) cannot be my disciple. And whosoever does not bear his cross,
and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

AND to show the folly of expecting to partake of the blessings of the
Messiah's kingdom, while they preferred their worldly attachments, to our great
Redeemer, he compared the case of such persons to that of an unthinking
builder, and of a rash and forward warrior* the former was obliged to leave his
st^^cture (...), because he had foolishly begun the building before he had
computed the cost; and the latter reduced to the disgrace, either of being
shamefully defeated, or meanly suing for peace, because he had rashly declared
war before he had compared his own strength with that of the enemy: So
likewise, added our great Redeemer, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not
all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.

THE fame of the miracles which JESUS daily wrought, and the divine discourses
which he delivered, being sp^ead in the most obscure and unpolite parts of the
country, several The Prodigal Son returning to his Father's House* a Parable of
our BLESSED SAVIOR. Published by Bird^ all and M^^^t NEW YORK.
persons of infamous lives, and abandoned characters, came amongst the crowds
which pressed to hear him. These persons, conscious of their unworthiness,
approached our great Redeemer with the highest reverence, and heard him with
the most respectful and steady attention. This opportunity was readily embraced
by the great Savior of sinners, who, far from upbraiding them with their
former wickedness, or spurning them from him with contempt, kindly condescended
to instruct them in those things which concerned their everlasting peace, and
not only taught them in the fields, but went with them to their houses, and
kindly condescended to teach them the nature of his kingdom, and lead them in
the way of eternal life and happiness.

THIS condescending goodness in our great Redeemer, was highly offensive to the
proud, self-conceited, self-righteous Pharisees; they wanted to be accepted on
the footing of their own unworthiness, and could not bear the thoughts of the
infinite mercy of God, manifested to the greatest of sinners; and, therefore,
with hearts full of envious pride, they advanced it as a ground of reproach
against our great Redeemer, that this man receives sinners, and eats with
them. Their pride could not bear the thought, that these persons whom they so
much despised, should be looked upon by our Savior with more kindness than
themselves; and they thought his condescension unworthy the character of a
prophet. They had no other views of divine acceptance, than such as had an
immediate reference to the law; and the infinite mercy of God to sinners,
manifested in the gospel of his Son, was what they could not understand; our
great Redeemer therefore, to convince them of their ignorance, to check their
abominable pride and self-sufficiency, to display the extensive and abundant
mercy of God to sinful man, and to vindicate his own conduct, in conversing
with the meanest and most contemptible persons, proposed three parables to
their consideration.

THE first of these parables was that of the lost sheep, which the Divine
Instructor delivered in the following words: 'What man of you, having an
hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninety and nine in
the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he
has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he comes
home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying unto them, rejoice
with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost:' Thus, by the natural turn
of the human mind, which is restless and uneasy under the mortification of
losing part of its property, and fixes with such eager attention on that which
it has lost, that it overlooks those valuable objects which it has in
possession, our great Redeemer describes the regard which God has to his people
while they wander from him in a lost, perishing condition; and by the joy which
expands the human heart, when that which had long been given up for lost, is
recovered; our Lord displays the kind reception which the worst of sinners will
find, when they are made sensible of their evil ways, and are enabled to
believe in the Son of God for life and salvation. And in this elegant,
well-chosen parable, he further describes the joy of the heavenly inhabitants,
when any of the sheep of Christ, who have long wandered from his fold, are
convinced of their desperate condition, humbled under a sense of their
unworthiness and wickedness, and are enabled to return: I say unto you, said
he, that likewise joy shall be in heaven ^ver one sinner that repents, more
than over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance.

THERE is no person on earth so just and holy, and whose conduct has been so
regular, and uniformly correct, as to need no repentance; but the proud
Pharisees, to whom our Lord directed these parables, would fain have been
esteemed by the world as such persons; and these are particularly referred to
in this representation, which was intended to display the amazing and infinite
extent of divine forgiveness. A second parable which our great Redeemer
published with the same view, was that of the lost piece of silver: 'Either,'
said the divine instructor, 'what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she
lose one piece, does not light a candle, and sweep the house, and search
diligently till she find it? and when she has found it, she calls her
friends and neighbors together, saying, rejoice with me; for I have found the
piece which I have lost: Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence
of the angels of God over one sinner that repents.'

THIS parable is founded on the same principles, and published with the same
design as the former, only the case and circumstances are varied; and our great
Redeemer condescends in various forms and methods of address to inculcate the
same truth. The infinite mercy of God to sinners, and the kind reception they
will find, when they are enabled to repent and return, is the great doctrine
which runs through his gospel, and this is the great design of all his
undertakings; to accomplish this, to remove every difficulty which attended it,
to overcome and subdue every power which opposed it, and to publish the
glad-tidings to a sinful world, he left the glories of the heavenly regions, he
laid aside the dignity and glory of his heavenly nature, and condescended to
become man; he was a partaker of the evils consequent on sin, that sinful men
might be delivered from them; he was a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief, that we might be partakers of the substantial and eternal joy; and he
died that we might live. To publish this great truth, and to prevail on the
world to receive it, was the whole design of his ministry; every doctrine he
advanced, every miracle which he wrought, had a natural tendency to promote
this benevolent design; and this great end, in various forms of instruction,
and various methods of address, he invariably pursued during the time of his
abode on earth. And that no method of address, no form of instruction, might be
omitted, which would powerfully operate on the mind and prepare it for the
reception of a truth, so worthy of God, so friendly to man, our Lord
condescended to appeal to the feelings of humanity; and from the natural
affection which an offended father feels for a repenting son, he urged the
certainty and the extent of divine forgiveness.

THE parable which our great Redeemer proposed with this view, is the finest
picture of nature; it contains all the beauties of just description, and
particularly calculated to engage the attention and affect the heart; the
evangelist Luke has given it in the following words: A certain man had two
sons: And the younger of them said to his Father, Father, give me the portion
of goods that falls to me. And he divided unto them his living. And not many
days after, the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a
far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. And when he
had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in
want. And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly with
the husks that the swine did eat; and no man gave unto him. And when he came to
himself, he said, how many hired servants of my father's have bread enough, and
to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and I
will say unto him, father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and
am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.
And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his
father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck and kissed
him. And the son said unto him, father, I have sinned against heaven, and in
thy sight, and am no more worthy ^^ be called thy son. But the father said to
his servants, bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on
his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it;
and let us eat, and be merry: for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he
was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry. Now his eldest son was in
the field; and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and
dancing. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.
And he said unto him, thy brother is come: and thy father has killed the
fatted calf, because he has received him safe and sound. And he was angry, and
would not go in; therefore came his father out, and entreated him. And he
answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither
transgressed I at any time thy commandment, and yet thou never gave me a kid,
that I might make merry with my friends: but as soon as this thy son was come,
which has devoured thy living with harlots, thou have killed for him the
fatted calf. And he said unto him, son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found. Luke xv.11.
to the end.

THE design of this parable is manifested at first sight, and stands a
beautiful and unfading memorial of the fullness, the freeness, and extent of
divine mercy to the greatest of sinners; it not only declares that it is the
fixed determination of heaven to forgive, and that mercy is an essential
attribute of deity, the brightest star in the eternal crown; but it shows that
this glorious disposition of heaven to forgive, entirely coincides with the
feelings of humanity; for the eternal God condescends to appeal to that
paternal tenderness which he has planted in the human breast, in vindication
of his own conduct in pardoning sinners, and in explanation of the nature and
extent of his mercy.

IF this parable be applied to the particular case with which it
stands-connected, it contains a reproof which the blessed JESUS directed to the
Pharisees for their murmuring (...) his condescending kindness to publicans and
sinners; and hereby they are taught that if they would resemble the holy and
happy inhabitants of the celestial regions, they would not murmur and complain,
and look down with envious pride, and sullen contempt while he conversed with
those who were noted for being habitually and prevailingly wicked, but would
rejoice to see such persons pursue those methods which might tend to their
reformation and final salvation; nor would the gladness of heart they might
express on this occasion, be any reproach to that strictness and purity which
they value themselves upon; 'for there is joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons which need no
repentance.'

OUR Lord having thus vindicated his own conduct, in his condescending kindness
to publicans and sinners, by showing the vast extent of divine mercy, and the
pleasure which the happy inhabitants of the heavenly regions, take in the
pardon of the worst of sinners, and their restoration to divine favor; he then
delivered a parable to impress on the minds of his hearers the necessity of
attending to the concerns of futurity. This he exemplified in the case of the
unjust steward, who being warned by his lord to give up his stewardship, took
such measures as were likely to procure him a subsistence when he had lost his
present employment: 'There was,' said our great Redeemer, 'a certain rich man,
which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his
goods. And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of
thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou may be no longer steward.
Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord takes away
from me the stewardship; I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed. I am resolved what
to do, that when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into
their houses. So he called every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said
unto the first, how much owe thou unto my lord? And ^e said, an hundred
measures of oil. And he said unto him, take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and
write fifty. Then said he to another, and how much owe thou? And he said, an
hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, take thy bill, and write
fourscore. And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done
wisely: for the children of this world are wiser in their generation, than the
children of light.' The scope of our Lord's argument in this passage, is
apparently this: as a prudent thought for futurity, and a steady pursuit of
those means which tend to prevent apprehended evils, though those means may not
be approved as lawful in themselves, are sufficient to denominate a person
wise: with what earnest attention, and unremitting application, ought those who
have eternity in view, to pursue the precepts of heavenly wisdom, and to make
all lesser events subservient to the greater end of obtaining eternal
happiness: 'And I say unto you,' added our great Redeemer, 'make to yourselves
friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive
you into everlasting habitations.'

THE Pharisees, whose hearts were set upon the things of this world, and who
had but very feeble and contracted views of eternal things, derided this
doctrine of our great Redeemer; but he after giving them a seasonable reproof,
produced by a striking and most remarkable parable, to show the vanity of
riches, and the vast importance of eternal things: 'There was,' said he, 'a
certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared
sumptuously every day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was
laid at his gate, full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which
fell from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.
And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into
Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell he lifted
up his eyes, being in torment, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
bosom. And he cried, and said, father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue;
for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, son, remember that thou, in
thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but
now he is comforted and thou art tormented. And besides all this, between us
and you, there is a great gulf sixed: so that they which would pass from hence
to you cannot: neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. Then
he said, I pray thee, therefore, father, that thou would send him to my
father's house; for I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest
they also come into this place of torment. Abraham says unto him, they have
Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham;
but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto
him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead.'

THIS parable is the most awful and alarming, and the most fully demonstrative
of the immortality of the soul, and it is existence in a separate state, of any
we meet with in the sacred volume: the imagery is so beautiful and it is drawn
in such lively colors, that it has rather been looked upon as an history than
a parable in all ages of the church; many of the most affecting, the most awful
and important lessons may be learned from it, and such sentiments are here
displayed, as are not to be found in any other part of the gospel.

IN the first place, we learn the shortness and uncertainty of this present
state, and how little the attainment of vast possessions, in this world,
conduces to the best interest of mankind. We have here held up to our view, a
rich man, in all the grandeur, glory, and profusion of oppulence, surrounded
with all the honors, and partaking of all the pleasures which earth can give:
The rich man's wealth, the wisest of men informs us, is his strong city: and as
an high wall in his own conceit. The rich man thinks that his our Blessed
Savior's Parable of Lazarus the Beggar who was fed with the crumbs which fell
from the Rich Man's Table
riches entitle him to every honor, and to the participation of every thing
which can be enjoyed: but how is he pained to find himself most deplorably
mistaken, when the mind, satiated with enjoyment, and surfeited with pleasure,
grows sick of delight; amidst the abundance of riches, the soul starves, it
finds nothing that is consistent with its spiritual nature, and would pine for
want of solid enjoyment in the possession of a whole material world.

BUT how short and uncertain are those sickly joys, those surfeiting pleasures
which the rich man is able to partake of: The rich man, we are informed, died,
and was buried. The pomp and pageantry, the luxury and all the consequence in
the world which riches give their possessor, will not enable him to face the
great king of terrors, Death: and as the utmost profusion of riches, cannot
enable their possessor to face the pale tyrant with composure, neither can they
bribe him to one moment's delay: No man has power to retain the spirit in the
day of death: the soul, all black and horrid with guilt, trembles at the
approach of the eternal world, and with vast amazement and terror, strives to
evade the awful stroke, but all in vain: there is no discharge in that war: the
case admits of no refusal or delay: the unhappy mortal falls, and all that his
riches can do, is only to carry him with prodigious pomp and splendor to the
grave.

FROM this awful and affecting parable, we likewise learn the state of the
dead, and the capacity of the separated soul, to receive happiness or misery
before the resurrection of the body; The rich man died and was buried, we are
informed, and what then? Did he enter into rest, or did he remain in a state of
insensibility until the day of resurrection? Neither of these; but in hell he
lifted up his eyes. The unhappy mortal's pleasures and sensual gratifications
are all past; and now, all naked, defenseless, and forlorn, he falls headlong
into the depths of misery and woe: the black regions of horror and despair are
now his portion: he lies in inexpressible torment, and, amidst these fiery
regions, sees nothing but what tends to increase and aggravate his woes: He
lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus
in his bosom. The poor beggar that lay at his gate, all covered with sores,
died and was buried, and in the dust lost all his meanness, and was equal to
the richest man on earth: there is no pre-eminence in the grave; for the small
and great are there, and the servant is free from his master. But how great the
difference between the poorest saint and richest sinner; Lazarus, at his death,
was carried by angels into Abraham's bosom, while the rich man descended into
hell, and lift up his eyes in torment.

THUS having reprimanded the Pharisees, he took occasion to speak of affronts
and offenses, described their evil nature, and their dreadful punishment: 'It
is impossible, said he, but that offense will come: but woe unto him through
whom they come. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little
ones.

OUR Lord spoke also against a quarrelsome temper in his servants, especially
in the ministers and teachers of religion, prescribed a seasonable and prudent
reprehension of the fault, accompanied with forgiveness on the person injured,
as the best means of disarming the temptations that may arise from thence:
'Take heed to yourselves: if thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and
if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day turn to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall
forgive him.'

THIS discourse on forgiveness, uttered at a time when the Pharisees had just
upbraided him, by called him a false teacher, sufficiently proves how truly he
forgave them all the personal injuries they had committed against him; and
should be a powerful recommendation of that amiable virtue, the forgiveness of
injuries.

HOWEVER beautiful these discourses of our Savior appear, when examined with
attention, they seem to have staggered the faith of his disciples and
followers; perhaps they still imagined, that he would shortly erect a temporal
kingdom, and distribute among them the rewards they expected for their
services. If so, they might well desire their Master to increase their faith:
as discourses like these had a very different tendency from what might
naturally have been expected from one who was going to establish the throne of
David, and extend his scepter over all the kindoms of the earth; but however
this be, our Savior told them, that if they had the smallest degree of true
faith, it would be sufficient for overcoming all temptations, even those which
seems as difficult to be conquered, as the plucking up trees and planting them
in the ocean: If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto
this sycamine-tree, be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the
sea, and it should obey you. Luke xvii.6.

CHAPTER XXV.
The Sickness and Death of Lazarus: JESUS receives an Account thereof; and, in
his Way to Bethany, he heals ten Lepers in a Village of Samaria: He arrives at
Bethany, and raises Lazarus to Life, after he had been dead four Days: Many
Jews believe: The Pharisees hold a Council against JESUS: Caiphas prophesies:
JESUS retireth to Ephraim, a City on the Borders of the Wilderness, where he
shows the spiritual Nature of the Kingdom of God, foretells the Destruction
of the Jewish State, and instructs his Disciples concerning the Coming of the
Son of Man. JESUS delivers the Parable of the unjust Judge, and importunate
Widow, and that of the Pharisee and the Publican: He answers the Question of
the Pharisees concerning Divorces: He receives the little Children with
Tenderness, that were brought unto him, and blesses them.

SHORTLY after our blessed Savior had finished these discourses, one of his
friends, named Lazarus, fell sick at Bethany, a village two miles from
Jerusalem, but at a great distance from the countries beyond Jordon, where
JESUS was now preaching the gospel. The sisters of Lazarus, finding his
sickness was of a dangerous kind, thought proper to send an account of it to
JESUS; being firmly pursuaded, that he who had cured so many strangers, would
readily come and give health to one whom he loved in so tender a manner; Lord,
said they, behold he whom thou love is sick: they did not add, come down and
heal him, make haste and save him from the grave; it was sufficient for them to
propose their necessities to their Lord, who was both able and willing to help
them in their distress.

WHEN Jesus heard that, he said, this sickness is not unto death; words which
were doubtless carried to Martha and Mary, and must strangely surprise them,
and exercise both their's and his disciples faith; since it is probable, that
before the messenger arrived at Bethany, Lazarus had expired. Soon after, JESUS
positively assured his disciples, that Lazarus was dead.

ST. LUKE, in the beginning of his account, tells us, that JESUS loved Martha,
and her sister, and Lazarus; and that after he had received the message, he
abode two days in the same place where he was. His design in this might be to
insinuate, that his lingering so long after the message came, did not proceed
from a want of concern for his friends, but happened according to the counsels
of his own wisdom: for the length of time which Lazarus lay in the grave, put
his death beyond all possibility of doubt, removed every suspicion of fra^d,
and consequently afforded JESUS a fit opportunity of displaying the love he
bore to Lazarus, as well as his own almighty power, in his undoubted
resurrection from the dead. His sisters, indeed, were by this means kept a
while in painful anxiety, on account of their brother's life, and at last were
pierced by the sorrow of seeing him die: yet they must surely think themselves
abundantly recompensed, by the evidence accruing to the gospel from this
astonishing miracle, as well as by the inexpressible surprise of joy they felt,
when they again had their brother restored from the dead.

AT the expiration of two days, JESUS said to his disciples, Let us go into
Judea again, John xi.7. His disciples were astonished at this proposal, and the
recollection of his late danger in that country alarmed them: Master, said
they, the Jews of late thought to stone thee; and go though thither again?
Will thou hazard thy life amongst those who desired nothing more than to find
an opportunity of killing thee? Jesus answered, are there not twelve hours in
the day? If any man walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he s^eth the
light of this world: but if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him.

THUS he intended to inform his disciples, that they had no reason to fear,
seeing his day was appointed, and the light of the Almighty was in him; that he
could not stumble nor fall, before the night of his passion approached, but
that night was coming when no man could work. JESUS having thus removed their
groundless apprehensions, and strengthened their faith, that he might clearly
explain to them the cause of his going into Judea again, told them, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep. The disciples
understanding his discourse in a literal sense, replied, Lord, if he sleep, he
shall do well; his distemper is abated, and he in all probability is
recovering. It would be, therefore, highly unreasonable in us to take two days
journey only to awake him out of his sleep. Thus they covered their fears, and
hinted to their Master, that it would be far safer to continue where they were,
than to take a hazardous journey into Judea. They were, however mistaken: for
the evangelist informs us, that he spoke of his death, but they thought, that
he had spoken of taking rest in sleep. JESUS, therefore, to remove any doubts,
said plainly to them, Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes, that I was
not there to the intent that you might believe: I am glad for your sakes, that
I was not in Judea before he died; for had I been there, and restored him to
his health, your faith in me, as the Messiah, must have wanted the great
confirmation it shall now receive, by your beholding me raise him thus
miraculously from the dead.

JESUS CHRIST having thus given his disciples a proof of his divine knowledge,
and of the designs of providence in the death of Lazarus, added, Nevertheless
let us go unto him. Thus JESUS, who could have raised Lazarus without opening
his lips, or rising from his seat, leaves his place of retirement beyond
Jordan, and takes a long Journey into Judea, where the Jews lately attempted to
kill him; because his being present in person, and raising Lazarus again to
life, before so many witnesses at Bethany, where he died, and was so well
known, would be the means of bringing the men of that, and of future ages, to
believe in his doctrine, so well fitted to prepare them for (...) to eternal
life; an admirable proof, as an emblem of which, he gave them in this miracle.

OUR Lord having thus declared his resolution of returning into Judea, and
Thomas conceiving nothing less than destruction from such a journey, yet
unwilling to forsake his Master, said, Let us also go that we may die with him.
Let us not forsake our Master in this dangerous journey, but accompany him into
Judea, that if the Jews, whose inveteracy we are well acquainted with, should
take away his life, we may also die with him.

THIS journey being thus resolved on, JESUS departed with his disciples, and in
his way to Bethany, passed through Samaria and Galilee: 'And as he entered into
a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar
off: and they lifted up their voices, and said, JESUS Master, have mercy on us.
And when he saw them, he said unto them, go show yourselves unto the priests.
And it came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed.' Luke xvii.12. etc.

ONE of these miserable objects, was a native of the country, who perceiving
that his cure was completed, came back praising God for the great mercy he had
received; he had before kept at a distance from our Savior, but being now
sensible that he was entirely clean, approached his benefactor, that all might
have an opportunity of beholding the miracle, and fell on his face at his feet,
thanking him in the most humble manner, for his condescension in healing him of
so terrible a disease. JESUS, in order to intimate, that those who were
enlightened with the knowledge of the truth, ought at least, to have shown as
great a sense of piety and gratitude as this Samaritan, asked, 'were there not
ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There are not found that have returned to
give glory to God, save this stranger.'

OUR Savior and his disciples now continued their journey toward Bethany,
where he was informed by some of the inhabitants of that village, that Lazarus
was not only dead, as he had foretold, but had now lain in the grave four days.
The afflicted sisters (...) overwhelmed with sorrow: so that many of the Jews
from Jerusalem, came to comfort them on the occasion.

IT appears, the news of our Lord's coming, had reached Bethany before he
arrived at that village; for Martha, the sister of Lazarus, being informed of
his approach, went out and met him, but Mary, who was of a more sedate and
contemplative disposition, fat still in the house. No sooner was she come into
the presence of JESUS, than, in excess of grief she poured forth her complaint:
Lord, said she, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. If thou had
complied with the message we sent thee, I well know that thy interest from
heaven had prevailed, my brother had been cured of his disease, and delivere^
from the dark chambers of death.

MARTHA entertained a high opinion of our Savior's power; she believed that
death did not dare to approach his presence; and consequently, if JESUS had
arrived at Bethany before her brother's dissolution, he had not fallen a victim
to the king of terrors: but imagined, that it was not in his power to heal the
sick, at a distance, though, at the same time, she seemed to have some dark and
imperfect hopes, that our blessed Lord would still do something for her; But I
know, said she, that even now, whatsoever thou will ask of God, God, will give
it thee. She thought that JESUS could obtain whatsoever he desired by prayer,
and therefore, did not found her hopes on his power, but on the power of God,
through his intercession. She doubtless knew, that the great Redeemer of
mankind had raised the daughter of Jarius, and the widow's son of Nain, from
the dead; but seems to have considered her brother's resurrection as much more
difficult, because he had been longer dead.

Our Blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST cleansing the Ten Persons afflicted with
Leprocy.


BUT our blessed Savior, who was willing to encourage this imperfect faith of
Martha, answered, Thy brother shall rise again. As these words were delivered
in an indefinite sense, with regard to time, Martha understood them only as an
argument of consolation, drawn from the general resurrection, and accordingly
answered, I know that he shall rise again at the resurrection at the last day.
She was firmly persuaded of that important article of the Christian faith, the
resurrection of the dead; at which important hour she believed her brother
would rise from the chambers of the dust. And here she seems to have terminated
all her hopes, not thinking that the Son of God would now call her brother from
the sleep of death. JESUS, therefore, to instruct her in this great truth,
replied, I am the resurrection, and the life. I am the author of the
resurrection, the fountain and giver of that life they shall then receive; and
therefore can, with the same ease, raise the dead now as at the last day: He
that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
lives and believes in me, shall never die. Believes thou this? To which
Martha answered, Yea Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God,
which should come into the world. I believe that thou art the true Messiah, so
long promised by the prophets, and therefore believe thou art capable of
performing, by thy power, every thing thou art pleased to undertake.

SHE now seemed to entertain some confused expectations of her brother's
immediate resurrection; and leaving JESUS in the field, ran and called her
sister, according to his order, being willing that both Mary and her companions
should be witnesses of this great miracle.

MARY accordingly, no sooner heard that JESUS was come, than she immediately
left her Jewish comforters, who only increased the weight of her grief, and
flew to her Savior: and the Jews, who suspected she was going to weep over the
grave of her brother, followed her to that great prophet, who was going to
remove all her sorrows. Thus the Jews, who came from Jerusalem to comfort the
two mournful sisters, were brought to the grave of Lazarus, and made witnesses
of his resurrection.

MARY having approached the great Redeemer of mankind, fell prostrate at his
sect, and in a flood of tears poured out her complaint, Lord, if thou had
been here, my brother had not died. No wonder the compassionate JESUS was moved
at so affecting a scene: on this side stood Martha pouring forth a flood of
tears; at his feet lay the affectionate Mary weeping and lamenting her dear
departed brother; while the Jews, who came to comfort the afflicted sisters,
unable to confine their grief, joined the solemn mourning, and mixed their
friendly tears in witness of their love for the departed Lazarus, and in
testimony to the justice of the sisters grief, for the loss of so amiable, so
deserving a brother. JESUS could not behold the affliction of the two sisters
and their friends, without having a share in it himself; his heart was melted
at the mournful scene, he groaned in spirit, and was troubled.

HOWEVER, to keep them no longer in suspense, he asked them, where they had
buried Lazarus; not that he was ignorant where the body of the deceased was
laid: he who knew that he was dead, when so far distant from him, and could
raise him up by a single word, must know where his remains were deposited: to
which they answered, Lord, come and see. The Son of God, now to prove that he
was not only God, but a most compassionate man, and to show us that the tender
affections of a human heart, when kept in due bounds; that friendly sorrow,
when not immoderate, and directed to proper ends, is consistent with the
highest sanctity of the soul, joined in the general mourning: he wept, even at
the time that he was going to give the most ample proofs of his almighty power.

THUS the Jews were convinced that he loved Lazarus exceedingly; but some of
them interpreted this circumstance to his disadvantage: for, according to their
mean way of judging, they fancied that he had suffered him to fall by the
stroke of death, for no other reason in the world, but for want of power to
rescue him. And thinking the miracle, said to have been wrought on the blind
man, at the feast of tabernacles, at least as difficult as the curing an accute
distemper, they called the former in question, because the latter had been
neglected: Could not this man, said they, which opened the eyes of the blind,
have caused that even this man should not have died?

BUT JESUS took no notice of these questions; but grieving at the hardness of
their hearts, and blindness of their infidelity, groaned again within himself,
as he walked toward the sepulcher of the dead. At his coming to the grave, he
said, Take ye away the stone. To which Martha answered, Lord, by this time he
stinketh; for he has been dead four days: or, as the passage may be better
rendered, has lain in the grave four days. She meant to insinuate that her
brother's resurrection was not to be expected. But JESUS gave her a solemn
reproof, to teach her that there was nothing impossible with God; and that the
power of the Almighty is not to be circumscribed within the narrow bounds of
human reason, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou would believe, thou
should see the glory of God?

Martha's objections being thus obviated, she with the rest, waited the great
event in silence; and in pursuance of the command of the Son of God, took away
the stone from the place where the dead was laid. JESUS had, on many occasions,
publicly appealed to his own miracles, as the proofs of his mission, though he
did not generally make a formal address to the Father before he worked this
miracle; but being ^^w to raise Lazarus from the dead, he prayed for his
resurrection, to convince the ^pectators that it could not be effected, without
an immediate interposition of the divine power: 'Father,' said he, 'I thank
thee, that thou have heard me; and I knew that thou hear me always: but
because of the people which stand by, I said it, that they may believe that
thou have sent me: I entertained no doubt of thy empowering me to do this
miracle, and therefore, did not pray for my own sake; I well knew that thou
hear me always: I prayed for the sake of the people, to convince them that
thou love me, have sent me, and art continually owning the work I am come to
do.

HAVING returned thanks to his Father, for this opportunity of displaying his
glory, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. This loud and
efficacious call of the Son of God, awakened the dead; the breathless clay was
instantly re-animated* and he who had lain four days in the chambers of the
tomb, obeyed immediately the powerful sound: 'And he that was dead came forth,
bound hand and foot with grave-clothes; and his face was bound about with a
napkin: JESUS says unto them, loose him and let him go.' It would have been
the least part of the miracle, had JESUS, by his powerful word, unloosed the
napkins wherewith Lazarus was bound; but he brought him out in the same manner
he was lying, and ordered the spectators to loose him, that they might be
better convinced of the miracle: for, in taking off the grave-clothes, they had
the fullest evidence both of his death, and resurrection. As on the one hand,
the manner which he was swathed, must soon have killed him, had he been alive
when buried; and consequently demonstrated, beyond all exception, that Lazarus
had been dead several days, before JESUS called him again to life. Besides, in
stripping him, the linen offered, both to their eyes and smell, abundant proofs
of his putrefaction; and, by that means, convinced them that he had not been in
a trance, but was really dead; on the other hand, by his lively countenance
appearing, when the napkin was removed, his fresh color, and his active
vigor, they who came near and handled him, must be convinced, that he was in
perfect health, and had an opportunity of proving the truth of the miracle, by
the closest examination. There is something extremely beautiful in our Lord's
behavior on this occasion; he did not utter one upbraiding word, either to the
doubting sisters, or the malicious Jews, nor did he let fall one word of
triumph or exultation: Loose him, and let him go, were the only words we have
recorded: he was in this, as on all other occasions, consistent with himself, a
pattern of perfect humility and self-denial.

SUCH was the blessed work wrought by the Son of God at Bethany. And in the
resurrection of Lazarus, thus corrupted, and thus raised by the powerful call
of JESUS, we have a striking emblem, and a glorious earnest of the resurrection
of our bodies from the grave at the last day; when the same powerful mandate,
which spoke Lazarus again into being, shall collect the scattered particles of
our bodies, and raise them to life.

SO astonishing a miracle performed in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, before a
multitude of spectators, many of them his enemies, could not fail of being the
common topic of conversation, and of producing different effects upon different
persons. Many believed that JESUS could be no other than the great Messiah so
long promised; while others, who still expected a temporal prince, and
therefore unwilling to acknowledge him for their Savior, were filled with
indignation, particularly the chief priests and elders. But this miracle, as
well as all the rest he had wrought in confirmation of his mission, was too
evident to be denied; and, therefore, they pretended that his whole intention
was to establish a new sect in religion, which would endanger both their church
and nation: Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and
said, What do we? for this man does many miracles. If we let him thus alone,
all men will believe on him; and the Romans shall come and take away both our
place and nation.

THE common people, astonished at his miracles, will, if we do not take care to
prevent it, certainly set him up for the Messiah; and the Romans, under
pretense of a rebellion, will deprive us both of our liberty and religion.
Accordingly, they came to a resolution to put him to death: this resolution was
not, however, unanimous; for Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and other
disciples of our Savior, then members of the council, urged the injustice of
what they proposed to do, from the consideration of his miracles and innocence:
but Caiaphas the high priest, from a principle of human policy, told them, that
the nature of government often required certain acts of injustice, in order to
procure the safety of the state: Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it
is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole
nation perish not.

THE council now having determined to put JESUS to death, deliberated, for the
future, only upon the best methods of effecting it; and, in all likelihood,
agreed to issue a proclamation, promising a reward to any person who would
deliver him into their hands. For this reason, our blessed Savior did not now
go up to Jerusalem, though he was within two miles of it; but returned to
Ephraim, a city on the borders of the wilderness, where he abode with his
disciples, being unwilling to go too far into the country, because the
passover, at which he was to suffer, was at hand.

WHILE our Lord abode in Ephraim, the Pharisees asked him, when the kingdom of
the Messiah was to begin. We have more than once observed, that the Jews had
very grand ideas of the kingdom they expected this great Son of David would
establish, the number of his subjects, the strength of his armies, and the pomp
and magnificence of his court. It is therefore no wonder, that they were very
desirous of having that empire speedily erected: but our Savior, to correct
this mistaken notion, told them, that the Messiah's kingdom did not consist in
any external pomp of government, erected in some particular country, by the
terror of arms, and desolation of war; but in the subjection of the minds of
men, and in rendering them conformable to the laws of the Almighty, which was
to be effected by a new dispensation of religion, and this dispensation was
already begun. It was therefore needless for them to seek in this or that place
for the kingdom of God, as it had been already preached among them by CHRIST
and his apostles, and confirmed by innumerable miracles: The kingdom of God,
said he, comes not with observation: neither shall they say, Lo here! or, Lo
there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you, Luke xvii.20. etc.

SOON after speaking these words to the Pharisees, he addressed himself to his
disciples, and, in the hearing of the people, prophesied the destruction of the
Jewish state: whose constitution, both religious and civil, was the chief
difficulty that opposed the erection of his kingdom: but because love and
compassion were eminent parts of our Savior's temper, he mentioned that
dreadful catastrophe in such a manner, as might tend to the reformation and
profit of his hearers. He informed them, that the prelude to this final
destruction would be an universal distress; when they should passionately wish
for the personal presence of the Messiah to comfort them, but would be denied
their request: 'The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days
of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.' He next cautioned them against
deceivers, which in this time of affliction, would endeavor to draw the people
after them, in order to support their own power: And they shall say to you, see
here: or, see there: go not after them, nor follow them. For as the lightening
that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shines unto the other part
under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in his day. But first must he
suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation:

BUT the coming of the Son of man shall be sudden and unexpected: he will come
in his own strength, and with great power; he will throw down all opposition,
destroy his enemies with swift destruction, and establish his religion and
government in a great part of the world, as suddenly as lightening darts from
one part of the heaven to the other: but before these things come to pass, he
must suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.

AND, notwithstanding this sudden destruction and calamity that was to
overwhelm the Jews, he told them their stupidity would be like that of the old
world, at the time of the deluge, or that of Sodom before the city was
destroyed: And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of
the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives; they were given
in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came
and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did
eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded: but the
same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is
revealed. In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in
the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field,
let him likewise not return back. Remember Lot's wife.

A better example than that of Lot's wife could not have been produced: for if
any of his hearers, through an immoderate love of the world, should be
prevailed on, in order to save their goods, after they were admonished from
heaven of their danger, by the signs which prognosticated the destruction of
Jerusalem; or if any of them, through want of faith, should think, that the
calamities predicted to fall on the nation, would not be either so great or
sudden as he had declared, and did not use the precaution of a speedy flight;
they might behold in Lot's wife an example both of their sin, and of their
punishment: he added, that those who endeavored to save their lives, by flying
into the city, should meet the destruction they were endeavoring to avoid;
whereas, those who retired into the open towns and defenseless villages, should
be safe: 'Whosoever shall seek to save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever
lose his life shall preserve it.'

OUR blessed Lord, after making these predictions, spoke the following parable,
in order to excite them to a constant perseverance in prayer, and not to be so
weary and faint in their minds, as to neglect this necessary duty.

THERE was in a city, said our Lord, a judge, who, being governed by
atheistical principles, had no regard to the precepts of religion; and, being
very powerful, did not regard what was said of him by man: so that all his
decisions were influenced merely by passion or interest. In the same city was
also a widow, who having no friends to assist her, was absolutely unable to
defend herself from injuries, or procure redress for any she had received. In
this deplorable situation, she had recourse to the unjust judge, in order to
obtain satisfaction for some oppressive wrong she had lately received: but the
judge was so abandoned to pleasure, that he refused, for a time, to listen to
her request; he would not give himself the trouble to examine her case, though
the crying injustice pleaded so powerfully for this distressed widow. She was
not however, intimidated by his refusal: she incessantly importuned him, till,
by repeated representations of her distress, she filled his mind with such
displeasing ideas, that he was obliged to do her justice, merely to free
himself from her importunity: Though, said he to himself, I fear not God, nor
regard man; yet, because this widow troubles me, I will avenge her; lest, by
her continual coming, she weary me.

THE sentiment, conveyed by our blessed Lord in this parable, is very
beautiful: we hence learn, that the cries of the afflicted will, by being
incessantly repeated, make an impression, even on the stony hearts of wicked
men, who glory in there impiety and laugh at all the precepts of justice,
virtue, and religion; and, therefore, cannot fail of being regarded by the
benevolent Father of the universe, who will listen to the petitions of his
faithful servants, and pour on them the choicest of his blessings. Hear, said
our gracious Lord, what the unjust judge says. And shall not God avenge his
own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I
tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Arguments of this kind, taken from
the feeble goodness, or even from the imperfections of men, to illustrate the
superior and infinite perfections of the Almighty were often made use of by the
blessed JESUS, and with great success in working the conviction designed. It
was indeed hardly possible to withstand such powerful appeals; they force their
way directly into mens' hearts, bear down all opposition, and make a lasting
impression on mens' minds.

OUR blessed Lord having thus enforced the duty of prayer, in this expressive
parable, asked the following opposite question, Nevertheless, when the Son of
man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? As if he had said,
notwithstanding all the miracles I have wrought, and the excellent doctrines I
have delivered, shall I find at my second coming, the faith among the children
of men, there is reason to expect? Will not most of them be found to have
abandoned the faith, and wantonly ask, Where is the promise of his coming?

OUR Lord having delivered these discourses to the Pharisees, who were
righteous in their own conceit, and despised others: but as these particulars
are better illustrated by their opposites, he placed the character of this
species of men, in opposition to those of the humble, describing the reception
each class met with from the Almighty, in the parable of the Pharisee and
publican, who went up together to the temple at the time when the sacrifice was
offered, to direct their petitions to the God of their fathers.

THE Pharisee, having a great opinion of his own righteousness, went far into
the court of the temple, that he might be as near the place of the divine
residence as possible: here he offered his prayer, giving God the praise of his
supposed righteousness; and had he been possessed of any, he would have acted
properly: 'God,' said he, 'I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess.' Having thus commended himself to
God, he wrapped himself up in his own righteousness, and giving the poor
publican a scornful look, walked away, perhaps to transgress some of the
weightier matters of the law, judgment, justice, and truth, and to devour the
houses of distressed widows and helpless orphans. But how different was the
behavior of the humble publican! Impressed with a deep sense of his own
unworthiness, he would not even enter the courts of the temple, but standing
afar off, he smote upon his breast, and in the bitterness of his soul,
earnestly implored the mercy of omnipotence: 'And the publican, standing afar
off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his
breast, saying, God, be merciful to me a sinner.'

OUR blessed Lord added, I tell you, however ye may judge from external
appearances, and whatever preference ye may give to this haughty Pharisee; I,
who know and see the heart, declare unto you, that the publican retired from
the temple accepted by his God, and blessed with the mercy which he im^^ored,
while the proud Pharisee was disregarded.

THE present parable sufficiently indicates, that all the sons of men stand in
need of mercy; both the strict Pharisee and the despised publican, with the
whole race of mankind, are sinners; and consequently all must inplore pardon of
their benevolent Creator: we must all ascend to the temple, and there pour
forth our prayers before the throne of grace; for there he has promised ever to
be present, to grant the petitions of all who ask with sincerity and truth.

THESE parables were spoken in the town of Ephraim; and during our Lord's
continuance in that city, the Pharisees asked him, Whether he thought it lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every cause? Our Savior had twice before
declared his opinion of this particular, once in Galilee, and once in Perea: it
is therefore probable, that the Pharisees were not ignorant of his sentiments,
and that they asked the question then, to find an opportunity of increasing the
people against him, well knowing that the Israelites held the liberty which the
law gave them of divorcing their wives as one of their chief privileges: but
however that be, JESUS was far from fearing the popular resentment, and
accordingly declared the third time against arbitrary divorces. The Pharisees
then asked him why they were commanded by Moses to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? Insinuating, that Moses was so tender of
their happiness, that he gave them liberty of putting away their wives, when
they sa^ occasion. To which JESUS answered, Because of the hardness of your
hearts, Moses suffered you to put away your wives; but from the beginning it
was not so: as unlimited divorces were not permitted in the state of innocence,
so neither shall they be under the gospel dispensation.

AND I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, comitteth adultery: and whose marries
her which is put away, does commit adultery.

AT which decision the disciples were greatly surprised; and though they held
their peace while the Pharisees were present, yet they did not fail to ask our
Lord the reason on which he founded his determination, when they were returned
home: And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter. And he
says unto them, 'Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another,
commits adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away her husband, and
be married to another, she commits adultery.'

UNLIMITED divorces being prevalent among the Jews, gave great encouragement to
family quarrels, were very destructive of happiness, and hindered the education
of their tender offspring; besides, it greatly tended to make their children
lose that reverence for them which is due to parents, as it was hardly possible
for the children to avoid engaging in the quarrel. Our Savior's prohibition,
therefore, of these divorces is founded on the strongest reasons, and greatly
tends to promote the welfare of society.

OUR Lord having, in the course of his ministry, performed innumerable cures in
different parts of the country, several persons thinking, perhaps, that his
power would be as great in preventing as in removing distempers, brought their
children to him, desiring that he would put his hands upon them and bless them.
The disciples, however, mistaking the intention, were angry with the persons,
and rebuked them, for endeavoring to give this trouble to their Master. But
JESUS no sooner saw it, than he was greatly displeased with his disciples and
ordered them not to hinder parents from bringing their chlidren to him: 'S^ffer
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the
kingdom of God.' That is, the church militant on earth, and that triumphant in
heaven, are composed of persons who resemble little children in humility and
meekness. Accordingly, taking them up in his arms, he blessed them with his
usual benevolence.

CHAPTER. XXVI.
CHRIST departs from Ephraim, and, in his Journey to Jerusalem by the Way of
Jericho, he instructs a young Man how to attain eternal Life, and how to
become perfect: He shows how hard it is for a rich Man to enter into the
Kingdom of God; and promises great Rewards to his Disciples, and to all who
have forsaken ought to follow him: He delivers the Parable of the Laborers,
who were hired at different Hours to work in the Vineyard: He foretells his
own Death, and Resurrection; and puts by the ambitious Suit of the Sons of
Zebedee.

THE time of our dear Lord's passion drawing near, he departed from Ephraim,
and repaired by the way of Jericho, toward Jerusalem: but before he arrived at
Jericho, a ruler of the synagogue came running to him, and kneeling down before
him, asked him, 'Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? Mat. xix.16. Though this young ruler pretended to pay great
honor to our dear Redeemer, yet the whole was no more than a piece of
hypocrisy: for though he styled him good, yet he did not believe that he was
sent from God, as sufficiently appears from his refusing to observe the counsel
given him by JESUS; nor could his artful insinuations escape the piercing eye
of the great Savior of the world; he well knew his secret intentions, and
beheld the inmost recesses of his soul; and accordingly rebuked him for his
hypocritical address, before he answered his question: Why call thou me
good? There is none good but one, that is God. But as he had desired the advice
of our blessed Savior, who never refused it to any of the sons of men, he
readily answered his question, by telling him, that he must observe all the
moral precepts of the law; there being a necessary connection between the
duties of piety toward the Almighty, and of justice and temperance toward
men, the latter of which, were much more difficult to counterfeit than the
former; 'If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. He says unto
him, Which? JESUS said, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Honor thy
father and thy mother; and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. The young
man says unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I
yet?'

THESE commandments were, doubtless, understood by the young ruler, in the
vague sense put upon them by the doctors and interpreters of the law; and,
therefore, the character he here gave of himself might be very just: for,
though he was far from being a person of true probity and virtue, he might have
appeared, in the sight of men, as a person of a very fair character: and having
maintained that character, notwithstanding his great riches, he certainly
deserved commendation; and therefore, might be loved by that benevolent person
who left the bosom of his Father, to redeem lost mankind: but he was, at the
same time, very faulty with regard to his love of sensual pleasures, a sin
which might have escaped even his own observation, though it could not escape
the all-seeing eye of the Son of God. Our blessed Savior, therefore, willing
to make him sensible of this secret desire of possessing the riches of this
world, told him, that if he aimed at perfection, he should distribute his
possessions among the poor and indigent, and become his disciple: If thou will
be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.

THE young man did not expect this condition, he was astonished at it, and
without making the least reply, retired, filled with sorrow, being very
unwilling to part with his large estates: But when the young man heard that
saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.

THE pernicious influence of riches over the minds of the children of men,
being thus melancholy instanced, our blessed Savior cautioned his disciples
against fixing their minds on things of such dangerous tendency, by showing how
very difficult it was for a rich man to procure an habitation in the region of
eternal happiness: 'Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter
into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, it is easier for a camel
to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed,
saying, who then can be saved? But JESUS beheld them, and said unto them, with
men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.

BY this it appears, that if man be not assisted by the grace of God, it will
be impossible for him to obtain the happy rewards of the kingdom of heaven;
but, by the assistance of grace, which the Almighty never refuses to those who
seek it with their whole heart, it is very possible.

BUT the disciples of our blessed Lord were far from being satisfied with this
answer, as they had doubtless, often reflected with pleasure on the high posts
they were to enjoy in their Master's kingdom. Peter seems particularly to have
been disappointed; and therefore addressed his Master in the name of the rest,
begging him to remember, that his apostles had actually done what the young man
had refused: they had abandoned their relations, their friends, their
possessions, and their employments, on his account: and, therefore, desired to
know what reward they were to expect, for these instances of their obedience.
To which JESUS replied, that they should not fail of a reward, even in this
life: for immediately after his resurrection, when he ascended to his Father,
and entered on his mediatorial office, they should be advanced to the honor of
judging the twelve tribes of Israel; that is, of ruling the church of CHRIST,
which they were to plant in different parts of the earth; Verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

OUR Lord having given this answer to Peter, he next mentioned the rewards his
other disciples should receive, both in this world, and in that which is to
come: they, said he, who have forsaken all for my sake, shall be no loosers in
the end; their benevolent Father, who intends to give them possessions in the
heavenly Canaan, will not fail to support them, during their long and painful
journey to that happy country, and raise them up friends who shall assist them
with those necessaries they might have expected from their relations, had they
not left them for my sake. Divine Providence will take care that they have
every thing valuable that can be given them by their relations, or they could
desire from large possessions: they shall, indeed, be fed with the bread of
sorrow, but this shall produce joys, to which all the earthly pleasures bear no
proportion; and, in the end, obtain everlasting life: they shall leave this
vale of tears, with all its pains and sorrows, behind them, and fly to the
bosom of their Almighty Father, the fountain of life and joy, where, for all
the sufferings they have undergone in this world, they shall be infinitely
rewarded.

ACCORDING to this, many who are by their fellow-mortals, considered as the
last of mankind, because of their sufferings, self-denials, and mortifications,
shall be really first, not only in point of future reward, but even with regard
to present satisfaction: But many that are first shall be last; and the last
shall be first.

IT seems these words were spoken to keep the disciples humble, as, in all
probability, they at first understood the promise of their sitting on twelve
thrones in a natural sense; so they were ready to construe every expression to
a temporal kingdom, which they still expected their Master would erect upon
earth. Our blessed Lord, therefore, to remove all thoughts they might entertain
of this kind, told them, that though he had described the rewards they were to
expect for the ready obedience they had shown to his commands, and the pains
they were to take in propagating the gospel amongst the children of men; yet
these rewards were spiritual, and not confined to the Jews alone, but extended
also to the Gentiles, who, in point of time, should excel the Jews, and
universally embrace the gospel before that nation was converted.

OUR great Redeemer illustrated this doctrine with the parable of the
house-holder, who at different hours of the day, hired laborers to work in his
vineyard: 'The kingdom of heaven, says our blessed Savior, is like unto a man
that is an house-holder, which went out early in the morning, to hire laborers
into his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day,
he sent them into his vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and saw
others standing idle in the market place, and said unto them, go ye also into
the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, I will give you. And they went their
way. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. And
about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing, says unto
them, why stand ye here all the day idle? They say unto him, because no man
has hired us. He said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever
is right, that shall ye receive. So, when even was come, the lord of the
vineyard said unto his steward, call the laborers, and give them their hire,
beginning from the last unto the first. And when they came that were hired
about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny. But when the first
came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise
received every man a penny. And when they had received it, they murmured
against the good man of house, saying, these last have wrought but one hour,
and thou have made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of
the day. But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do the no wrong;
did not thou agree with me for a penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way: I
will give unto this last, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what
I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? So the last shall
be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen,' Matt. xx.1
-- 16.

OUR blessed Savior delivered the parable of the house-holder in such a
manner, as, from the application he has made of it, it would not be difficult
to interpret it. The dispensations of religion, which God gave to mankind in
different parts of the world, are represented by the vineyard: the Jews, who
were early members of the true church, and obliged to obey the law of Moses,
are the laborers which the house-holder hired early in the morning; the
Gentiles, who were converted at several times, by the various interpositions of
Providence, to the knowledge and worship of the true God, are the laborers
hired at the third, sixth, and ninth hour: and the invitation given at the
eleventh hour, implies the calling of the Gentiles in every country, to live
piously and virtuously. The law of Moses was a heavy yoke; and therefore, the
obedience to its precepts was very elegantly represented, by bearing the heat
and burden of the whole day: but the proselyted Gentiles paid obedience only to
some particular precepts of the law, bore but part of its weight, and were,
therefore, represented by those who were hired, at the third, sixth, and ninth
hours; while those Heathens, who regulated their conduct by the law of nature
only, and esteemed the works of justice, piety, temperance and charity, as
their whole duty, are beautifully represented as laboring in the cool of the
evening, only one hour.

THE time being come when each labourer was to receive his wages, they were all
placed on an equal footing; these rewards being the privileges and advantages
of the gospel. The Jews who had borne the grievous yoke of the Mosaic
ceremonies, murmured when they found the Gentiles were admitted to its
privileges, without being subject to their ceremonial worship: but we must not
urge the circumstance of the reward, so far as to fancy that either Jews or
Gentiles merited the blessings of the gospel, by their having labored
faithfully in the vineyard, or having behaved well under their several
dispensations. The gospel, with its blessings, was bestowed entirely by the
free grace of God, and without any thing in men to merit it; besides, it was
offered promiscuously to all, whether good or bad, and was embraced by persons
of all character. The conclusion of the parable deserves our utmost attention;
we shall often meditate upon it, and take care to make our calling and election
sure.

OUR Lord having finished these discourses, he continued his journey toward
Jerusalem, where the chief priests and elders, soon after the resurrection of
Lazarus, issued a proclamation, promising a reward to any one who should
apprehend him. In all probability, this was the reason why the disciples were
astonished at the alacrity of our Lord during this journey, while they
themselves followed him trembling, JESUS, therefore, thought proper to repeat
the prophecies concerning his sufferings, in order to show his disciples that
they were entirely voluntary, adding that though the Jews should put him to
death, yet instead of weakening, it should increase their faith, especially as
he would rise again the third day from the dead: Behold, we go up to Jerusalem;
and all things that are written by the prophets, concerning the Son of man,
shall be accomplished: for he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be
mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on: and they shall scourge him,
and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise again, Luke xviii.31, 32,
33.

IT must have given the greatest encouragement to out Lord's disciples, had
they understood and applied this prediction which was built upon the ancient
prophecies, in a proper manner; but they were so ignorant in the scriptures,
that they had no idea of what he meant: And they understood none of these
things: and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which
were spoken.

BUT the sons of Zebedee were so ignorant, that they thought their Master, by
his telling them he would rise again from the dead, meant that he would then
erect his empire; and, accordingly, begged that he would confer on them the
chief posts in his kingdom, which they expressed, by desiring to be seated, the
one on his right hand, and the other on his left, in allusion to his placing
the twelve apostles upon twelve thrones, judging the tribes of Israel.

EVER since our Savior's transfiguration, the sons of Zebedee had conceived
very high notions of his kingdom, and possibly of their own merit also, because
they had been admitted to behold that miracle; but JESUS told them, they were
ignorant of the nature of the honor they requested; and since they desired to
share with him in his glory, asked them, if they were willing to share with him
also in his sufferings: 'Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the
cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with?' Matt. xx.22. The two disciples, ravished with the prospect of
the dignity they were aspiring after, replied without hesitation, that they
were both able and willing to share any hardship their Master might meet with
in the way to his kingdom. To which he answered, that they should certainly
share with him his troubles and afflictions; but that they had asked a favor
which was not his to give: 'Ye shall drink, indeed, of my cup, and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on
my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father.'

THE indignation of the rest of the disciples being raised by this ambitious
request of the two brothers, they thinking themselves equally deserving the
principal posts in the Messiah's kingdom, were highly offended at the arrogance
of the sons of Zebedee. JESUS, therefore, in order to restore harmony amongst
his disciples, told them, that his kingdom was very different from those of the
present world; and that the greatness of his disciples did not, like that of
secular princes, consist in reigning over others in an absolute and despotic
manner: 'Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them,
and they that are great, exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so
among you: but whosoever will be great among you let him be your minister; and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even as the Son of
man came not to be administered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many.

CHAPTER XXVII.
JESUS, being arrived at Jericho, gives sight to two blind men near that
Place: He visits Zaccheus the Publican, and delivers the Parable of a
Nobleman who left Money with his Servants to trade with in his Absence: The
Rulers give Orders to apprehend him: Being arrived at Bethany, Mary anointeth
his Feet: Judas murmureth at the Cost. CHRIST rides into Jerusalem upon an
Ass, amidst the Acclamations of the multitude, and weepeth over the City.

OUR Lord with his disciples, and the multitude that accompanied him, being now
arrived at Jericho, in their way to Jerusalem, a famous city of Palestine, and
the second in the kingdom. Near this town JESUS cured two blind men, who sat by
the road begging, and expressed their belief in him, as the Messiah: 'And as
they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. And, behold, two
blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that JESUS passed by, cried
out, saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. And the multitude
rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more,
saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord thou Son of David,' Matt. xx.29, 30, 31.

THE Son of God stood still at this importunate request of the two men, and
called them to him, that, by their manner of walking, spectators might be
convinced that they were really blind. As soon as they approached him, he asked
them, what they requested with such earnestness? To which the beggars answered,
that they might receive their sight: What will ye, that I shall do unto you?
They say, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. This request was not made in vain:
their compassionate Savior touched their eyes, and immediately they received
sight, and followed him, glorifying and praising God. After conferring sight on
these beggars, Zaccheus, chief of the publicans, having often heard the same of
our Lord's miracles, was desirous of seeing his person; but the lowness of his
stature prevented him from satisfying his curiosity, he ran before, and climbed
up a sycamore tree to see him; for he was to pass that way. As JESUS approached
the place where he was, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus,
make haste and come down; for today I must abide at thy house. Luke xix.5.

AT which condescension of our Lord, the publican expressed his joy, carried
him to his house, and showed him all the marks of civility in his power. But
the people when they saw he was going to the house of a publican, condemned his
conduct, as not conformable to the character of a prophet. Zaccheus seems to
have heard these unjust reflections; and, therefore, was willing to justify
himself before JESUS and his attendants: 'And Zaccheus stood, and said unto the
Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken
any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him four fold. And Jesus
said unto him, This day is salvation come to thy house, forasmuch as he also is
a son of Abraham.'

FURTHER to convince the people that he acted agreeable to his character, in
keeping company with publicans and sinners, our Lord told them, that the true
intention of his coming was to recover those who had wandered from the paths of
virtue, and restore them to the rightful owner: The Son of man is come to seek
and to save that which is lost. While JESUS continued in the house of Zaccheus
the publican, he spoke a parable to his followers, who supposed, at his arrival
in the royal city, he would erect the long-expected kingdom of the Messiah: 'A
certain nobleman,' said he, 'went into a far country to receive for himself a
kingdom, and to return. And he called his ten servants, and delivered to them
ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come. But his citizens hated him,
and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over
us. And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the
kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had
given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.
Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds. And he
said unto him, Well, thou good servant; because thou have been faithful in a
very little, have thou authority over ten cities. And the second came, saying,
Lord, thy pound has gained five pounds. And he said likewise to him, be thou
also over five cities. And another came saying, Lord, behold, here is thy
pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin: for I feared thee, because thou
art an austere man: thou take up that thou layest not down, and reapest that
thou did not sow. And he says unto him, out of thine own mouth will I judge
thee, thou wicked servant. Thou knew that I was an austere man, taking up
that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow: wherefore then gave not
thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own
with usury? And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and
give it to him that has ten pounds. (And they said unto him, Lord, he has ten
pounds.) For I say unto you, That unto every one which has shall be given; and
from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away from him. But
those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me.'

WE have the characters of three sorts of men in this parable delineated by our
blessed Savior himself; namely, the true disciples of the Messiah, the
hypocrites, and the openly profane: and the treatment these servants met with,
represents the final sentences that will be passed upon them by the awful Judge
of the whole earth. The true disciples shall be rewarded with the honors and
pleasures of immortality, the hypocrites stripped of all the advantages they so
often boasted, and loaded with eternal infamy, and the open enemies of CHRIST,
in proportion to the degree of their guilt, shall suffer severe punishment.

ALTHOUGH this be the general sense of the parable, yet it has also a
particular relation to the time when it was spoken; and was intended to teach
the disciples, that though they might imagine that the Messiah's kingdom was
speedily to be erected, and they were soon to partake of its happiness, yet
this was not to happen before the death of their Master; that they themselves
must perform a long and laborious course of services, before they received
their eternal reward. That after his resurrection, when he had obtained the
kingdom, he would return from his seat of majesty, and reckon with all his
servants, and reward every one according to the improvements he had made in the
trust committed to his care; and that he would execute, in an exemplary manner,
his vengeance on those who refused to let him reign over them, and did all in
their power to hinder the erection of his kingdom among others. After speaking
this parable JESUS left the house of Zaccheus the publican, and continued his
journey toward Jerusalem, where he proposed to celebrate the passover; and was
earnestly expected by the people, who came up to purify themselves, and who
began to doubt whether he would venture to come to the feast. This delay,
however, was occasioned by the proclamation issued by the chief priests,
promising a reward to any one who would discover the place of his retirement;
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that if
any knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take him. John xi.57

JESUS arrived at Bethany, six days before the passover, and repaired to the
house of Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead: 'there they made him a
supper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table
with him. Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and
anointed the feet of JESUS, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was
filled with the odor of the ointment. Then says one of his disciples, Judas
Iscariot, Simon's son, which should betray him, Why was not this ointment sold
for three hundred pence, and given to the poor? This he said, not that he cared
for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was
put therein. Then said JESUS, Let her alone: against the day of my burying has
she kept this. For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.'

BETHANY being not above two miles from Jerusalem, the news of our Lord's
arrival was soon spread through the capital, and great numbers of the citizens
came to see Lazarus, who had been raised from the dead, together with the great
prophet who had wrought so stupendous a miracle; and many of them were
convinced both of the resurrection of the former, and the divinity of the
latter: but the news of their conversion, together with the reason of it, being
currently reported in Jerusalem, the chief priests were soon sensible of the
weight so great a miracle must have on the minds of the people; and therefore
determined to put both Lazarus and JESUS to death, if possible.

OUR dear Lord was not ignorant of what the chief priests and elders had
determined against him, but was so far from declining to visit Jerusalem, that
he even entered it in a public manner. When they 'were come to Bethpage, unto
the mount of Olives, then sent JESUS two disciples, saying unto them, Go into
the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a
colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought
unto you, ye shall say, the Lord has need of them; and straightway he will
send them. All this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by
the prophet, saying, tell the daughter of Sion, behold thy king comes unto
thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. And the
discipels went, and did as JESUS commanded them, and brought the ass, and the
colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon. And a very great
multitude spread their garments in the way, others cut down branches from the
trees, and strewed them in the way. And the multitudes that went before, and
that followed, cried saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest. And when he was come
into Jerusalem, all the city was moved saying, Who is this? And the multitude
said, This is JESUS, the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.' Matt. xxi.1 -- 11.

THIS circumstance of our Lord has given more occasion for profane wit and
ridicule, than any before: we reckon an ass to be a contemptible creature, and
a man, especially a man of character, riding upon an ass, a ridiculous figure.
These are prejedices of our own times and country. And when they, who look no
further than the manners and customs before them, examine this part of the
sacred story by the standard of modern prejudices, they see, or think they see,
something quite inconsistent with the gravity and dignity of the person,
pretending to be the king of the Jews, when Christ is represented, entering in
triumph into Jerusalem, sitting on an ass. But however contemptible an ass, or
a man riding on that creature, may be at present, it was not so from the
beginning. In many countries, and particularly in Judea, persons of the highest
distinction usually rode upon asses. The governors of Israel are described in
the song of Deborah, as riding on white asses, Judge. v.10. And the thirty sons
of Jair, who was judge and prince over Israel twenty-two years, are said to
ride on thirty asses, chapter x.4. And another judge is recorded to have had forty
sons, and thirty nephews, that rode on seventy ass colts, -- chapter xii.14.

HOWEVER, it may be asked, that supposing it was an usual thing to ride on an
ass, why should this common practice be mentioned in relation to the Messiah,
as a mark of distinction? Might not the prophet, upon this supposition, as well
have said, he shall come walking on foot? And would he not have been as well
known by one character as by the other? Besides, if we turn to the book of
Zachariah, where this prophecy is to be found, we shall see the person, there
described, to be a king, a just king, and one having salvation: and what is
there in this character, of riding on the foal of an ass, that is peculiar to a
king, to a just king, and to one who was to bring salvation and deliverance to
his people?

HOWEVER difficult these questions may at first sight appear, they are easily
answered; not by considering the state and condition of kings in general, but
that peculiar to a king of Israel, on which is founded the propriety of this
character.

WE shall generally find, if we look into the history of the rise and fall of
nations, that their prosperity and success were proportionable to their force
and power, and to the conduct and ability of their leaders. But with the Jews,
who from slaves in Egypt became a powerful people, the case was very different.
The best and greatest of their kings, and he who carried their empire to its
greatest height, has left us another account of their affairs: The people, says
he, got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou had a favor unto them, Psalm xliv.3.

WE are apt to ascribe these and other similar passages, to the piety and
devotion of the Psalmist; to consider them only as acknowledgments of God's
general providence in the affairs of the world; and hence are apt to overlook,
or not sufficiently consider, the historical truths they contain. It is true,
indeed, that all success, in the strictest sense, may be ascribed to God; that
it is he who gives victory unto kings; but he generally makes use of natural
means, and it is no offense to his providence that kings list their thousands
of horse and foot to secure themselves and their dominions. But with the Jews
it was very different: they were never so weak as when they made themselves
strong; never so certainly ruined as when their force was great enough to
create a confidence in themselves. For God had taken the defense of Israel upon
himself: and, the people were sure to be undone whenever they took it out of
his hands, to place it in their own.

GOD was so tender of his honor in this respect, and so concerned to justify
his promise to protect Israel in the eyes of the world, that he would not
always permit natural causes to interfere in their deliverance, lest the people
should grow doubtful to whom they ought to ascribe their victories. And for the
same reason it was, that he commanded the people to have neither horses nor
chariots of war for their defense: not because they were thought useless in
war; for it is well known that they were the strength of the ancient kingdoms;
but because God himself had undertaken their defense, and he wanted neither
horse nor foot to fight their battles.

IT is evident from the Jewish history, that this law was observed for near
four hundred years; namely, till about the middle of Solomon's reign. And when
David swayed the scepter of Israel, when the kingdom was carried to its utmost
height, he himself rode on a mule, and provided no better equipage for his son,
on the day of his coronation: Cause Solomon my son, said David, to ride upon
mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon; and let Zadock the priest and
Nathan the prophet anoint him king over Israel, 1 Kings i.33, 34. And when that
pious prince looked back, and contemplated this state of things, he might well
say, Some trust in chariots and some in horses; but we will remember the name
of the Lord our God, Psalm xx.7.

BUT things quickly changed their aspect in the reign of Solomon: he married
the daughter of the king of Egypt, and opened a commerce between that country
and his own; by which means he soon acquired an immense number of horses and
chariots; and all his successors when they had it in their power, followed his
example. But what did the kingdom gain by his change? They were before a rich
and flourishing people, but after breaking this law of the Most High, their
wealth and power gradually declined, till at last, their habitations were laid
waste, their temple and cities burnt with fire, and they themselves carried
captive into a strange land.

PERHAPS it may be asked, wherein the guilt of having a country full of horses
consisted? There is certainly no moral crime in purchasing or keeping these
creatures; but the kings of Israel were exalted to the throne, on condition
that they should renounce the assistance of chariots and horses, and depend
upon God for success in the day of battle.

THUS having considered this law and the consequences that resulted from the
breach of it, let us now look back to the prophecy relating to the Messiah:
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion; shout O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy
King comes unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon
an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass. And I will cut off the chariot from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, Zach. ix.9.10.

THE descendants of Jacob were to be saved by such a king: and what sort of a
king could be expected? Is it possible to imagine that God would send a king to
save them who should be like the kings which had undone them? Is it not more
reasonable to think, that he would resemble those who had been deliverers of
their country? Kings who feared God, and therefore feared no enemy; who, though
mounted on asses, and colts the foals of asses, were able to put to flight the
thousands and ten thousands of chariots and horses that came against them.

THE king, foretold by the prophet, was also to be just, meek, and lowly; but
how could he have deserved that character, had he appeared in the pride and
pomp of war, surrounded with horses and chariots, in direct opposition to the
law of God? Or, as he was to bring salvation to the people, could he make use
of those means which God never had prospered, and which he declared he never
would?

BY this it appears, that it was essential to the character of a king of
Israel, who was to be just and lowly, and to bring salvation with him, that he
should come riding on an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass; but if any doubt
can yet remain, let the prophet himself explain it, and immediately after the
description of the promised kings, adds, and I will cut off the chariot from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem: plainly intimating, that the character
given of the Messiah, that he should ride on an ass, was in opposition to the
pride of their warlike kings, who had ruined themselves and their people, by
their great strength in chariots and horses.

WE have thus undeniably shown the intention of the prophet, when he foretold
that the Messiah should ride on an ass; and from hence it appears, that the
enemies of revelation have not the least reason for turning this transaction
into ridicule. Was it any reproach to CHRIST to ride into Jerusalem on the foal
of an ass, when David, the greatest of his ancestors, and Solomon the wisest,
as long as he was wise, rode in the same manner? Can the Jews object to this
circumstance, and yet talk of the glories of David, and the magnificence of
Solomon, who in the midst of all that glory and magnificence did the very same
thing? Or can they stumble at this character of the Messiah, without forgetting
by what princes their ancestors were saved, and by what undone?

BUT to return. The prodigious multitude that now accompanied JESUS, filled the
Pharisees and great men with malice and envy, because every method they had
taken to hinder the people from following JESUS, had proved ineffectual: The
Pharisees therefore said among themselves, perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?
Behold the world is gone after him. John xii.19.

AS our blessed Redeemer drew near the city of Jerusalem, surrounded by the
rejoicing multitude, notwithstanding the many affronts he had there received,
he beheld the city; and with a divine generosity and benevolence, which nothing
can equal, wept over it; and, in the most pathetic manner, lamented the
calamities which he foresaw were coming upon it, because its inhabitants were
ignorant of the time of their visitation: 'If,' said he, 'thou had known,
even that thou, at least, in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes, for the days shall come upon thee,
that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and
keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy
children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another;
because thou know not the time of thy visitation.' Luke xix.42, 43, 44.

YE wandering mortals, behold here an example and generosity infinitely
superior to any furnished by the heathen world; an example highly worthy for
them to imitate and admire!

WHEN our Lord entered Jerusalem, surrounded by the multitude, the whole city
was moved on account of the prodigious concourse of people that accompanied
him, and by their continual acclamations, JESUS rode immediately to the temple;
but it being evening, he soon left the city, to the great discouragement of the
people, who expected he was immediately to have taken into his hands the reins
of government: And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when
he had looked round about upon all things, and now the even tide was come, he
went out unto Bethany with the twelve. Mark xi.11.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
JESUS curses the barren Fig Tree: He drives the Buyers and Sellers out of
the Temple, and heals the diseased there: His reply to the Pharisees who took
Offense at the Praises of the People: The cursed Fig Tree is dried up: CHRIST
exhorts to Faith in Prayer, and to Forgiveness of Enemies: Certain Greeks
desire to see him: He shows the Benefit of his Death to Believers; Prays to
his Father; is answered by a Voice from Heaven; signifies the Manner of his
Death; and exhorts to make good Use of the present Light. The Generality of
the Jews believe not; yet many chief Rulers believe, but dare not confess him;
He urges Faith in his divine Mission: He silenceth the Priests and Elders who
question his Authority: He delivers the Parable of the two Sons whom their
Father sent to work his Vineyard; the Parable of the Vineyard let out to wicked
Husbandmen; and the Parable of the Marriage of the King's Son, wherein is shown
the Unworthiness of those that were first ^idden, that others were called in
their Room, and the Punishment of one that came without having on the Wedding
Garment.

EARLY the next morning our dear Lord left Bethany, to visit again the capital
of Judea: and, as he pursued his journey, he saw at a distance a fig tree,
which from its fullness of leaves promised abundance of fruit. This inviting
object induced him to approach it, in expectation of finding figs; for he was
hungry, and the season for gathering them was not yet arrived: but, on his
coming to the tree, he found it to be really barren; upon which our blessed
Lord said to it, Let no fruit grow on thee for ever, Matt. xxi.19.

THIS transaction of our Lord, which was purely emblematical, and prefigured
the speedy ruin of the Jewish nation, on account of its unfruitfulness, under
all the advantages it then enjoyed, has, by the enemies of revelation, been
represented as an action unbecoming the Redeemer of mankind: but, if they had
fully considered its intention, that they would have been convinced, that, like
the rest of his miracles, it was done with a gracious intention; namely, to
awaken his countrymen from their lethargy, and prevent the total ruin of their
church and nation, by repentance.

OUR blessed Savior, being disappointed in finding fruit on this fig tree,
pursued his journey to Jerusalem; and, on his arrival, went straightway to the
temple, the outer court of which he found full of merchandise. A sight like
this, vexed his meek and righteous soul: so that having made a small scourge of
cords, he drove them all out of the temple, overturned the tables of the
money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and would not suffer any
vessel to be carried through the temple: saying unto them, Is it not written,
my house shall be called of all nations, a house of prayer? but ye have made it
a den of thieves.

THIS is considered by St. Jerome as one of the greatest of all our Savior's
miracles, and it must be owned that the circumstances are very extraordinary,
that one man should undertake so bold, and execute so hazardous a task; one
man, without a commission from Caesar, without any countenance from the Jewish
rulers, without any arms, either to terrify the multitude, or defend himself;
that he should cast out the whole tribe of mercenary trafficers, wrest from
those worshipers of wealth their darling idol, and trample under foot their
great Diana; and all this without tumult or opposition: not one of the
sacrilegious rabble daring to move the hand or open the mouth.

ACCORDING to tradition, a certain bright and dazzling luster flashed from his
eyes, which the people were unable to bear, as they formerly could not behold
the face of Moses, for the glory that surrounded him: but as the scriptures
take no notice of this transcendent luster, we must only adore the greatness of
the fact, and, at the same time, so improve this miracle to our spiritual
advantage, as to secure by accepting his grace, the power of this mighty
Reformer on our side, that when he shall come in glory, we may be safe under
the shadow of his almighty wings, while he takes fearful vengeance on those who
have defiled his holy temple, and made it a den of thieves; and those who have
robbed Omnipotence of his due, will then find their souls deprived of their
everlasting rewards in the happy mansions of a blessed eternity.

THE temple being thus cleared by our blessed Lord, of this avaricious tribe of
dealers, the people brought unto htm the blind, the lame, and the diseased, who
were all healed by the Son of God; so that the very children proclaimed him to
be the great Son of David, the long expected Messiah, when they saw the many
miraculous cures he performed.

THE Pharisees were highly provoked at these transactions, but they feared the
people, and therefore only asked him, if he heard what the children said?
insinuating that he ought to rebuke them, and not suffer them thus to load him
with the highest praises. But JESUS, instead of giving a direct answer to their
question, repeated a passage out of the eighth Psalm: Have ye never read, said
the blessed JESUS, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, thou have
perfected praise? Giving them to understand, that the meanest of God's works
are so formed, as to declare the greatness of his protection; and that if the
Father does not refuse the praise which arises from the least of his creatures,
so the Son did not disdain that offered him by children. In the present
juncture, praise was peculiarly acceptable, as it implied, that his miracles
were so exceedingly illustrious, that they led the tender minds of children,
illuminated only with the dawnings of reason, to acknowledge him for the
Messiah so earnestly desired, and so long expected, by all the descendants of
Jacob.

IN the evening, our Lord with his disciples, left the city and retired to
Bethany, where his benevolent miracle, in raising Lazarus from the dead had
procured him many friends, among whom he was always in safety. The next
morning, as they were returning to Jerusalem, the disciples were astonished at
beholding the fig tree that had been but the morning before declared barren,
dried up from the roots: they had, in all probability, forgotten what our
Savior had said to this fig tree, till its dry and withered aspect brought it
again to their memory. Peter, on seeing this astonishing phenomenon, said unto
JESUS, Master, behold the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away! To
which JESUS answered, that whoever had faith in the Almighty, or thoroughly
believed in his miracles, should be able to do much greater things than the
withering of the fig tree: 'And JESUS answering, says unto them, Have faith in
God. For verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, be
thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart,
but shall believe, that those things which he sees shall come to pass; he
shall have whatsoever he says,' Mark xi.22, 23.

HE also added, that whatsoever they should ask by faith, they should receive;
and concluded, by giving them directions concerning prayer, which was necessary
to increase the faith he mentioned: 'And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye
have ought against any: that your Father also which is in heaven, may forgive
you your trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which
is in heaven, forgive your trespasses.'

DURING our dear Redeemer's continuance in the temple, certain proselyted
Greeks, who came up to worship at Jerusalem, desired to see him, having long
cherished expectations of beholding the promised Messiah. Accordingly, they
applied to Philip, a native of Bethsaida, who mentioned it to Andrew, and he
told it to JESUS. Upon which our blessed Savior told his disciples, that he
should soon be honored with the conversion of the Gentiles: The hour is come,
said he, that the Son of man should be glorified. But declared, that before
this glorious event happened, he must suffer death; illustrating the necessity
there was of his dying, by the similitude of casting grain into the earth:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the ground,
and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit, John
xii.24. Adding, that since it was absolutely necessary for him, their Lord and
Master, to suffer the pains of death before he ascended the throne of his
glory; so they, as his followers, must also expect, to be persecuted and
spitefully used for his name sake; but if they persevered, and even resolved to
lose their lives in his service, he would reward their constancy with a crown
of glory. And at the same time he tacitly insinuated, that the strangers, if
their desire of conversing with him proceeded from an expectation of obtaining
temporal preferments, would find themselves greatly disappointed: 'If any man
serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if
any man serve me, him will my Father honor.'

THUS having surveyed his own sufferings, and proposed them as an example to
his disciples, the melancholy prospect so greatly moved him, that he uttered in
a very pathetic manner his grief, and addressed his heavenly Father for succor
in his distress: Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me
from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour.

WE should learn by this example of our Lord, that prayer is the only method of
easing the mind overwhelmed with distress; but at the same time, to be always
resigned to the divine will: for though the weakness of human nature may shrink
when persecutions or sufferings of any kind appear in all their hideous forms;
yet, by reflecting on the wisdom, goodness, and power of God to deliver us, we
ought to support every trial, however severe, with patience, as he doubtless
proposes some happy end by these afflictions.

OUR dear Redeemer, having given vent to his melancholy reflections, and made a
short prayer to his heavenly Father, begged of God to demonstrate the truth of
his mission, by some token which could not be resisted: Father, glorify thy
name. Nor had the great Savior of mankind hardly uttered these words, before
he was answered by an audible voice from heaven, I have both glorified it, and
will glorify it again. The miracles thou have already performed have glorified
my name; and, by other miracles, to be wrought before the sons of men, I will
still continue to glorify it.

THIS voice was evidently preternatural, resembling thunder in loudness, but
sufficiently articulate to be understood by those who heard our blessed Savior
pray to his heavenly Father. And JESUS told his disciples, that it was not
given for his sake but to confirm them in their faith of his mission: This
voice, said he, came not because of me, but for your sakes. It came to confirm
what I have told you relating to my sufferings, death, resurrection, and the
conversion of the whole Gentile world to the Christian religion.

A prospect like this, could not fail of being agreeable to that compassionate
Being, who came down from heaven to redeem lost and undone mankind, and of
removing the melancholy thoughts that afflicted his spotless soul: and,
acccordingly, he communicated this comfortable reflection to his disciples,
telling them that the time was at hand when the kingdom of Satan should be
destroyed, and the sons of men exalted with himself into the happy regions of
the heavenly Canaan: Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of
this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all
men unto me.

BUT the people on hearing our blessed Redeemer affirm, that he was to suffer
death on the cross, or as he termed it, be lifted up from the earth, could not
reconcile what he said with the prophecies made concerning the Messiah, whom
they supposed was never to taste of death: We have heard, said they, out of the
law, that Christ abides forever: and how say thou, The Son of man must be
lifted up? To which our blessed Lord replied, that they should soon be deprived
of his presence and miracles, and therefore they would do well to listen
attentively to his precepts, firmly believe the doctrines he delivered, and
wisely improve them to their eternal advantage; for otherwise, they would be
soon overtaken with spiritual blindness, and rendered incapable of inheriting
the promises of the gospel: that while they enjoyed the benefit of his
preaching and miracles, which sufficiently proved the truth of his mission from
the Most High, they should believe on him, for by that means alone they could
become the children of God: 'Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk
while you have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in
darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have light, believe in the
light, that ye may be the children of light.

HAVING spoken these words to the people, our dear Lord retired privately from
Jerusalem, probably to Bethany: but, notwithstanding the many miracles our
great Redeemer had wrought in the presence of this perverse and stiff-necked
people, the generality of them refused to own him for the Messiah; being filled
with the vain expectations of a temporal prince, who was to rule over all the
kingdoms of the earth, and place his throne in Jerusalem. Some, indeed, even of
the rulers, believed on him, though, valuing the good opinion of men above the
approbation of the Almighty, they thought it prudent to conceal their faith,
lest they should, like the blind man, be excommunicated, or put out of the
synagogue.

BUT our Redeemer being willing to cherish the least glimmerings of faith,
wherever it appeared, he soon returned to Jerusalem; and to inspire such as
believed on him with courage, he cried in the temple, He that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me. As if he had said, the doctrine I
preach to the children of men, is so evidently from God, that he who believes
on me, believes more properly on the Almighty, who sent me into the world, and
by whose authority alone I preach the gospel: adding, he that sees the
miracles I perform, sees the operations of that omnipotent power by which I
act; I am the Sun of Righteousness, whose beams dispel the darkness of
ignorance in which the sons of men are involved, and am come to deliver all who
believe on me, out of that palpable darkness. You must not however expect, that
I will at present execute my judgments upon those who refuse to embrace the
doctrines of the gospel; for I am not come to condemn and punish, but to save
the world, and consequently to try every gentle and winning method to reclaim
the wicked from the error of their ways, and turn their feet into the paths of
virtue, which lead to the happy mansions of my Father's kingdom: they shall
not, however escape unpunished who neglect the instructions and offers of
salvation now made to them; for the doctrine I have preached, shall bear
witness against them at the awful tribunal of the last day; and as it has
aggravated their sin, so it shall then heighten their punishment. I well know,
that the doctrines and precepts which the Father has commanded me to preach,
are the only conditions of eternal life; and, therefore, I have promised them
with the greatest faithfulness, perspicuity, and confidence; consequently I am
worthy of credit, both with regard to my mission, and the faithfulness with
which I have executed the commands of the Most High.

A deputation of priests and elders was sent from the supreme council, while
our Lord was thus preaching in the temple, to ask him concerning the nature of
the authority by which he acted, whether it was as prophet, priest, or king, as
no other person had a right to make any alterations either in church or state;
and, if he laid claim to either of those characters, from whom he received it;
But our blessed Savior, instead of giving a direct answer to the question of
the Pharisees, asked them another; promising, if they resolved his question, he
would also answer theirs: I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I
in like manner will tell you by what authority I do these things. The baptism
of John, whence was it? from heaven or of men? Matt. xxi.14, 25.

THE priests were reduced, by this question, to an inextricable dilemma: they
considered, on the one hand, that if they said it was from God, it would oblige
them to acknowledge the authority of JESUS, John having more than once publicly
declared him to be the Messiah; and, on the other, if they peremptorily denied
the authority of John, they would be in danger of being stoned by the people,
who, in general, considered him as a prophet: they therefore thought it the
most eligible method to answer, that they could not tell from whence John's
baptism was. Thus, by declining to answer the question asked them by JESUS,
they left him at liberty to decline giving the council the satisfaction they
had sent to demand: and, at the same time, they plainly confessed, that they
were unable to pass any sentence on John the Baptist, notwithstanding he
claimed the character of a messenger from God, and they had sent to examine his
pretensions. This was, in effect, to acknowledge, that they were incapable of
judging of any prophet whatsoever; well, therefore, might the blessed JESUS
say, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things. You have no right
to ask, since you have confessed you are unable to judge; and, for that reason,
I shall not satisfy your inquiry.

THIS deputation of the elders having said, that they were ignorant from whence
the baptism of John was, our blessed Savior sharply rebuked them, conveying
his reproof in the parable of the two sons commanded to work in their father's
vineyard; and made them condemn themselves, by asking their opinion of the two.
A certain man, said he, had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son,
go work to day in my vineyard. But this ungracious youth very roughly answered
the kind command of his father, and, without the least preface, or appellation
of respect, answered, I will not: but, after reflecting on the impropriety and
indecency of such behavior to this kind and indulgent father, he repented of
what he had done, and went to work in the vineyard. The father having met with
so harsh a reply from the former son, had recourse to the other, and in the
same manner ordered him to work that day in his vineyard. This son was very
different from the former, and in a very dutiful manner said, I go Sir. But
notwithstanding this seeming obedience, he delayed to do as his father desired;
he did not go to work in the vineyard. The temper and behavior of this second
son were exactly conformable to that of the Pharisees: they gave the Almighty
the most honorable titles, and professed the utmost zeal for his service, in
their prayers and praises; but at the same time refused to do any part of the
work that he enjoined them. In the character of the other son, the disposition
of the publicans and harlots is well described. They neither professed or
promised to do the will of their Creator; but when they came to reflect
seriously, on their conduct, and the offers of mercy which were so kindly made
them, they submitted to our Savior, and amended their lives in consequence of
their faith.

OUR Lord having thus finished the parable, asked the Pharisees, Whether of
them twain did the will of his Father? They say unto him, the first. They did
not immediately perceive, that by this answer they condemned themselves, till
our Savior made a just application to the parable, in this sharp, but just
rebuke: 'Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you. For John came unto you in the way of righteousness,
and ye believed him not,' nor entered into your father's vineyard, though like
the second son, you promise in the most fair and candid manner; but the
publicans and the harlots believed him, repented of their former disobedience,
and entered into the vineyard.

OUR blessed Lord did not rest satisfied with showing the Pharisees the
heniousness of their sin in rejecting the Baptist, but he thought proper also
to represent the crime of the nation in rejecting all the prophets which had
been sent since they became a nation, and among the rest, the only begotten Son
of the Most High; warning them, at the same time, of their danger, and the
punishment that would inevitably ensue, if they continued in their rebellion.
The outward economy of religion, in which they gloried, would be taken from
them; their relation to God, as his people, cancelled; and the national
constitution destroyed: but because these topics were extremely disagreeable,
he delivered them under the veil of the following parable: There was, said he a
certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and
dug a wine press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and
went into a far country.

WE frequently find in the sacred scriptures, the comparison of the church to a
vineyard; but this particular parable, for the fuller conviction of the Jews,
is expressly taken from the fifth chapter of the prophet Isaiah, with which
they could not fail of being well acquainted, nor ignorant of its meaning, as
the prophet at the end of it adds: The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the
house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for
judgment, but beheld oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. Our
Savior, therefore, continued the metaphor, telling them; That when the time of
the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might
receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one,
and killed another, and stoned another. The Almighty sent the prophets to
exhort the Jews to entertain just sentiments of religion, and tread the paths
of virtue; but the Jews, extremely irritated at the prophets for the freedom
they used in reproving their sins, persecuted and slew them with unrelenting
fury. Their wickedness, however, in killing these messengers, did not instantly
provoke the Almighty to pour down his vengeance upon them; he sent more
prophets to exhort and reclaim them, but they met with no better fate than the
former. His mercy however, still continued; and that no means might be left
untried, he sent unto them his own son, whose authority, being clearly
established by undeniable miracles, ought to have been acknowledged cheerfully
by these wicked men: but how different was the consequences? 'When the
husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, this is the heir; come let
us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. When the Lord, therefore, of
the vineyard comes, what will he do unto those husbandmen? they say unto him.
He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto
other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their season.'

ON hearing this answer made by the Pharisees, the people said, God forbid;
surely these husbandmen will not proceed to such desperate iniquity; surely the
vineyard will not thus be taken from them. But, to confirm the truth of this,
our Savior added a remarkable prophecy of himself, and of his rejection, from
the 118th Psalm: Did ye never, said he, read in the Scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the
Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

THE rejection of the Messiah by the Jews, and the reception he met with among
the Gentiles, all brought to pass by the providence of God, are wonderful
events: and therefore I say unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

THE chief priests, perceiving the drift of our Savior's parable, were highly
incensed, and would gladly have apprehended him; but they feared the people,
who acknowledged him as the Messiah while they surrounded him in the temple.

BUT as the rulers were afraid to apprehend JESUS, he was at liberty to proceed
in the offices of his ministry; accordingly he delivered another parable,
wherein he described on the one hand, the bad success which the preaching of
the gospel was to meet with amongst the Jews; and, on the other, the cheerful
reception given it among the Gentiles. This gracious design of the Almighty, in
giving the gospel to the children of men, our blessed Savior illustrated by
the behavior of a certain king, who, in honor of his son, made a great feast,
to which he invited many guests: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain
king; which made a marriage for his son. This marriage-supper, or great feast,
signifies the joys of heaven, which are properly compared to an elegant
entertainment, on account of their exquisiteness and duration; and are here
said to be prepared in honor of the Son of God, being bestowed on men as a
reward for their obedience.

BUT before the supper was ready, the servants were sent forth to call the
guests to the wedding; that is, when the fullness of time approached, the Jews,
as being the peculiar people of God, were first called to the great feast of
heaven by John the Baptist, and afterward by CHRIST himself; but they refused
all these benevolent calls of mercy, and rejected the kind invitations of the
gospel, though pressed by the preaching of the Messiah, and his forerunner.
After our Savior's resurrection and ascension, the apostles were sent forth to
inform the Jews, that the gospel covenant was established; that mansions in
heaven was prepared; and that nothing was wanting but their cheerful acceptance
of the honor designed them: Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell
them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage. But
these messengers were as unsuccessful as the former. The Jews undervaluing the
favor offered them, mocked at the message; and some of them, more rude than
the rest, insulted, beat and slew the servants, that had been sent to call them
to the marriage-supper of the lamb: But when the king heard thereof, he was
wroth; and sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up
their city. This branch of the parable, plainly predicted the destruction of
the Jews by the Roman armies, called here the armies of the Almighty, because
they were appointed by him to execute vengeance on that once favorite, but now
rebellious people.

THE benevolent calls of the gospel being thus rejected by the Jews, the king
again sent forth his servants into the countries of the Gentiles, with orders
to compel all that they met with to come into the marriage. This was
immediately done, and the wedding was furnished with guests: but when the king
came into the apartment, he saw there a The Conference of CHRIST with the
Pharisees concerning the Tribute Money
man which had not on a wedding garment; and he says unto him, Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
Then said (...) the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and
cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: for
many are called, but few are chosen, Matt. xxii.11, 12, 13, 14.

THE latter part of the parable represents the final judgment, and teaches us,
that though the Gentiles obey^d the call of the gospel with more alacrity than
the Je^^ yet they should not all be saved. And by the conclusion of the parable
we learn, that the profession of the christian religion will not save a man,
unless he lives in a manner conformable to its precepts. Let us, therefore, who
have obeyed the call, and are by profession the people of God, think often on
that awful day, when the king will come in (...) see his guests, when the
Almighty will, with the greatest strictness, view every soul that lays claim to
the joys of heaven: let us think of the speechless confusion that will seize
such as have not on the wedding garment, and of the inexorable-anxiety with
which they will be consigned to weeping and gnashing of teeth; and let us
remember, that to have seen for a while the light of the gospel, the fair
beamings of an eternal hope, will add deeper and more sensible horrors to these
gloomy caverns. On the other hand, to animate and encourage us, let us think
also on the harmony, pomp and beauty of heaven, that will add to the solemnity,
the magnificence, and the joys of the happy time, when the marriage-supper of
the Lamb shall be celebrated.

CHAPTER XXIX.
Our Savior answers the insidious Question of the Pharisees concerning paying
tribute to Caesar: He confuteth the Sadducees who questioned him touching the
Resurrection: He shows which are the two great Commandments of the Law: He
proposes to the Pharisees a Question concerning himself: He exhorts to
observe the Doctrine, but not to follow the evil Example of the Scribes and
Pharisees; and particularly not to imitate their ambition: He pronounces
diverse Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, for their Blindness and
Hypocrisy: and proposes the Destruction of Jerusalem.

THE parable of the marriage-supper incensed the Pharisees in such a manner,
that they immediately concerted with the Herodians or Sadducees on the most
proper method of putting our Lord to death. It is sufficiently evident, that
their hatred was now carried to the highest pitch; because the most violent
enmity which had so long subsisted between the two sects, was on this occasion
suspended, and they joined together to execute this cruel determination on the
Son of God: they, however, thought it most eligible to act very cautiously, and
endeavor if possible, to catch some hasty expression from him, that they might
render him odious to the people, and procure something against him, that might
serve as a basis for a prosecution. Accordingly, they sent some of their
disciples to him, with orders to seign themselves just men, who maintained the
greatest veneration for the divine law, and dreaded nothing more than the doing
any thing inconsistent with its precepts; and, under this specious cloak of
hypocrisy, to beg his determination of an affair that had long lain heavy on
their consciences; namely, the paying tribute to Caesar, which they thought
inconsistent with their zeal for religion. This question was, it seems,
furiously debated in our Savior's time; one Judas, a native of Galilee, having
inspired the people with a notion, that taxes to a foreign power were
absolutely unlawful. A doctrine so pleasing to the worldly-minded Jews, could
not fail of friends, especially among the lower class; and therefore, must have
many partisans amongst the multitude that then surrounded the Son of God. The
priests, therefore imagined, that it was not in his power to decide the point,
without rendering himself obnoxious to some of the parties: if he should say it
was lawful to pay the taxes they believed, that the people in whose hearing the
question was proposed, would be incensed against him, not only as a base
pretender, who, on being attacked, publicly renounced the character of the
Messiah, which he had assumed among his friends, but also as a flatterer of
princes, and a betrayer of the liberties of his country; one who taught
doctrines inconsistent with the known privileges of the people of God: but if
he should affirm, that it was unlawful to pay tribute, they determined to
inform the governor, who they hoped, would punish him as a fomenter of
sedition. Highly elated with their project, they accordingly came; and, after
passing an encomium on the truth of his mission, his courage, and his
impartiality, they proposed this famous question: 'Master,' said they, 'we know
that thou art true and carest for no man; for thou regardest not the person of
men, but teach the way of God in truth. Tell us therefore, what think
thou, is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not?'

HOWEVER, though they had artfully laid the scheme, they could not deceive our
blessed Lord, who beheld the inmost recesses of their hearts: he saw their
secret intentions; and accordingly called them hypocrites, to signify, that
though they made conscience, and a regard for the divine will, their pretense
for proposing this question, he saw their design, and knew that their intention
was only to ensnare him.

NEVERTHELESS, our blessed Savior did not decline answering their question,
but previously desired to see a piece of the tribute money. The piece was
accordingly produced, and proved to be coined by the Romans. Upon which our
dear Lord answered them, since this money bears the image of Caesar, it is his;
and by making use of it, you acknowledge his authority: if so, I leave it to
yourselves, to judge whether tribute ought not to be paid toward the support
of that government, which ye have acknowledged, which ye cannot shake off, and
by which your tranquillity is preserved: but, at the same time that, you
discharge your duty to the civil magistrate, you should never forget the duty
you owe to you God; but remember that as you bear the image of the great, the
omnipotent King, you are his subjects, and ought to pay him the tribute of
yourselves, serving him to the very utmost of your power.

UNDER a pretense of religion, the Pharisees and their followers often
justified sedition; but the Herodians, in order to ingratiate themselves with
the reigning powers, made them a compliment of their consciences, complying
with whatever they enjoined, however opposite their commands might be to the
divine law. Our Lord therefore adapted his answer to them both, exhorting them
in their regards to God and the magistrate, to give each his due; as, when
their rights only are insisted on, there can be no inconsistency between them.

JESUS, by so unexpected an answer, confuted them on their own principles, and
showed, that the rights of God, and those of the magistrate, do not in the
least interfere; because magistrates are God's deputies, and rule by his
authority: this quite disconcerted and silenced these crafty enemies; they were
astonished both at his having discovered their design, and his wisdom in
avoiding the snare they had so artfully laid for him: When they heard these
words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way, Matt. xxii.22.

BUT the miscarriage of this scheme did not intimidate others from renewing the
attack; enemies came against him from every quarter. The Sadducees, who denied
the doctrine of a future state, together with the existence of angels and
spirits, first returned to the charge; proposing to him their strongest
argument against the resurrection which they deduced from the law given by
Moses, with regard to marriage: Master, said they, Moses wrote unto us, If a
man's brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his brother
should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. There were therefore,
seven brethren; and the first took a wife, and died without children. And the
second took her to wife, and he died childless. And the third took her; and in
like manner the seven also: and they left no children and died. Last of all the
woman died also. Therefore, in the resurrection, whose wife of them is she? for
seven had her to wife. Luke xx.28 -- 33.

BUT the Sadducees, believing the soul to be nothing more than a refined
matter, were persuaded, that if there was any future state, it must resemble
the present; and the being in that state material and mortal, the human race
could not be continued, nor the individuals rendered happy without the
pleasures and conveniences of marriage: and hence considered that every man's
wife should be restored to him, as a necessary consequence of the doctrine of
the resurrection, or a future state.

BUT our blessed Savior soon confuted this argument, by telling the Pharisees
they were ignorant of the power of God, who had created spirit as well as
matter, and who can render man completely happy in the enjoyment of himself. He
also observed, that the nature of the life obtained in a future state, made
marriage altogether superfluous, because in the world to come, men being
spiritual and immortal, like the angels, there was no need of natural means to
propagate or continue the kind: Ye do err, said our dear Lord, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. For in the resurrection, they neither marry,
nor are given in marriage. Matt. xxii.29. Neither can they die any more; for
they are equal unto the angels, and are the children of God, being the children
of the resurrection. Luke xx.36. Hence we may observe, that good men are called
the children of the Most High, from their inheritance at the resurrection, and
particularly on account of their being adorned with immortality.

HAVING thus shown their ignorance of the true nature of a future state, and
the difference between corporeal and spiritual beings, our dear Lord proceeded
to show that they were also ignorant of the scriptures, and particularly of the
writings of Moses, from whence they had drawn their objection: for he
demonstrated, from the very law itself, the certainty of a resurrection, at
least, that of just men, and consequently quite demolished the opinion of the
Sadducees, who by believing the materiality of the soul, affirmed that men were
annihilated at their death, and that their opinion was founded on the writings
of Moses: Now, said our Savior, that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at
the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of ^saac,
and the God of Jacob. For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for
all live unto him. Luke xx.37, 38. As if he had said, The Almighty cannot
properly be called God, unless he has his people, and be Lord of the living.
Since, therefore, Moses called him the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, long after these venerable patriarchs were dead, the relation
denoted by the word God, still subsisted between them: consequently they were
not annihilated as you pretend, but are still in being, and continue to be the
servants of the Most High. This argument was conclusive; it effectually
silenced the Sadducees, and agreeably surprised the people, to see the
objection, hitherto thought impregnable, totally abolished, and the sect they
had long abominated, fully confuted: And when the multitude heard this, they
were astonished at his doctrine. Matt. xxii.33.

THOUGH the Pharisees had joined with the Sadducees, in order to put our
blessed Savior to death, they could not fail of being pleased to see their
inveterate enemies put to silence, and the famous argument they had so often
proposed with ostentations, as unanswerable, fully confuted. Nor could they
refrain from giving the Savior of mankind the praise due to his superlative
wisdom; for one of the Scribes desired him to give his opinion, on a question
often debated among their teachers; namely, which was the great commandment of
the law. The true reason for their proposing this question, was to try whether
he was as well acquainted with the sacred law, and the debates that had arisen
on different parts of it, as he was in deriving arguments from the inspired
writers to destroy the tenets of those who denied a future state.

IN order to understand the question proposed to our blessed Savior by the
Scribe, it must be remembered, that some of the most learned Rabbis had
declared, that the law of sacrifices was the great commandment; some, that it
was the law of circumcision; and others, that the law of meats and washings had
merited that title. Our blessed Savior, however, showed that they were all
mistaken: and that the great commandment of the law is the duty of piety; and
particularly mentioned that comprehensive summary of it, given by Moses, Hear,
O Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord; and thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all
thy strength: this is the first and great commandment. Mark xiii.29, 30.

HERE I cannot help observing, that this summary of piety begins with an
emphatical assertion of there being only one God, the maker of heaven and
earth, and the possessor of all perfection, in order to induce us to use the
utmost diligence in obeying his precepts; the first and chief of which is, to
give him our hearts. The Divine Being is so transcendently amiable in himself,
and has by the innumerable benefits conferred upon us, such a title to our
utmost affection, that no obligation bears any proportion to that of loving
him. The honor assigned to this precept, proves that piety is the noblest act
of the human mind, and that the chief ingredient in piety is love, founded on a
clear and extensive view of the divine perfections, a permanent sense of his
benefits, and a deep conviction of his being the sovereign good -- our portion
-- our happiness: but it is essential to love, that there be a delight in
contemplating the beauty of the object beloved, whether that beauty be matter
of sensation or reflection; that we frequently, and with pleasure, reflect on
the benefits conferred on us by the object of our affections; that we have a
strong desire of pleasing him, great fear of doing any thing to offend him, and
a sensible joy in thinking we are beloved in return. Hence the duties of
devotion, prayer, and praise, are the most natural and genuine exercises of the
love of God: nor is this virtue so much any single affection, as the continual
bent of all the affections and powers of the soul; consequently to love God is
as much as possible to direct the whole soul toward him, and to exercise all
its faculties on him as its chief object. Accordingly, the love of God is
described in scripture, by the several operations of the mind, a following hard
after God, namely, by intense contemplation; a sense of his perfection,
gratitude for his benefits, trust in his goodness, attachment to his service,
resignation to his providence, the obeying of his commandments, admiration,
hope, fear, joy, etc. not because it consists in any of those singly, but in
them altogether: for to content ourselves with partial regards to the Supreme
Being, is not to be affected toward him in the manner we ought to be, and
which his perfections claim. Hence the words of the precept are, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, and with all thy strength; that is with the joint force of all thy
faculties; and therefore, no idol whatsoever must partake of the love and
worship that is due to him alone.

BUT the beauty and excellency of this state of mind is best seen in its
effects* for the worship and obedience flowing from such an universal bent of
the soul toward God, is as much superior to the worship and obedience arising
from partial considerations, as the brightness of the sun is to any picture
that can be drawn of that luminary. Thus, for example, if we look upon God,
only as a stern lawgiver, who can and will punish our rebellion, it may,
indeed, force an awe and dread of him, and as much obedience to his law as we
think will satisfy him, but can never produce that constancy in our duty, that
delight in it, and that earnestness to perform it in its utmost extent, which
are produced and maintained in the mind, by the sacred fire of divine love, or
by the bent of the whole soul turned toward God: a frame that constitutes the
highest perfection and happiness of the creature, and, therefore, the most
excellent that can be conceived and the most to be desired.

WE should always earnestly desire to be blessed with the presence of the Most
High, our souls should pant after him, as the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, and even thirst for the Living God. Again, this commandment
requires us to fear God; and certainly we cannot love the Lord our God, unless
we fear and reverence him: for as the love, so the fear of God, is the sum of
all the commandments, and indeed, the substance of all religion. If we
acknowledge there is a God, it is but reasonable we should fear his essential
greatness and glory; for you open a passsage for a deluge of villainy and
wickedness, if you take away the fear of a Deity, and that of a Supreme. Power,
that can reward and punish the actions of men.

IT is not enough that we love and fear the Most High, we must also call upon
the name of God in our prayers and praises; love and fear, respect the inward
worship of God in our hearts, and by this act of outward worship, we give an
express testimony that we love and fear him: prayer and praises are the tribute
and homage of religion, by the one we acknowledge our dependence upon God, by
the other we confess, that all our blessings and comforts are from him. Such,
therefore, as neither pray to God nor praise him, cannot be said to have a God,
for they acknowledged none, but are gods to themselves; and as the love and
fear of God are often used in scripture for his whole worship and service, so
is this calling upon his name; Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that knows
thee not, and upon the families that have not called upon thy name, Jer. x.25.

But to return -- Our blessed Savior having thus answered the question put to
him by the Scribe, added, that the second commandment was that which enjoined
the love of our neighbor. This had, indeed, no relation to the lawyer's
question concerning the first commandment; yet our blessed Lord thought proper
to show him which was the second, probably because the men of his sect did not
acknowledge the importance and precedence of love to their neighbors, or
because they were remarkably deficient in the practice of it, as JESUS himself
had often found in their attempts to kill him: And the second is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.

OUR natures must be brought to a temper that is all love and goodness, if we
would become like God, who is love; and if our souls dwell in love, then we
dwell in God and God in us. This principle will be also fruitful in every good
work; it will make us readily perform the duties of all relations in which we
stand: and because love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore it is the
fulfilling of the law; for it will prompt us to a cheerful and ready
performance of every office, whether of justice or charity, that we owe to ou^
neighbor: all the best things we can do, if destitute of this principle, will
appear to be either the effect of hypocrisy, or done to procure the esteem of
men: without love, a narrowness of soul will shut us up within ourselves, and
make all we do to others only as a sort of merchandise, trading for our own
advantage: it is love only that opens our hearts to consider other persons, and
to love them on their own account, or rather on account of God, who is love.

THOSE who possess the effects of this excellent temper well deserve our
consideration: they have a constant calm within, and are not disturbed with
passion, jealousy, envy, or ill nature: they observe and rejoice in the
happiness of others, they are glad to see them easy, and share with them in
their joy and felicity, not fretting or complaining, though they enjoy less
than their neighbors. It is true, love has a very different effect; for the
same temper will render many so considerate of the misfortunes of others, as to
sympathize with them in their distress and be greatly affected with such
objects of compassion as it is not in their power to assist: but there is a
real pleasure even in this compassion, as it melts us into the greatest
tenderness, and proves us to be men and Christians. The good man, by the
overflowings of his love, is sure that he is a favorite with his Maker,
because he loves his neighbor: his soul, therefore dwells at ease; there is a
sweetness in all his thoughts and wishes: this makes him clear in his views of
things; no vapors, no clouds darken him, but an inward serenity reigns in his
mind, and such a liveliness in all his thoughts, as spreads a cheerfulness in
his looks, and renders him grateful to all about him.

A constant disposition for prayer, is also maintained in him who has this
charitable temper: a calm mind is easily recollected; but nothing dissipates
the thoughts more, and renders them less fixed and attentive than passion. A
charitable man, who has had occasions to forbear and forgive others, and to
return good for evil, dares, with an humble assurance to lay claim to mercy and
pardon: for though he is ready to acknowledge, he is many talents indebted to
his Maker; yet being of a forgiving temper, he has an argument to plead for
mercy and forgiveness, and to conclude that much will be forgiven him because he
loves much. There is such a likeness and sympathy between the spirit of love,
and the spirit of true devotion, that they have a sensible influence upon each
other, and the one will rise or fall in proportion to the other.

BUT to return from this digression, which we flatter ourselves has not been
disagreeable to the reader, we shall go back to the Scribe who was astonished
at the justness of our Savior's decisions, and answered, that he had
determined rightly since there is but one Supreme God, whom we must all adore;
and if we love him as much as we are able, and without a rival, and our
neighbor as ourselves, we worship him more acceptably than if we sacrifice to
him all the cattle upon a thousand hills. And our Lord declared, that the
person who made this reflection, was not far from the kingdom of God, and
highly applauded the piety and wisdom of it.

DURING the course of our Savior's ministry, the Pharisees having proposed to
him many difficult questions with an intention to prove his prophetical gifts,
he now, in his turn, thought proper to make a trial of their skill in the
sacred writings. For this purpose, he asked their opinion of a difficulty
concerning the Messiah's pedigree: What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he?
They say unto him, the son of David, Matt. xxii.42. I know, answered JESUS, you
say, CHRIST is the son of David; but how can you support that opinion, or
render it consistent with the words of David, who himself calls him Lord; and
how is he his son? It seems, that the Jewish doctors did not imagine that their
Messiah would be endued with any perfections greater than those that might be
enjoyed by human nature; for though they called him the Son of God, they had no
notion that he was God, and therefore could not pretend to solve the
difficulty. The latter question however, might have convinced them of their
error; for if the Messiah was only to be a secular prince as they supposed, and
to rule over the men of his own time, he never could have been called Lord, by
persons who died before he was born; far less would so mighty a prince as
David, who was also his progenitor, have conferred on him that ^itle. Since,
therefore, he not only rules over the vulgar dead of former ages, but even over
the kings from whom he was himself descended, and his kingdom comprehends the
men of all countries and times, past, present, and to come; the doctors, if
they had thought accurately upon the subject, should have expected in their
Messiah a king different from all other kings whatever: besides, he is to sit
at God's right hand, till all his enemies are made his footstool. Numbers of
CHRIST's enemies are subject to him in this life: and they who will not bow to
him willingly, shall be reduced by punishment, like the rebellious subjects of
other kingdoms.

HE returned such clear and solid answers to the ensnaring questions of his
adversaries, that they gave the people an high opinion of his wisdom; and
showed them, how far superior he was to their most renowned Rabbis, whose
argument to prove their opinions, and answers to the objections which were
raised against him, were, in general, very weak and trifling: nay, his foes
themselves, from the repeated proofs they had received from the prodigious
depth of his understanding, were impressed with such an opinion of his wisdom,
that they judged it impossible to entangle him in his talk. Accordingly, they
left off attempting it, and troubled him no more with their insidious questions
from that day.

OUR blessed Savior silenced his most virulent opposers by this means; but
having mentioned the final conquest and destruction of his enemies, who were to
be made his footstool, agreeable to the prediction of the royal Psalmist, he
turned toward his disciples, and in the hearing of the multitude, solemnly
cautioned them to beware of the Scribes and Pharisees; insinuating thereby, who
the enemies were whose destruction he had mentioned: The Scribes and Pharisees,
said he, sit in Moses's seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say and do not.
Matt. xxiii.2, 3. While they teach the doctrines before delivered by Moses,
observe all they say, but by no means imitate their practices; for they impose
many precepts on their disciples, which they never perform themselves: For they
bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders;
but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. But all their
works they do for to be seen of men. The difficult precepts they impose on
others are never regarded by these hypocrites, and any good action they may
happen to perform, is vitiated by the principle from whence it proceeds: they
do it only with a view to popular applause, and not from a regard to God, far
less from a love of goodness: they are proud and arrogant to excess, as is
plain from their affected gravity in their clothes, from the anxiety they
discover, lest they should not obtain the principal seats in the public
assemblies, and from their affecting to be saluted in the streets, with the
sounding titles of Rabbi and Father: 'They make broad their phylacteries, and
enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be
called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.'

THE proper meaning of the word Rabbi is great, and it was given to those men
who had rendered themselves remarkable for the extent of their learning; it is
therefore no wonder that the proud and supercilious Pharisees were so fond of a
title, which gave them great authority with their disciples, and highly
complimented their understandings.

BUT our Lord's followers were to decline this title, because the thing
signified by it belonged solely to their Master, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and because they owed no part of their
knowledge to themselves, but derived it entirely from him who came down from
heaven: 'But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even CHRIST; and
all ye are brethren. And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is
your Father, which is in heaven,' Matt. xiii.8, 9. Life, with all its
blessings, comes from God, and men wholly depend upon him; all praise and
thankfulness, therefore, should ultimately be referred to him; so that if any
one teaches rightly, not the teacher, but the wisdom of the Almighty is to be
praised, which exerts and communicates itself by him.

THE disciples of our blessed Savior were likewise enjoined not to accept of
the title of master or leader, which the Jewish doctors also courted; because
in point of commission, and inspiration, they were all equal, neither had they
any title to rule the consciences of men, except by virtue of the inspiration
which they had received from their Master, to whom alone the prerogative of
infallibility belonged: Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master,
even Christ.

HOWEVER, our blessed Savior did not intend by this to insinuate, that it was
sinful to call men by the stations they held in the world; he only intended to
reprove the simplicity of the common people, who loaded their teachers with
praises, and forgot to ascribe any thing to God; and to root out of the minds
of his apostles, the Pharisaical vanity, which decked itself with honors
belonging solely to the Creator of the universe. Accordingly, that he might
instill into their hearts humility, to dispose them to do good offices to one
another, as occasion offered, he assured them, it was the only road to true
greatness: for, by assuming what did not properly belong to them, they should
be despised both by God and men; whereas, they should enjoy a high degree of
the divine favor, who did not disdain to perform the meanest offices of love
to their brethren.

THE Scribes and Pharisees were greatly incensed at the above discourses; and,
as they were pronounced in the hearing of many of that order, it is therefore
no wonder that they watched every opportunity to destroy him: but this was not
a time to put their bloody designs in execution; the people set too high a
value on his doctrine to suffer any violence to be offered to his person; and,
as this was the last sermon he was ever to preach in public, and as all his
mild persuasions had hitherto proved ineffectual, it was necessary, that he
should now use some severity.

HE accordingly denounced in the most solemn manner, dreadful woes against
them, not on account of the personal injuries he had received from them, but on
account of their excessive wickedness. They were public teachers of religion;
and therefore should have used every method in their power to recommend its
precepts to the people, and to have been themselves shining examples of every
duty it enjoined: but, on the contrary, they abused every mark and character of
goodness for all the purposes of villainy; and, under the cloak of a severe and
sanctified aspect, they were malicious, implacable, lewd, covetous, and
rapacious: in a word, instead of being reformers, they were the corrupters of
the people, and consequently their wickedness deserved the greatest reproof
that could be given by the great Redeemer of mankind: Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye
neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses,
and for a pretense make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea
and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more
the child of hell than yourselves, Matt. xxiii.13, etc.

YOU shall suffer punishment that will be terribly severe, because ye have
given a wrong interpretation of the ancient prophecies concerning the Messiah,
and done all that is in your power to hinder the people from repenting of their
sins, and believing the gospel; because you have committed the grossest
iniquities, and under the cloak of religion, have devoured the substance of
widows and orphans, hoping to hide your villainies by long prayers: bacause ye
have expressed the greatest zeal imaginable in making proselytes, not with a
view to render the Gentiles more wise and virtuous, but to acquire their
riches, and a command over their consciences; and instead of teaching them the
precepts of virtue and the moral duties of religion, you confine their duties
to superstitious and ceremonial institutions, and hence they often relapse into
their old state of heathenism, and become more wicked than before their
conversion, and consequently liable to a more severe sentence.

OUR Lord also mentioned, in a particular manner, their doctrine concerning
oaths; and declared in opposition to their abominable tenets, that every oath,
if the matter of it be lawful, is obligatory; because when men swear by any
part of the creation, it is an appeal to the Creator himself; for, in any other
light, an oath of this kind is absolutely ridiculous, the object having neither
knowledge of the fact, nor power to punish the perjury: 'Woe unto you, ye blind
guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but
whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor! Ye fools and
blind, whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
And, whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever swears
by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty! Ye fools and blind, for whether is
greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift? Whosoever therefore
shall swear by the altar, swears by it, and by all things thereon. And whosoever
shall swear by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him that sits
thereon.'

OUR blessed Savior also upbraided them with their superstitious practices, in
observing the minutest parts of the ceremonial precepts of the law, and at the
same time utterly neglecting the eternal and indispensable rules of
righteousness: Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay
tithe of mint, and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of
the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.

THE Son of God also took notice of their hypocrisy; for they spared no pains
to appear virtuous in the eyes of the world, and maintain an external conduct
that should require the praises of men; but, at the same time neglected to
adorn their souls with the robe of righteousness, which is the only ornament
that can render them dear in the sight of their Maker: Woe unto you, Scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the
platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess. Thou blind Pharisee,
cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of
them may be clean also.' Cleanse first thy mind, thy inward man, from evil
dispositions and affections, and thy outward behavior will of course be
virtuous and praiseworthy.

OUR dear Lord also animadverted upon the success of their hypocrisy: they
deceived the simple and unthinking part of mankind, with their pretended
sanctity, appearing like whited sepulchers, beautiful on the outside, while
their internal parts were full of uncleanness: 'Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed
appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead mens' bones, and of all
uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye
are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.'

HE also censured them for the pains they had taken in adorning the sepulchers
of the prophets, because they pretended a great veneration for their memory,
and even condemned their fathers who killed them, saying, that if they had
lived in the days of their fathers, they would have opposed such monstrous
wickedness, while, at the same time, all their actions abundantly proved, that
they still cherished the same spirit they condemned in their fathers,
persecuting the messengers of the Most High, particularly his only begotten
Son, whom they were determined to destroy: Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and gernish the
sepulchers of the righteous, and say, If we had been in the days of our
fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children
of them which killed the prophets.

OUR blessed Savior added, that the Divine Being was desirous of trying every
method for their conversion, though all these instances of mercy were slighted;
and therefore, they must expect such terrible vengeance, as should be a
standing monument of the divine displeasure against all the murders committed
by the sons of men, from the foundation of the world.

THUS having laid before them their heinous guilt and dreadful punishment; he
was at the thought of the calamities which were soon to fall upon them,
exceedingly moved, and his breast filled with sensations of pity to such a
degree, that unable to contain himself, he broke forth into tears, bewailing
the hard lot of the city of Jerusalem; for as its inhabitants had more deeply
imbrued their hands in the blood of the prophets they were to drink more deeply
of the punishment due to such crimes: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest
the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.

THIS exclamation of the benevolent Redeemer of mankind, is such as can hardly
be read without a tear, and conveys a strong idea of his love for that
ungreatful nation. How often had the Almighty called upon them to return from
their evil way, before he sent his only begotten Son into the world! How often,
how emphatically did the compassionate JESUS entreat them to embrace the
merciful terms now offered them by the Almighty! And with what unconquerable
obstinacy did they refuse the benevolent offers, and resist the most winning
expressions of the divine love! By the word house, our blessed Savior meant
the temple, which was from that time to be left unto them desolate; the glory
of the Lord, which Haggai had prophesied should fill the second house, was now
departing from it: adding, 'I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth,
till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. As if he
had said, As ye have killed the prophets, and stoned them whom the Father has
sent from the courts of heaven, and will shortly put me, who am the Lord of the
temple, to death; your holy house shall be left desolate, and your nation
totally deserted by me; nor shall you see me any more till the whole nation is
converted to Christianity, when all the descendants of Jacob shall, with one
voice, cry out, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, as the
multitude lately did.

IN this manner, the blessed JESUS stripped the Scribes and Pharisees of their
hypocritical mask. He treated them with severity, because their crimes were of
the blackest dye; and hence we should learn to be really good, and not flatter
ourselves that we can cover our crimes from that piercing eye to which nothing
is concealed with the cloak of hypocrisy.

AT these discourses, the people could not fail of being astonished, as they
had always considered their teachers as the most righteous among the sons of
men; nay the persons themselves, against whom they were levelled, were
confounded, because their own consciences convinced them of the truth of every
thing laid to their charge. They therefore knew not what course to pursue; and
they let JESUS depart without making any attempt to seize him, or inflict on
him any kind of punishment, being prevented from putting their wicked purposes
into practice until the work was finished for which he was sent of his Father
into the world to do.

CHAPTER XXX.
CHRIST valueth the poor Widow's two Mites above all the gifts of the Rich: He
foretells the Destruction of the Temple; shows what Signs and Calamities
should go before, and what should happen at the Time of his Coming: He delivers
the Parable of the ten Virgins; and of the Talents, which a King distributed
among his Servants, to be improved by them: and in a third Parable, delivered
at the same Time, he gives a Description of the last Judgment.

AFTER our dear Lord had exposed the secret practices of the Scribes and
Pharisees, he repaired with his disciples unto the court of the woman, called
the treasury, from several chests being fixed to the pillars of the portico
surrounding the court for receiving the offerings of those who came to worship
in the temple. While he continued in this court 'He beheld how the people cast
money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. And there came a
certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing. And he
called unto him his disciples, and says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that
this poor widow has cast more in, than all they which have cast into the
treasury; for all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did
cast in all that she had, even all her living.' Mark xii.41, 42, 43, 44.

THIS poor widow's offering was, in itself, very small, yet, in proportion to
the goods she enjoyed, it was remarkably large; for it was all she had, even
all her living. In order, therefore, to encourage charity, and show that it is
the disposition of the mind, not the magnificence of the offering, that
attracted the regard of the Almighty, the Son of God applauded this poor widow,
as having given more in proportion than any of the rich. Their offerings,
though great in respect of here is, were but a small part of their estates,
whereas, her offering was her whole stock. And from this passage of the gospel,
we should learn, that the poor, who in appearance are denied the means of doing
charitable offices, are encouraged to do all they can; for how small soever the
gift may be, the Almighty who beholds the heart, values it, not according to
what it is in itself, but according to the disposition with which it is given.
On the other hand, we should learn from hence, that it is not enough for the
rich, that they exceed the poor in their gifts of charity, they should bestow
in proportion to their fortune; and they would do well to remember, that a
little given, where a little only is possessed, appears a much nobler offering
in the sight of the Almighty, and discovers a more benevolent and humane temper
of mind, than a greater sum out of the abundance of the rich.

OUR Lord having declared, at the conclusion of his pathetic lamentation over
Jerusalem, that the temple should not any more be favored with his presence,
till they should say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: which
declaration greatly surprised his disciples; and therefore, as he was departing
from that sacred structure, they desired him to observe the beauty of the
building, insinuating, that they thought it strange he should intimate an
intention of leaving it desolate; that so glorious a fabric, celebrated in
every corner of the earth, was not to be deserted rashly; and that they should
think themselves supremely happy, when he, as the Messiah, and descendent of
David, should take possession of it, and erect his throne in the midst of
Jerusalem: And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples says unto
him, Master, see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here! The
eastern wall of the temple, which fronted the Mount of Olives, whither the
disciples, with their master, were then retiring, was built from the bottom of
the valley to a prodigious height, with stones of an incredible bulk, firmly
compacted together, and, therefore, made a very grand appearance at a distance.
This eastern wall is supposed to have been the only remains of Solomon's
temple, and had escaped when the Chaldeans burnt it: but this building, however
costly or strange it appeared, our Savior told them should be totally
destroyed: 'Seest thou', said he, 'these great buildings? There shall not be
left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.' Mark xiii.2.

THIS venerable structure, which you behold with wonder, adorned with huge
stones of amazing beauty, shall be razed to the very foundation. The disciples,
therefore, when they heard their Master affirm, that not so much as one of
these enormous stones, which had mocked the fury of of Nebuchadnezzar's army,
and survived the destructive hand of time, was to be left one upon another,
they perceived that the whole temple was to be demolished, but did not suspect
that the sacrifices were to be taken away, and a new religion introduced, which
rendered the temple unnecessary. They therefore, flattered themselves, that the
fabric then standing, however glorious it might appear, was too small for the
numerous worshippers who would frequent it, when all the nations of the world
were subject to the Messiah's kingdom, and was, therefore, to be pulled down,
in order to be erected on a more magnificent plan, suitable to the idea they
had conceived of his future empire. Filled with these pleasing imaginations,
they received the news with pleasure, meditating as they walked to the
mountain, on the glorious things which were shortly to come to pass.

AS soon as they arrived at the Mount of Olives, and their master had taken his
seat on some eminence, from whence they had a prospect of the temple and part
of the city, his disciples drew near, to know when the demolition of the old
structure was to happen, and what were to be the signs of his coming, and of
the end of the world: And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples
came unto him privately, saying, tell us when shall these things be? and what
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? Matt. xxiv.3.

IT is probable the disciples meant what signs should precede the erection of
that extensive empire, over which they supposed the Messiah was to reign; for
they still expected he would govern a secular kingdom. They therefore,
connected the demolition of the temple with their Master's coming, though they
had not the least notion that he was to destroy the nation; and change from the
religious worship. They, therefore, meant by the end of the world, or, as the
words should have been translated, the end of the age, the period of the
political government then executed by Heathen procurators, and considered their
Master's coming to destroy the constitution then subsisting, as a very
desirable event: they also thought the demolition of the temple proper, as they
expected a larger and more superb building would be erected in its stead, in
proportion to the number of the Messiah's subjects.

IT will sufficiently appear, that this is the real sense of the disciples
question, if we consider, that they were delighted with the prospect; whereas,
if they had meant by the end of the world, the final period of all things, the
destruction of the temple would have exhibited to them a melancholy prospect,
which they could not have beheld, without a deep concern, in their present
temper of mind.

THEREFORE, our blessed Lord was careful to convince them of their mistake, by
telling them, that he was not come to rule a secular empire, as they supposed,
but to punish the Jews for their perfidy and rebellion, by destroying both
their temple and nation: Take heed, said he, that no man deceive you. For many
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceiv^ many. This
caution was far from being unnecessary, because, though the disciples were to
see their Master ascend into heaven, they might take occasion from the
prophecy, to think that he would appear again on earth, and, therefore, be in
danger of seduction by the false Christ's that should arise: And when ye shall
hear of wars and rumors of wars, see that ye be not troubled; for all these
things must come to pass; but the end is not yet. Before this nation and temple
are destroyed, terrible wars will happen in the land: 'For nation shall rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be famines, and
pestilences, and earthquakes, in diverse places.'

THESE things are but the beginning of a long series of calamities: which shall
fall upon this nation: at the same time you shall meet with hot persecutions;
walk, therefore, circumspectly, and arm yourselves both with patience and
fortitude, that ye may be able to perform your duty through the whole course of
these persecutions: for you shall be brought before the great men of the earth
for my sake: 'But when they shall lead you and deliver you up, take no thought
before hand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever
shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye; for it is not ye that speak,
but the Holy Ghost.' Mark. xiii.11.

OUR Lord told them, during this time of trouble and confusion, the perfidy of
mankind shall be so great toward one another, that brother shall betray the
brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up against
their parents, and shall cause them to be put to death. The unbelieving Jews
and apostate Christians, shall commit such crimes, that the very idea of which,
shall excite horror in the most barbarous nations. It is, therefore, no wonder
that the perfidy and wickedness of such pretended Christians, shall discourage
many disciples and greatly hinder the propagation of the gospel: but he who
supports his faith during these persecutions, and is not led astray by the
seduction of false Christians, shall escape that terrible destruction which
will overflow the land like a deluge.

MY disciples shall be scattered by these persecutions and tribulations, and
shall preach the gospel in all parts of the Roman empire; and then shall the
period you now inquire after arrive: then shall the Almighty arise to
vengeance, and consume, in his anger, this stiff-necked generation.

AT the time when Jerusalem shall be surrounded with armies, Pagan armies
bearing in their standards the images of their gods, the abomination of
desolation, mentioned by the prophet Daniel; then let him who reads the
predictions of that prophet understand, that the end of the city and sanctuary,
together with the ceasing of the sacrifice and oblation there predicted, is
come, and, of course, the final period of the Jewish government.

THEN let them which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are
in the midst of it depart out; Luke xxi.21. Let him which is on the the
housetop, not come down to take any thing out of his house: neither let him
which is in the field, return back to take his clothes, Matt. xxiv.17, 18. For
the Almighty will now punish this nation for its sin: these are the days of his
vengeance, when all the threatenings of the prophets, especially those of
Daniel, shall be inflicted on this obstinate and rebellious people.

THE women who are with child, and they who have infants hanging at their
breasts, shall be particularly unhappy in those days of vengeance, because they
cannot flee from the impending destruction: But pray ye that your flight be not
in the winter, when the badness of the roads and the rigor of the season, will
render speedy traveling very troublesome, if not impossible; neither on the
Sabbath Day, when you shall think it unlawful, for then shall be great
tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no,
nor ever shall be. This is confirmed by what Josephus tells us: for he says.
'that no less than eleven hundred thousand perished in the siege.'

OUR dear Lord added, that except the days of tribulation should be shortened,
none of the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judea, of whom he was then speaking,
should escape destruction. And accordingly Josephus tells us, that the quarrels
which raged during the siege, were so fierce and obstinate, both within the
walls of Jerusalem, and without in the neighboring country, that the whole
land was one continued scene of horror and desolation: and had the siege
continued much longer, the whole nation of the Jews had been totally destroyed,
according to our Lord's prediction: But, added our blessed Savior, for the
elect's sake, whom he has chosen, he has shortened the days. By the elect are
meant, such of the Jews as had embraced the doctrines of the gospel, and those
who were brought in with the fullness of the Gentiles particularly.

DURING this time of universal confusion, it was natural to think, that the
expectations of the whole nation would be turned toward their Messiah; for if
he was ever to appear, it must be then, to deliver them from impending
destruction. Our blessed Savior therefore cautioned his disciples not to
listen to any pretenses of that kind, as many false Christ's would arise, and
deceive great numbers of the people. A prediction that was fully accomplished
during the terrible siege of Jerusalm by the Romans: for Josephus tells us,
that many arose, pretending to be the Messiah, boasting that they would deliver
the nation from all its enemies. And the multitude, always too prone to listen
to deceivers who promise temporal advantages, gave credit to those deceivers,
became more obstinate in their opposition to the Romans, and thereby rendered
their destruction more severe and more inevitable. And what still increased the
infatuation of the people, was their performing wonderful things during the
war; and accordingly Josephus calls them magicians and sorcerers. Hence we see
the propriety of the caution given by the Son of God, who foretold that, they
should show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they
would deceive the very elect. But take ye heed; behold, I have foretold you all
things.

BUT as it was likely the partisans of the false Christ's would pretend that the
Messiah was concealed a while for fear of the Romans, and the weaker sort of
Christians, without this warning, might have imagined, that Christ was actually
returned, to deliver the nation in its extremity, and to punish their enemies,
who now so cruelly oppressed them, and that he would show himself as soon as it
is proper, our blessed Savior thought it needful to caution them against this
particular: Wherefore, if they should say unto you, Behold, he is in the
desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers: believe it not. For
as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even unto the West; so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Matt. xxiv.26, 27.

AS lightning is swift and destructive, so shall the coming of the Son of man
be. But he will not come personally, his servants only shall come, the Roman
armies, who shall destroy this nation, as eagles devour their prey, by his
command.

THUS having given them a particular account of the various circumstances which
should precede the destruction of Jerusalem, he next described that catastrophe
itself, in all the pomp of language and imagery made use of by the ancient
prophets, when they foretold the destruction of cities and kingdoms: But in
those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon
shall not give her light, and the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers
that are in heaven shall be shaken. And upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; mens' hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.

THESE expressions are figurative and lofty, and signify the decaying of all
the glory, excellency, and prosperity of the nation, and the introduction of
universal sadness, misery, and confusion. The roaring of the sea, and the
waves, may justly be considered as metaphorical, as the signs in the sun, in
the moon, and in the stars are plainly so. And by the powers of heaven are
meant the whole Jewish polity, government, laws, and religion, which were the
work of heaven; these, our blessed Savior tells us, should be shaken.

AS the disciples, in conformity to the repeated questions of the Pharisees
during his ministry, had asked what would be the signs of his coming. Our
blessed Savior told them, that after the tribulation of those days, when the
sun should be darkened, and all the enemies of the Messiah should mourn, they
should see the accomplishment of what Daniel foretold, by the figurative
expression of the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven; for they should
behold the signal punishments executed on the Jewish nation, by the Roman
armies, sent for that end by the Son of man, who shall thus gloriously
demonstrate the greatness of his power, and the extent of his dominion: Then
shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the
tribes of the earth mourn. And they shall see the Son of man coming in the
clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

THE disciples were to consider the time of their redemption, from the
oppression under which they then groaned, as near at hand when these things
came to pass: and that they might be certain this prophecy would not long wait
for its accomplishment, he told them that the present generation should not all
be laid in the chambers of the dust, before these terrible calamities should
fall upon Jerusalem. Adding, that his disciples might sooner expect the
dissolution of the whole frame of nature, than that one single circumstance of
this prophecy should fail of its accomplishment: 'Verily I say unto you, This
generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled. Heaven and earth
shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.'

IF we take the pains to campare the prediction of our Savior with the history
Josephus wrote of the war, we cannot fail of being struck with the wisdom of
CHRIST, and acknowledge that his prediction was truly divine. For as the Jewish
nation was at this time in the most flourishing state, the event here told was
altogether improbable. Besides, the circumstances of the destruction are very
numerous, and surprisingly particular; and the whole delivered without any
ambiguity. It is therefore a prophecy of such a kind, as could never have been
uttered by any imposter, and consequently the person who delivered it, was
truly divine, and acquainted with the secret counsels of heaven.

BUT it has been demanded with some assurance, by the enemies to revelation,
why should CHRIST order his disciples not to flee from Jerusalem, till they saw
it encompassed with the Roman army, when it would then be impossible for them
to make their escape? But persons, before they propose such questions, would do
well to read attentively the history Josephus has given us of these terrible
calamities: because they would there find a solution of that difficulty. That
historian tells us, "That Cestius Gallus, surrounded the city with his army;
and at the time when he could easily have taken the city, suddenly withdrew his
forces, without any apparent reason." He adds, "that as soon as the siege was
raised, many eminent Jews fled from it, as from a sinking ship." In all
probability, many of these were Christians, who being warned by this prophecy
of their great Master, saved themselves by flight, as he had directed. Thus we
see what frivolous objections are made by the free-thinkers of our age, against
the truth of the sacred writings, and how easily they are answered. And I
cannot help observing, that this conduct of the Roman general, so contrary to
all the rules of prudence, must have been brought to pass by the providence of
God, who interposed for the deliverance of the disciples in this manner.

HAVING given this description of the destruction of Jerusalem, our blessed
Savior enumerated a great variety of particulars that were to precede or
accompany it, assuring his disciples, that it would be very unexpected, and
thence urged the necessity of a watchful vigilance, lest they should be
surprised, and have a share in those terrible calamities: But as the days of
Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Matt. xxiv.37. Watch
ye therefore; for ye know not when the master of the house comes; at even, or
at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning; lest coming suddenly,
he find you sleeping. Mark xiii.35, 36.

AS men were to undergo, at the destruction of Jerusalem, nearly the same
miseries, and as the passions which its approach would raise in their minds,
were similar to those which will happen at the destruction of the world, and
the general judgment; it was natural for our blessed Savior, on this occasion,
to put his disciples in mind of that judgment, and to exhort them to the
faithful discharge of their duty, from the consideration of the suddenness of
his coming to call every individual to account after death: Therefore, be ye
also ready; for in such an hour, as ye think not, the Son of man comes. Who
then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his
household, to give them meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his
Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall
make him ruler over all his goods. As if he had said, you who are the ministers
of religion, ought to be particularly careful to discharge the important trust
committed to your care: you are the stewards to whose care the whole household
of the church is committed; and you would do well to remember, that your
example will have a great effect upon the minds of those employed under you. It
is your duty to be well acquainted with the stores of the everlasting truths,
and to understand how they may be applied to the best advantage: you should
also be careful to know the characters of the different persons under your
direction, that you may be able to give every one of them his portion of meat
in due season: and if I find you thus employed at my coming, I will reward you
with the joys of my kingdom, even as an earthly master bestows particular marks
of respect on such servants as have been remarkably faithful in any important
trust. But, on the other hand, if you behave like unjust stewards, who, because
their Lord delayeth his coming, abuse their fellow servants, and riot in
excess; if you tyranize over the consciences of your brethren, neglect the
duties of your function, and give yourselves up to sensual pleasures, I will
come upon you unexpectedly, and make you dreadful examples of mine anger, by
the severe punishments which I will inflict upon you: 'But if that evil servant
shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite
his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the lord of that
servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

HAVING thus mentioned the rewards and punishments of a future state, it was
easy and elegant for our Lord to pass from that subject to the consideration of
the general judgment, when those rewards and punishments should be distributed
in their utmost extent. This could not fail of animating his disciples to a
vigorous discharge of their duty; and, by the striking representation of the
last judgment here given, must greatly tend to rouse the consciences of men
from their lethargy, and consider, before it be too late, the things which
belong to their peace.

THEN shall the kingdom of heaven, the gospel-kingdom, in the last dispensation
of it, when the kingdom of grace is going to be swallowed up in the kingdom of
glory, be likened unto ten virgins which took their lamps, and went forth to
meet the bridegroom. And five of them were wise, and five were foolish; they
that were foolish, as a proof of their stupidity, took indeed their lamps, but
put no oil in their vessels, while the wise, as an instance of their prudence
and foresight, took both their lamps and oil in their vessels, knowing that it
was uncertain when the bridegroom would arrive, and that they might, in all
probability wait long for his coming. Nor were they mistaken, for the
bridegroom did not come so soon as they expected: And while he tarried they all
stumbered and stepped, and at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the
bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. Then all those virgins arose, and
trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil,
for our lamps are gone out. But the wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there
be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
yourselves. And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came: and they that were
ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came
also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But he answered, and
said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore; for ye know
neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man comes.

To understand this parable aright, we must remember that it alludes to the
customs of marriages among the eastern people. It was usual with them for the
bridegroom to bring his bride home in the evening, sooner or later, as
circumstances might happen; and, that she might be received properly at his
house, his female acquaintance, especially those of the younger sort, were
invited to come and wait with lamps, till some of his retinue, dispatched
before the rest, informed them that he was near at hand; upon which they
trimmed their lamps, went forth to welcome him and conduct him with his bride
into the house, for which they were honored as guests at the marriage feasts,
and share in the festivities.

OUR blessed Savior compares the candidates for the kingdom of heaven, to ten
such virgins; he mentions ten, because this was the general number appointed to
wait on the bridegroom; and to these, all Christian professors may be likened,
who taking the lamp of Christian profession, go forth to meet the bridegroom;
that is, prepare themselves as candidates for the kingdom of heaven, and desire
to be admitted into the happy mansions of immortality, with CHRIST, the
celestial Bridegroom.

THE case of Christians is represented to us by this of the virgins, half of
whom only were wise, the other half being foolish. And we must remember, that
there always was, and always will be, a mixture of good and bad in the church,
till the great day of separation arrives. The weakness of the foolish is
represented by their taking no oil in their vessels with their lamps; that is,
the foolish Christians content themselves with the bare lamp of a profession,
and never think of furnishing it with the oil of divine grace, the fruit of
which is a life of holiness. Whereas, the wise, well knowing that a lamp,
without the supply of oil, would be speedily extinguished; that faith, without
love and holiness, will be of no consequence, take care to supply themselves
with a sufficient quantity of the divine grace, and to display in their lives,
the works of love and charity. While all those virgins, though differently
supplied, waited the coming of the bridegroom, they all slumbered and slept;
that is, all Christians, both good and bad, the sincere and the hypocrite, all
lie down together in the sleep of death; and, while the bridegroom delayeth his
coming, slumber in the chambers of the dust.

THERE is a tradition among the Jews, that CHRIST's coming to judgment will be
at midnight, which agrees with that part of the parable, at midnight there was
a cry made, Go ye out to meet him. But however this be, whether he will come at
midnight, or in the morning, it will be awfully sudden and alarming; the great
cry will be heard to the ends of the earth; the trumpet shall sound and the
mighty archangel's voice pierce even to the bowels of the earth, and the depths
of the ocean: Behold the bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. All that are
in the graves must then awake, and come forth; and all will then begin to think
how they may prepare themselves to find admittance to the marriage-supper of
the Lamb: Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. But the
foolish soon perceived their folly; their lamps were gone out, totally
extinguished, and they had no oil to support the flame: in like manner, the
hypocrite's hope shall perish. But the wise were in a much happier condition;
they had oil in their vessels sufficient for themselves, but none to spare:
for, when the foolish virgins would have procured some from them, they denied
their request, fearing there would not be enough for both.

WE have here a representation of nominal and sincere Christians; the former
having only the bare lamp of a profession, have neglected to live agreeably to
the precepts and examples of their Master, and have not been solicitous to gain
the oil of divine grace, by a constant use of the means assigned; those who
have been contented with a mere negative righteousness, with such a justice and
honesty as heathens boasted of, to whose charge no henious crimes can be laid,
while, at the same time, no good can be spoken of, as an effect of their faith;
and such will fare like the foolish virgins: while the latter, whose wise
conduct and zealous endeavors to stock their lamps with divine oil, will, like
the wise virgins, enter into the joy of their Lord.

THOSE that were foolish, going to purchase oil, missed the bridegroom, and
behold the door was shut. They at last, however, reached the gate, and with
great importunity cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us. But he answered, and said,
Verily, I say unto you, I know you not. You are strangers to me; you did not
attend me at my coming, and now the door is shut, and entrance forever denied;
depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

THEREFORE, how justly did our blessed Savior bid us all watch, that we may be
found ready whenever he comes, or commands, by the king of terrors, our
attendance before his judgment seat. Let us not refuse this kind invitation of
being constantly prepared to meet the heavenly Bridegroom: let us fill our
lamps with oil, that we may be ready to follow our great Master into the happy
mansions of the heavenly Canaan.

HOWEVER, as this duty was of the utmost importance, our blessed Savior, to
show us more clearly the nature and use of Christian watchfulness to which he
exhorts us at the conclusion of the parable of the ten virgins, he added
another, wherein he represented the different characters of a faithful and
slothful servant, and the difference of their future acceptance. This parable,
like the former, is intended to stir us up to a zealous preparation for the
coming of our Lord, by diligence in the discharge of our duty, and by a careful
improvement of our souls in holiness; and at the same time, to expose the vain
pretenses of hypocrites, and to demonstrate, that fair speeches, and outward
form, without the power of godliness, will be of no service in the last great
day of account.

THE Son of man, with respect to his final coming to judge the world, may be
likened unto a man traveling into a far country, who called his own servants,
and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one he gave five talents, to
another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several
abilities; and straightway took his journey.

HE that had received the five talents, lost no time, but went immediately on
his master's departure, and traded with the same, and his increase was equal to
his industry and application; he made them other five talents. He that had
received two talents, did the same, and had equal success. But he that received
one, very unlike the conduct of his fellow servants, went his way, dug in
the earth, and hid his Lord's money, idle, useless, unemployed, and unimproved.

BUT after a long time, and at an hour when they did not expect it, the Lord of
those servants returned, called them before him, and ordered them to give an
account of their several trusts. Upon which, he that had received five talents,
as a proof of his fidelity, produced other five talents, saying, Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them, five
talents more. His Lord, highly applauding his industry and fidelity, said unto
him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful over a
few things, I will make the ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord. In like manner also, he that had received two talents, declared he
had gained two others: upon which he was honored with the same applause, and
admitted into the same joy with his fellow servants; their master having regard
to the industry and fidelity of his servants, not to the number of the talents
only, and the greatness of their increase.

THEN he that had received the one talent came, and with a shameful falsehood,
to excuse his vile indolence said, 'Lord, I knew thee, that thou art an hard
man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering where thou have not
strawed: and I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there
thou have that is thine.' This dishonorable notion, which the servant
entertained of his Lord, greatly aggravated his crime; and accordingly his Lord
was wroth, and answered, 'Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knew that I
reap where I sowed not, and gatherest where I have not strawed: thou ought,
therefore, to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I
should have received mine own with usury. Take therefore, the talent from him,
and give it unto him that has ten talents. For unto every one that has shall
be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be
taken away, even that which he has. And cast ye the unprofitable s^^vant into
outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

THIS was the parable of the talents, as delivered by our blessed Savior; a
parable, containing the measures of our duty to God, and the motives that
enforce it, all delivered in the plainest and simplest allusion: but its views
are so extensive and affecting, that while it instructs the meanest capacity,
it engages reverence and attention from the greatest, and strikes an impression
on the most improved understanding. We are to consider God as our Lord and
Master, the author and giver of every good gift, and ourselves as his servants
or stewards, who, in various instances and measures, have received from his
goodness, such blessings and abilities, as may fit us for the several stations
and offices of life to which his providence appoints us: but then we are to
observe, that these are committed to us as a trust or loan, for whose due
management we are accountable to the doner. If we faithfully acquit ourselves
of this probationary charge, we shall receive far greater instances of God's
confidence and favor; but if we are remiss and negligent, we must expect to
feel his resentment and displeasure.

A time will come, and how near it may be, none of us can tell, when our great
Master will demand a particular account of every talent he has committed to
our care. This time may, indeed, be at a distance, for it is uncertain when the
king of terrors will receive the awful warrant to terminate our existence here
below; yet it will certainly come, and our eternal happiness or misery depends
upon it; so that we should have it continually in our thoughts, and engrave it,
as with the point of a diamond, on the tables of our hearts. But this is not
all we are to learn from this instructive parable; the Divine Author has
adapted every incident of the relation, to convey some spiritual instruction.
We hence learn, that Infinite Wisdom has entrusted men with different talents,
and adjusted them to the various purposes of human life. But though the gifts
of men are unequal, none can with justice complain, since whatever is bestowed,
be it more or less, is a favor entirely unmerited. Each then, should be
thankful, and satisfied with his portion; and instead of envying the more
liberal endowments of others, apply himself to the improvement of his own. And
it should be attentively observed, that the difficulty of the task is in
proportion to the number of talents committed to each. He who had received
five, was to gain other five; and he who had received two, was to account for
other two. Surely then, we have no reason to complain, if our Master has laid
on us a lighter burden, a more easy and less service than what he has on
others; especially as our interest, in the favor of the Almighty, does not
depend on the number of our talents, but on application in the management of
them: so that the moral design of this parable is to engage our utmost
attention, to improve such talents as our heavenly Father has thought proper to
bestow upon us. By these talents, are principally meant, the communications and
graces of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows in different measures, dividing to
every man severally as he will. And subordinate to these, are all the means,
opportunities, and abilities to exercise or improve these graces: all the
advantages of station, fortune, education, and whatever may enable us to do
good; for we, having received all we enjoy from God, are strictly obliged to
promote the wise ends for which he bestows his favors. And here let us take a
short and imperfect view of what God has done for us: he has given us reason
and understanding, to discern good from evil, and consequences of things, to
collect from them proper rules of judgment and action. Indeed, since the fall,
this faculty has been much obscured; but still it remains an universal gift of
God to men; and though not equal to all, yet it is given to every man in such
measure, as is sufficient for their direction. In the knowledge of our duty,
and the pursuit of our happiness, God has, by the gospel, so graciously
supplied the defects of reason, that the meanest understanding may know how to
be happy: such assistances of divine grace attend every Christian, if he will
apply to God for it, as may enable him to direct his inclinations, govern his
passions, and subdue his corrupt affections. These talents are, in some degree,
common to all men; and, by the improvements of that grace which is conferred
upon every one, all have sufficient to conduct them through the several stages
of life, if they will use but proper diligence and application.

BUT regard must be had to all the means for cultivating those gifts of nature
and grace, such as all opportunities of instruction, the ministry, and
ordinances of religion, the reproofs and examples of good men, the occasions
offered, and the abilities give^ for the exercise of virtue: all these are
talents, or gifts of God, deposited with us, to be diligently made use of, and
for which we are accountable to him. I shall, therefore, proceed to show what
duty is required from us, in the improvement of these talents. It is here
supposed, that these talents are improveable, or otherwise they would be of no
use or value; and, indeed, we are bound by the command of God, to improve them,
who has threatened to inflict severe penalties if we neglect it: and, if they
are not improved, they will not continue long with us, but be lost; the finest
parts and capacities, without proper culture, will make but a mean and
contemptible figure. No knowledge can be preserved without use and exercise,
and the same holds with regard to moral accomplishments. It requires great care
and attention to form a virtuous habit, and much more to preserve it in its
vigor: unless we cooperate with the goodness of God's grace, and cultivate it
by use and application, its impressions will gradually wear out and be lost:
The Spirit of God will not always strive with man. He gives us a stock to
manage, equal to the service he expects from us; but if we are slothful and
negligent, and will not apply it to the purposes for which it was given, he
will recall the useless gift: Take from him, says he, the talent, and give it to
him that has ten talents. Let us, therefore, diligently improve every talent
committed to us, because this will be required of us in the day of account;
and, if not improved, will be immediately taken from us: what this improvement
implies, and how we may discharge this duty, is an inquiry of the nearest
concern to us. The proper improvement of all God's gifts, is the employing
them, so as may best promote his glory: this is the end the Almighty has
proposed in our creation, in all the powers he has endowed us with, and in all
the aids of grace he has vouchsafed to us. Whatever other improvements we make
of them, they will not profit us, nor be admitted as any proof of our fidelity
in the day of reckoning: we may cultivate our understanding by learning and
study, and extend our knowledge through all the subjects of human inquiry; but
if our end be only to gratify our curiosity or our vanity, we are not serving
God, but ourselves; we may increase our portion of God's outward gifts, but if
we only apply them to enlarge our own conveniences, we are not making the
improvements our master expects: we may take pleasure in our knowledge and
fortune, rejoice in them as our portion and instruments in our present
possession; but we must still remember, that in our reckoning with God, all
these improvements of our capacities and abilities, will be added to our
account: and the only use God will admit us to set in balance of our debt to
him, is to employ them as means of increasing and multiplying our virtues, or
as instruments of exercising them in the works of religion and piety.

FROM this parable we may learn, that the divine justice, in this scrutiny,
will estimate and reward every one's fidelity in proportion to the improvements
and returns they have made. An account will be demanded of every talent; nor
will it be sufficient, that we have made some improvement, it must be
proportioned to the number and value of our gifts. Let us therefore, live and
act under serious habitual regard to that day, when our great Master shall come
and reckon with us; remembering that such as have been idle, and made no use of
the talents given them by the Almighty, will be cast into outer darkness; there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. A prospect surely sufficient to awaken
such from their slumber, quicken them to an immediate and vigorous application
to duty; that by a double improvement of the time yet remaining, they may
redeem what their indolence has lost. But far worse, and more difficult to be
retrieved, is his case, who has squandered away the stock itself, suffered his
gifts to perish for want of use; or, by abusing them to the service of sin, has
provoked the Almighty to take them from him.

HOW shall the prodigal recall the fortune he has spent, and appease the anger
of his Judge? The terrors of the Lord may justly terrify him; but it should not
extinguish his endeavors in despair: he has lost many excellent talents, but
he who gave can restore. Indeed, the most circumspect person will, in the great
day of account, want much to be forgiven: and must expect his reward from the
mercy of his Judge, not from the merit of his service. Let us then do all in
our power to bring forth fruits, meat for repentance; for though the awful day
of the Lord may be at a great distance, yet the time allotted us to prepare for
it, is limited by the short space of human life: the night of death comes,
when no man can work: today, therefore, while it is called today, let us be
diligent in the work of the Lord, correct our errors, and finish what is
imperfect, that we may obtain his approbation, and make our calling and
election sure, before we go hence, and are seen of men no more.

WE have endeavored to explain the parable of the talents after this manner,
and shall now return to the third parable delivered at the same time by the
blessed JESUS, namely, that of the last judgment: When the Son of man, said he,
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all nations: and
he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from
the goats: and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the
left. Matt. xxv.31, 32, 33.

IT is common in the Old Testament, to compare good men to sheep, on account of
their innocence and usefulness; and wicked men to goats, for their exorbitant
lusts. Our blessed Savior, however, does not pursue the allegory further, but
describes the remaining, and indeed the greatest part of this awful scene, in
terms perfectly simple; so that though the sense be profound, it is obvious.
Here the judgment of all nations, Gentiles as well as Christians, is exhibited;
and the particulars on which these awful trials are to proceed, displayed by
the great Judge himself. Here we learn, that we shall be condemned or
acquitted, accordingly as we have neglected or performed works of charity;
works which flow from the great principles of faith and piety, and which the
very Heathens are, by the light of nature, invited to perform. But we must not
understand, that such works merited this favor from the Judge; not all who are
acquitted at that day, shall be acquitted solely on account of the
righteousness of CHRIST, the true, the only meritorious cause, as well Heathens
as Christians.

WHO can read the following sentence passed upon the righteous, without feeling
the warmest love and gratitude to the great Author of all good; and what a
noble motive to perseverance in well-doing does it afford: Come, ye blessed
children of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Good men, can at best, but consider their present state as a
banishment from their native country. A state in which they are often exposed
to innumerable temptations, to persecutions, to poverty, to reproach, to
contempt. But the consideration that they are traveling toward the heavenly
Jerusalem, a city prepared for them, when the foundations of the world were
laid, will be abundantly sufficient to support their spirits, and render them
more than conquerors. The glory laid up for them in the mansions of eternity,
and which the great Judge will, at the awful day of account, confer upon them,
will animate them to bear the violence of their oppressors, and even defy the
malice of men and devils. Nay, they will behold with contempt the flourishing
prosperity of the wicked, and look forward to that glorious and immortal crown
which will be given them by their great Redeemer. Then shall the King say unto
them on the right hand, Come, ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a
stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye
visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Matt xxv.34, 35, 36.

BEING astonished to hear the great Judge declare, that all the good offices
they have ever done to their brethren in affliction, was done to him, they ask
with great reverence and humility, when they performed these services? as they
never saw him in want, and therefore could never assist him: Lord, when saw we
thee an hungered, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we
thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we
thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? And the king shall answer and say
unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. This is truly astonishing!
The united wisdom of men and angels could never have discovered a more proper
method to convey an idea of the warmth and force of the divine benevolence to
the sons of men, or offer a more forcible motive to charity, than that the Son
of God himself, should from his seat of judgment, in the presence of the whole
race of mankind, and all the hosts of blessed spirits from the courts of
heaven, declare that all good offices done to the afflicted, are done to
himself. During the time of his dwelling with human nature in this vale of
tears, he suffered unspeakable injuries and afflictions; and therefore he
considers all the distressed virtuous, as members of his body, loves them with
the utmost tenderness, and is so greatly interested in their welfare, that he
grieves when they are distressed, and rejoices when they are happy.

PERHAPS in this representation of the last judgment, it may seem strange that
the inquiry should solely turn on the performance of duties, without any regard
to the commission of crimes. Perhaps the true reason is, that men, generally
speaking, consider the neglect of duties as a matter of no great consequence,
but dread the commission of crimes. And hence it happens, that while they keep
themselves free from the latter, they easily find excuses for the former. And
as there is not a more pernicious error with regard to religion and morality
than this, the blessed JESUS thought proper to give such an account of the
judgment, as should prove the most solemn caution against it. But as the
inquiry turns wholly on the performance of duties, it has been asked why the
offices of charity only are mentioned, and no notice taken of the duties of
piety, though the Judge himself, upon another occasion, declared these to be of
more importance than the duties of charity, so highly applauded in this
parable? But those who ask this question would do well to remember, that
charity cannot subsist separately: piety and its origin, faith, always
producing charity; and charity, wherever it subsists, necessarily presupposing
piety.

THERE is such a connection between piety and charity, as it will evidently
appear, if it be rightly considered, that no man can be truly benevolent and
merciful, without loving those dispositions: consequently, he must love
benevolence in God, that is, he must love God; for piety, or the love of God,
is nothing else but the regard we cherish toward God, on account of his
perfections. Piety and charity being thus essentially connected together, it
was abundantly sufficient to examine the conduct of men with regard to either
of those graces. In the parable, the inquiry is represented as turning upon the
duties of charity, perhaps, because in this branch of goodness, there is less
room for self-deceit than in the other. It is common for hypocrites, by a
pretended zeal in the externals of religion to make specious pretenses to
extraordinary piety, and at the same time are totally deficient in charity; are
covetous, unjust, rapacious, and proud, and, consequently, destitute of all
love for their Creator. But none can assume the appearance of charity, but by
feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, relieving the distressed, and
performing other benevolent offices to their brethren. The works of charity may
indeed, in some particular cases, flow from other principles than those of a
pious and benevolent disposition, as from vanity, or even views of interest;
but then it should be remembered, that a common degree of hypocrisy will hardly
engage men to undertake them: they are by far too weighty duties to be
sustained by those false principles, and therefore are seldom counterfeited.
Consequently, we may conclude, that the love of God, reigns in perfection
wherever a genuine, extensive, and permanent charity is found.

THEREFORE, this parable teaches us in the plainest manner, that however loud
pretentions we may make to piety, they will stand us in no stead at the awful
tribunal of the Son of God, if we are deficient in works of charity. At the
same time, if we consider it in its true light, it will give us no reason to
hope well of ourselves, if we are wanting in our duty to God; and will show us,
that we should not only be charitable, but grateful; also, just, temperate, and
blameless in all our dealings with mankind, for we should remember, that the
duty we owe to the Almighty is no other than what is due from all men in all
circumstances, and which it would be unjust in us to neglect. It consists in
dispositions and actions, the same in kind, but different in degree,
proportionate to the perfection of the object. He who loves and admires
holiness, justice, and truth in men, cannot but love these perfections in God,
that is, he must love God: so likewise, he that is truly greatful to an earthly
benefactor, cannot be ungrateful to one from whose bounty he receives all the
good things he enjoys: and since ingratitude in men is nothing more than
forgetting the benefit received, and the benefactor who conferred the favor;
how can we acquit ourselves from the charge of ingratitude to God, if we forget
the obligations we lie under to him, and are at no pains to return him thanks;
that is, if we wholly neglect the eternal and internal exercises of devotion.
Since therefore, the duty we owe to God is the fame in kind with that we owe to
man, it will undeniably follow, that true morality can never exist where piety
is wanting; and that a person renders himself ridiculous, who pretends to
morality and is distitute of piety.

THUS having endeavored to show that justice and piety cannot subsist
separately from each other, I shall now return to the remaining part of the
parable, which exhibits a scene, enough to terrify the most hardened sinner.
The awful judge himself has told us, that after he has passed the happy
sentence on the righteous, he will pronounce the following sentence of
condemnation upon the wicked: Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat: I was thirsty, and ye game me no drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me
not. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did
not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto
you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to
me. Matt. xxv.41 -- 46.

OUR blessed Savior has told us, that the fire of hell was prepared for the
Devil and his angels, as well as for the wicked; and that the kingdom of heaven
was prepared for the righteous. Perhaps he intended to teach us, that the
original design of omnipotence was to render man happy; not miserable: a state
of consummate felicity was formed for the human race, at the time they were
created: but the fire of hell was prepared for the Devil and his angels
immediately after their fall. And as wicked men join with devils in their sin
of rebellion against the Almighty, they are doomed to share with them in their
punishments; a punishment of the heaviest kind, a punishment of devils.

OUR Savior having represented the sentences that are to be passed on the
righteous and the wicked, he closed the parable in the following manner: And
these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life
eternal. An expression short indeed, but awful beyond expression! And were it
fully understood, it must surely make an impression on the most hardened
sinner; as it indicates, that, when the sentence is passed, the scene is closed
forever, and everlasting punishment, or life eternal, must be the lot of every
individual of the human race.

CHAPTER XXXI.
CHRIST again foretells his own Death: The Rulers conspire against him: A
Woman pours precious Ointment upon his Head: Judas covenanteth with the
Council to betray his Master for thirty Pieces of Silver: Peter and John sent
to prepare the Passover: CHRIST eats it with them, and washes his Disciples'
Feet: He comfort them with the Promise of a heavenly Mansion: He professes
himself the Way, the Truth, and the Life: He foretells the Treachery of
Judas, and points him out to John by a Token.

AFTER our blessed Savior had finished the beforementioned parables, he added
a short account of his own death, in order to fortify the disciples against the
greatest trial they had yet met with; namely, the sufferings of their Master;
And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto
his disciples, Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and
the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. Then assembled together the chief
priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the
high priest, who was called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might take Jesus
by subtilty, and kill him. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be
an uproar among the people. Matt. xxvi.1 -- 5.

OUR blessed Savior, with his disciples, repaired to Bethany in the evening,
and entered the house of Simon the leper, probably one who had experienced the
healing efficacy of his power. But while he sat at meat, a woman who had also
doubtless been an object of his mercy, poured a box of precious ointment upon
his head. This action displeased the disciples, who knew their Master was not
delighted with luxuries of any kind; and therefore they rebuked the woman,
imagining it would have been more acceptable to the Son of God, if the ointment
had been sold, and the money distributed amongst the sons and daughters of
poverty and affliction. But their benevolent Master said, that it had pleased
the Divine Providence to order, that there should always be persons in
necessitous circumstances, that the virtuous might never want occasions for
exercising their charity; but those who did not now testify their love to him,
would never more have an opportunity of doing it, as the time of his ministry
was near its period, when the king of terrors should enjoy a short triumph over
his body; and therefore this woman had seasonably anointed him for his burial.
And to make them sensible of their folly, in blaming the woman for this her
token of love to him, he assured them, that her memory should live to the
latest period of time, and that she should be highly celebrated for this action
in every part of the world.

BUT Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, having been more forward than the rest,
in condemning the woman, thought the rebuke was peculiarly directed to him.
Stung with the guilt of his own conscience, he rose from table, went
immediately into the city, to the high-priest's palace, where he found the
whole council assembled. His passion would not suffer him to reflect on the
horrid deed he was going to commit: he immediately promised to betray into
their hands, his Lord and Master, for the paltry reward of thirty pieces of
silver.

THUS having engaged with the rulers of Israel, to put into their hands, a
person who had been long laboring for their salvation, and had often invited
them in the most pathetic manner, to embrace the benevolent terms of the gospel
offered by the Almighty, he sought an opportunity to betray him in the absence
of the multitude. Ye monsters in the human form, how could you plot so
detestable a crime? Surely you have forgot how mercy, with her charming voice,
spoke in all he uttered! How did benevolence pour her choicest stores in all
his actions! Ye rulers of Israel, did ever compassion look so amiably soft, as
in those melting tears which swelled his eyes, and poured down his cheeks, to
soften your hard and stony hearts? Was it possible for patience to assume a
form so lovely, as that sweetly winning conduct, that endured the contradiction
of sinners; which besought the guilty not to die, and entreated the obstinate
to be reconciled.

THE apostate Judus was thus bargaining with the chief priests and elders to
betray his Master, while the benevolent JESUS was preparing to celebrate the
passover before he suffered, with his disciples. He was now going to finish the
mighty work for which he came into the world; and therefore, would not neglect
to fulfill the smallest part of the law of Moses. He therefore, sent two of his
disciples into the city, to prepare a lamp, and make it ready for eating the
passover; telling them that they should meet a man, bearing a pitcher of water,
who would conduct them to his house, and show them a large upper room
furnished, where they were to make ready for him. He was willing, in this last
transaction, to convince his disciples, that he knew every thing which should
befall him, that his sufferings were all premeditated by the Almighty; and that
they were all submitted unto voluntarily on his own account.

AS soon as night approached, JESUS left Bethany; and every thing being ready
for him, at the time he entered into the city, he sat down at the appointed
hour. But knowing that his sufferings was now near, he told his disciples in
the most affectionate manner, that he had greatly longed to eat the passover
with them before he suffered, in order to show them the strongest proofs of his
love. These proofs were to give them a pattern of humility and charity, by
washing their feet: instructing them in the nature of his death, as a
propitiatory sacrifice; instituting the sacrament in commemoration of his
sufferings; comforting them by the tender discourses recorded in John xiv, xv,
xvi. in which he gave them a variety of excellent directions, together with
many gracious promises, and recommending them to the kind protection of his
heavenly Father: With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you
before I suffer; for I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it
be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. Luke xxii.15, 16.

AFTER our Lord had thus spoken, he arose from the table, laid aside his
garments like a servant, and, with all the circumstances of an humble minister,
washed the feet of his disciples without distinction, though one of them, Judas
Iscariot, was a monster of impiety, that they might at once behold a
conjunction of charity and humility, of self-denial and indifference,
represented by a person glorious beyond expression, in their great Lord and
Master. He chose to wash their feet rather than their head, that he might have
an opportunity of displaying a more humble posture, and a more striking
instance of his charity. The omnipotent Son of the Father lays every thing
aside, that he may serve his followers; heaven stoops to earth; one abyss calls
upon another; and the miseries of man, which were almost infinite, are exceeded
by a mercy equal to the immensity of the Almighty. He deferred this ceremony,
which was a customary civility paid to honorable strangers, at the beginning
of their feasts, that it might be preparatory to the second, which he intended
should be a feast to the whole world, when all the followers of the blessed
JESUS should have an opportunity of feeding on his flesh, and drinking his
blood in a spiritual manner.

PETER modestly declined it when our blessed Savior came unto him; but his
Master told him, that if he refused to submit implicitly to all his orders, he
could have no part with him. On which Peter cried out, Lord, not my feet only,
but also my hands and my head. But JESUS told him, that the person who had
bathed himself, had no reason to wash any part of his body except his feet,
which he might have dirtied by walking from the bath. In order to teach us,
that persons converted do not stand in need of a total change of mind, but only
to cleanse themselves from the particular sins they constantly commit through
infirmity; for it is abundantly evident that our blessed Savior spoke of a
spiritual washing, because he added, ye are clean, but not all. Ye are men of
virtuous and holy dispositions; but not all: I well know that one of you will
betray me.

AFTER our blessed Savior had finished this menial service, he asked his
disciples if they knew the meaning of what he had done, as the action was
purely emblematical? You truly, added he, style me Master and Lord, for I am
the Son of God, and the Savior of the world: but if I, your Master and your
Lord, have condescended to wash your feet, you surely ought to perform, with
the utmost pleasure, the humblest offices of charity to one another. I have set
you a pattern of humility, and I recommend it to you.

CERTAINLY nothing can more effectually show us the necessity of this heavenly
temper of mind, than its being recommended to us by so great an example: a
recommendation, which, in the present circumstances, was particularly
seasonable; for the disciples having heard their great Master declare, that the
kingdom of heaven was at hand, their minds were filled with ambitious thoughts.
Upon which our blessed Savior added, 'Ye need not be ashamed to follow my
example in this particular; for no servant can think it beneath him, to
condescend to perform those actions his Lord has done before him: and,
therefore, if he knows his duty, he will be happy if he practices it.' Our
blessed Savior added, that though he had called them to the apostleship, and
well knew the secret dispositions of every heart, before he chose them, they
need not be surprised that any one among them should prove a traitor, as it was
done, that the scripture might be fulfilled: He that eats bread with me, has
lifted up his heel against me. John xiii.18.

OUR dear Lord being now to be but a short time with his disciples, he thought
proper to take his farewell of them, which he did in the most affectionate
manner. These melancholy tidings greatly troubled them. They were very
unwilling to part with so kind a friend, so dear a master, so wise a guide, and
so profitable a teacher; especially as they thought they should be left in a
forlorn condition, a poor and helpless prey to the rage and hatred of a blind
and malicious generation. They seemed willing to die with their Lord, if that
might be accepted: Why cannot I follow thee? I will lay down my life for thy
sake, was the language of one, and even all of them: but the thoughts of a
disconsolate separation they could not support.

THEIR dear Lord and Master seeing them thus dejected, endeavored to cheer
their drooping spirits: Let not your hearts be troubled. Listen attentively to
what I am going to deliver for your consolation: I go to prepare a place for
you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto myself; that where I am, there you may be also. A reviving admonition!
They were one day to meet again their dear, their affectionate Master, in a
place where they should live together to all eternity. But death makes so vast
a distance between friends, and the disciples then knew so little of a future
state, that they seemed to doubt whether they should ever after parting, meet
their great Redeemer. They neither knew the place where he was going, nor the
way that led to his kingdom. Lord, said they, we know not whither thou go,
and how can we know the way? In answer to this question, he told them, that he
was the way, the truth, and the life; as if he had said, the only way of
following me to the regions of happiness, is by duly observing my doctrines and
precepts which I have delivered to you from the Almighty. He added, that by his
removing to heaven, he would there intercede for them with his heavenly Father,
and send the Holy Ghost to comfort them from thence.

HOWEVER, lest all these arguments should not be sufficient to quiet their
minds, he had still another, which could not fail of success: If ye loved me,
says he, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the father: intimating
that he would consider it as a proof of their love to him, if they ceased to
mourn. They doubtless thought, that by grieving for his death, they expressed
their love for their Master; and it should seem strange, that our Savior
should put so contrary an interpretation on their friendly sorrow, or require
so unnatural a thing of them, as to rejoice at his departure. What! (might they
think) shall we rejoice at so amiable a friend's removal from us; or can we be
glad that he retires and leaves us in this vale of misery? No, it is
impossible? the human heart, on so melancholy an occasion, has no disposition
to rejoice. Our blessed Savior, therefore, adds this reason to solve the
seeming paradox, because he was going to the Father; that is, he was going to
ascend to the right hand of infinite power, from whence he would send them all
the assistance they could desire. It must not, however, be supposed, that our
Savior meant by these words, that his disciples should not be concerned at his
death, or that they could not love him unless they expressed a visible joy on
this occasion: that would, indeed, have been a hard interpretation of their
grief; he well knew their grief flowed from love, and that if their love had
not been strong, their sorrow had been much less. Indeed, their Master was
fully convinced, that love was the occasion of their sorrow; and, for that
reason, he used these arguments to mitigate it.

OUR Lord did not intend to intimate, that all sorrow for so worthy a friend,
was unlawful, or an unbecoming expression of their love; doubtless, he was not
displeased to see his disciples so tenderly affected at his removal from them:
he who shed tears at the grave of Lazarus, blended with sighs and groans,
cannot be thought to forbid them wholly at his own; he, therefore, did not
chide his disciples with angry reproaches, as though they had been entirely in
the wrong, but gently reasoned with them by kind persuasion, Let not your heart
be troubled, as rather pitying than condemning their sorrow. Soon after JESUS
had spoken these things, his heart was greatly troubled, to think that one of
his disciples should prove his enemy: he complained of it at the table,
declaring that one of them should betray him. This moving declaration greatly
affected the disciples, and they began every one of them to say to their
Master, Lord, is it I? But JESUS giving them no decisive answer, John, the
beloved disciple, whose sweet disposition and other amiable qualities, is
perpetuated in the peculiar love his great Master bore him, and was now
reclining on his bosom, asked him, who among the disciples could be guilty of
so detestable a crime? JESUS told him, that the person to whom he should give
the sop, when he had dipped it, was he who should betray him: accordingly, as
soon as he had dipped the sop in the dish, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, saying
to him at the same time, That thou do, do quickly.

JUDAS received the sop, without knowing any thing of what his Master had told
the beloved disciple, nor did any of the disciples, except St. John, entertain
the least suspicion, that Judas was the person who would betray their Master.
They were, indeed, so deeply affected with his declaration, that one of them
should betray him, that they did not remark the words of JESUS to his apostate
disciple; but continued to ask him, who was the person that should be guilty of
so unnatural a crime? Willing at last, to satisfy their importunity, the
blessed JESUS declared, that the person who dipped his hand with him in the
dish, should betray him. This, to the eleven, was a joyful declaration, but
confounding in the highest degree, to Judas: impudent as he was, it struck him
speechless, displaying the soulness of his heart, and pointing him out plainly.

JUDAS continued mute with confusion, while the blessed JESUS declared, that
his death should be brought about according to the decrees of heaven, though
that would not in the least mitigate the crime of the person who betrayed him;
adding, it had been good for that man if he had not been born. Judas having now
recovered himself a little, asserted his innocence, by a question which implied
a negation of the charge. But his Master positively affirming that he was the
person, he was soon silenced.

JUDAS Iscariot's treachery in betraying his Master, must raise the
astonishment of every reader, who has any notion of the character of our great,
our merciful Redeemer. It will not therefore, we hope, be disagreeable to the
reader, to explain the motives that induced him to be guilty of this atrocious
crime, and consider particularly the circumstances that attended so inhuman an
action. Some are of opinion, that he was induced to commit this villainy by the
resentment of the rebuke given him by his Master, for blaming the woman who
came with the precious ointment, and anointed the head of JESUS, as he sat at
meat in the house of Simon the leper -- but though this had doubtless its
weight with the traitor: yet it could not, I think, be the only motive, because
the rebuke was given in general, to all the disciples, who had, perhaps, been
equally forward with him, in censuring the woman; nor can we imagine, even if
he had been rebuked alone, that so mild a reproof could provoke any person,
however wicked, to the horrid act of murdering his friend, much less Judas,
whose covetous disposition, must have disposed him to bear every thing from his
Master, from whom he expected the highest preferment when he openly declared
himself the Messiah, and took the reins of government into his own hands. If it
should be answered, that his resentment was so great as to hinder him from
exercising his reason, I desire it may be remembered, that though he actually
agreed with the chief priests, a few hours after the rebuke was given, yet he
did not commit the henious crime till two days after: besides, to impute his
treachery to the sudden impulses of a strong resentment, is so great an
alleviation of his crime, as seems absolutely inconsistent with the character
given of it in the scripture, where it is said to merit the heaviest
punishment, and represented in the blackest colors.

THERE are others that think Judas betrayed his Master through covetousness:
but if we understand by covetousness, the reward given by the priests, this
opinion is equally defective; for the sum was too small for the most covetous
wretch to think equivalent to the life of a friend, especially when he expected
from him the highest posts and advantages. The reader will be convinced of the
force of this remark, when he remembers, that all the disciples believed the
Messiah's kingdom was instantly to be erected; and that according to the notion
they entertained of it, each of them, especially the apostles, expected, in a
very short time, to be possessed of immense riches; besides the scripture tells
us, that the predominate passion of Judas was covetousness; he therefore, could
not be so inconsistent with himself, as when just on the point of receiving an
immense reward for his service, to exchange every thing for so trifling a sum.

BUT there are others that attribute the perfidy of Judas, to his doubting
whether his Master was the Messiah, and that he betrayed him in a fit of
despair: but of all the solutions, this is the worst founded; for, if Judas
believed his Master to be an impostor, he must have observed something in his
behavior, which led him to form such an opinion of him, and, in that case, he
would doubtless, have mentioned it to the chief priests and elders, when he
made the contract with them, which it is plain he did not, as they would have
reminded him of it, when he came back and expressed his remorse for what he had
done. It should also be observed, that had Judas given them any intimations of
this kind, they would doubtless have urged them against our blessed Savior
himself, in the course of his trial, when they were at so great a loss for
witnesses to support their accusations; and against the apostles afterward,
when they reproved them for speaking in the name of JESUS: besides, had Judas
thought his Master an impostor, and proposed nothing by his treachery, but the
price he put upon his life, how came he to sell him for such a trifle, when he
well knew, that the chief priests and rulers would have given him any sum,
rather than not have gotten him into their hands? In fine, the supposition that
Judas believed his Master to be an impostor, is directly confuted by the solemn
declaration he made to the priests, when he declared the deepest conviction of
the innocence of our great Redeemer: I have sinned, said he, in betraying the
innocent blood. And it must be remembered, that the remorse he felt for his
crime, was too bitter to be endured; so that he fled even to the king of
terrors for relief, after he saw his Master condemned.

HOWEVER, since the treachery of Judas did not proceed from any of these
motives, it may be asked, what other motive can be assigned for his conduct?
The evangelist St. John tells us, that he was of so covetous a disposition, as
to steal money out of our Lord's bag; and hence we have sufficient reason to
believe, that he first followed JESUS, with a view of obtaining riches, and
other temporal advantages, which he expected the Messiah's friends would enjoy:
it likewise authorizes us to think, that as he had hitherto reaped none of
these advantages, he might grow impatient under the delay, and the rather, as
JESUS had lately discouraged all ambitious views amongst his disciples, and
neglected to embrace the opportunity of erecting his kingdom, which was offered
him by the multitude who accompanied him into Jerusalem with shouts, and
crying, Hosanna to the Son of David, His impatience, therefore becoming
excessive, inspired him with the thought of delivering his Master into the
hands of the council, firmly persuaded, that he would then be obliged to assume
the dignity of the Messiah, and consequently able to reward his followers: for,
as this court was composed of the chief priests, elders and scribes, that is,
the principal persons of the sacredotal order, the representatives of the great
families, and the doctors of the law; the traitor did not doubt that his
Master, when brought before so august an assembly, would assert his pretensions
to the title of the Messiah, prove his claim to their full conviction, gain
them over to his interest, and immediately enter on his regal dignity. And
though he must be sensible, that the measures he took to compass this
intention, were very offensive to his Master; yet he might think the success of
it would procure his pardon from so compassionate a Master, and even recommend
him to favor. In the mean time, his project, however plausible it might appear
to one of his turn, was far from being free from difficulty; and therefore,
while he revolved it in his own mind, many things might occur to stagger his
resolution. At length, thinking himself affronted by the rebuke of JESUS, at
the time when the woman anointed the head of his Master, he was provoked to
execute the resolution he had formed of obliging him to alter his measures.
Rising, therefore, directly from the table, he went immediately into the city,
to the palace of the high priest, where he found the council assembled,
consulting how they might take JESUS by subtilty, in the absence of the
multitude. To them he made known his intention of delivering his Master into
their hands; and undertook, for a small sum of money, to conduct a band of
armed men to the place where the Savior of the world usually spent the night
with his disciples, where they might apprehend him without the least danger of
tumult. Thus the great deceiver of mankind tempted him to commit the horrid
action, by laying hold of the various passions that now agitated the traitor's
breast.

IT may be gathered from the nature of the contract, that these were really the
motives which induced Judas to betray his Master: What will ye give me, said
he, and I will deliver him unto you? He did not mean that he would deliver him
up to be put to death; for though the priests had consulted among themselves,
how they might destroy JESUS, they had not been so abominably wicked as to
declare their intention publicly: they only proposed to bring him to trial for
assuming the character of the Messiah, and to treat him as it should appear he
deserved. The offer, therefore, which Judas made them of delivering him up, was
in conformity to their public resolutions; nor did they understand it in any
other light: for, had the priests thought that his design in this was to get
his Master punished with death, they must also have thought he believed him to
be an impostor; in which case, they would doubtless have produced him as one of
their principal evidences, no person being more proper to bear witness against
any criminal than his companion. Or, supposing Judas repented before the trial
came on, and had withdrawn himself, the priests might have argued with great
plausibility, both in their own court, and before the governor, that for a
man's disciple to require the judges to bring him to condign punishment,
branded him with such a suspicion of guilt, as was almost equal to a full
proof: also, when Judas returned to them with the money, declaring that he had
sinned in betraying the innocent blood, instead of replying, What is that to
us, see thou to that? it was the most natural thing in the world to have
upbraided him with the stain he had put upon his Master's character, by the
contract they had made with him. It is true, they called the money they gave
him, the price of blood; but they did not mean this in the strictest sense, as
they had neither hired Judas to assassinate his Master, nor can they be
supposed to have charged themselves with the guilt of murdering him: it was
only the price of blood in consequence of its being the reward they had given
to the traitor for putting it in their power to take away the life of CHRIST,
under the color and form of public justice; nay, it may be even doubted,
whether Judas asked the money, as a reward or his service: he covetously,
indeed, kept it, and the priests, for that reason, called it the price of blood.

JUDAS, in short, knew that the rulers could not take away the life of any
person whatsoever, the Romans having deprived them of that power; and,
therefore, could have no design of this kind in delivering him up; not to
mention that it was a common opinion among the Jews, that the Messiah could
never die, an opinion which Judas might easily embrace, having seen his Master
raise several persons, and among the rest, one who had been in the grave no
less than four days.

IT is probable that the traitor's intention in betraying his Master, was that
mentioned above, from his hanging himself when he found him condemned, not by
the governor, but by the council, whose prerogative it was, to judge prophets.
Had Judas proposed to take away the life of his Master, the sentence of
condemnation passed upon him, instead of filling him with despair, must have
gratified him, being the accomplishment of his project: whereas, this
circumstance is shown to have been perfectly natural, by the light wherein we
have endeavored to place his conduct.

HAVING been witness to the greatest part of our Lord's miracles, and having
experienced the certain truth of them, in the powers that had been conferred
upon himself, Judas could never think that the council would have condemned him
as an impostor, far less, as a blasphemer; he knew him to be perfectly
innocent, and expected that he would have wrought such miracles before the
council, as should have constrained them to believe: therefore, when he found
nothing of this kind was done, and that the priests had passed the sentence of
condemnation upon him, and were carrying him to the governor to get it
executed, he repented of his rash and covetous project, came to the chief
priests and elders, the persons to whom he had betrayed him, offered them their
money again, and solemnly declared the deepest conviction of his Master's
innocence, hoping that they would have desisted from the prosecution; but they
were obstinate, and would not relent: upon which his remorse arose to such a
pitch, that, unable to support the torments of his conscience, he went and
hanged himself. Thus I think it probable, that the traitor's intention in
delivering up his Master, was not to get him punished with death, but only to
lay him under a necessity of proving his pretensions before the grandees, whom
he had hitherto shunned; thinking that the whole nation would immediately have
submitted, and the disciples have been raised forthwith to the summit of their
expectations, if they had yielded.

BUT this account of Judas's conduct, is by no means calculated to lessen the
foulness of his crime, which was the blackest imaginable: for, even in the
light above mentioned, it implied both an insatiable avarice, and a wilful
opposition to the counsels of Providence, and rendered the actor of it a
disgrace to human nature: but it is calculated to set the credibility of the
traitor's action in a proper light, and to show that he was not moved to it by
any thing suspicious in the character of his Master; because, according to this
view of it, his perfidy, instead of implying that he entertained suspicions of
his Master's integrity, plainly proved that he had the fullest conviction of
his being the Messiah: and to say the truth, it was not possible for any one
intimately acquainted with our Lord, as Judas was, to judge otherwise of him;
having seen his miracles, which were great and true beyond exception, and
having experienced his power, in the ability of working miracles, which he had
received from him, and, no doubt, exercised with extraordinary pleasure,
together with the rest of the apostles.

CHAPTER XXXII.
Our Savior institutes the Sacrament of his Supper: He checketh the ambitious
Strife of his Disciples, and promises them a Share in his Kingdom: He tells
Peter of Satan's desire to sift him, but that his Faith should be supported;
and yet he should thrice deny him: He advises his Disciples to provide
Necessaries, and to arm themselves against the Day of Trial: He promises them
Power to do greater Works than his own, and the Grant of all that they should
ask in his Name: He requires their Obedience, as a Proof of their Love, and
gives them a Promise of the Comforter, the Holy Ghost. Under the Parable of
the Vine, CHRIST sets forth God's Government of his Church, and exhorts
his Disciples to abide in his Faith and Doctrine: He commands them to love
one another, according to the great Love he had shown for them; and warns
them of their Sufferings for his Sake: He comfort them by a Promise of the
Holy Ghost: He intimates his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension: His Disciples
confess their Faith in him; he foretells their Desertion of him, and
promises them Peace in him amidst their Tribulation in the World: He prays
to his Father to glorify him: and to preserve his Apostles in Unity of Faith,
and from all Evil; and to sanctify them with the Word of Truth; and for the
perfect Union of all Believers, and their Admission to a Share of his Glory in
Heaven.

IT does not appear that our Savior was in the least disturbed at the
consideration of the treachery of Judas; for, in order to render his love to
mankind more effectual, he instituted the sacrament of his supper, to
perpetuate the memory of it throughout all ages. Accordingly, as they were
eating the paschal-supper, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is given
for you: this do in remembrance of me, observe this rite no longer in
remembrance of your deliverance from Egypt, but in remembrance of me; who by
dying, for you, will bring you out of the spiritual bondage, a bonage far worse
than the Egyptian, under which your fathers groaned, and will establish you in
the glorious liberty of the children of God: do it in remembrance of me, who,
by laying down my life, will ransom you from sin, from death, from hell, and,
that you may enter immortality in triumph, will set open the gates of heaven to
you.

AFTER having given the bread to his disciples, he also took the cup and gave
it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. All of you, and
all of my disciples in all ages, must drink of this cup, because it represents
my blood shed for the remission of the sins of mankind; my blood, by which the
new covenant between God and man is ratified: it is therefore my blood of the
new covenant, so that this institution exhibits to your joyful meditation, the
grand basis of the hopes of the children of men, and perpetuates the memory of
it to the end of the world. He added, I will not drink hence forth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's
kingdom. Matt. xxvi.29.

THE most illustrious, the most momentous event that is possible to engage the
meditations of mankind, in the manifestation of the Son of God: to his life and
death, his resurrection and ascension into glory, we are indebted for our hopes
and assurances of pardon, for our peace, for our happiness: to procure our
benefit, he made the most amazing condescension from the dignity he enjoyed
with his Father by putting on the veil of flesh; he poured divine instruction
from his lips, and shone forth with an all-perfect and all-lovely example: for
our benefit, he submitted to a course of the most cruel treatment of his bitter
enemies, to the agonies of the cross and to the stroke of the king of terrors:
for our benefit, he arose again with power and luster, ascended into the
mansions of eternal happiness, intercedes for us with the Almighty, and holds
the reins of government. And shall the amiable, the excellent, the benificial
actions of this Savior, be buried in oblivion? Forbid it gratitude, duty,
interest! Forbid it, every consideration that can affect the human mind! With
the greatest wisdom and goodness this benificient JESUS instituted a rite that
should recall his love to our memories, and awake each pious passion in our
breasts; a rite which, by the breaking of bread, and the pouring out of wine
should represent to us, in a striking manner, that most signal proof of the
affection, both of him and his heavenly Father, when his tender frame was
exposed to wounds and bruises, when streams of the most precious blood issued
from his sacred veins. And the more we reflect on this instance of divine love,
the more we shall perceive that there was a peculiar propriety in pointing out,
by a particular ordinance, a fact of such immense importance in the system of
revelation! Nay, we may even venture to assert, that in some dark and corrupt
ages, when the Scriptures were little known by the common people, and hardly
studied by the priests, the death of our Savior, had not the remembrance of it
been renewed by the celebration of this sacred ordinance, would have been
almost forgotten.

WE should also remember, that the vanities of the world, the allurements of
sensual pleasure, the charms of ambition, the splendor of riches; in short,
temptations from present objects of every kind, have often too fatal an
influence on our temper and conduct; they have a melancholy aptitude to draw
the soul aside to folly, and to obliterate the impressions of things divine. It
was, therefore, a wise, a kind intention of our great Redeemer, by a frequent
repetition of the sacramental feast to call back the wandering heart of man to
a sense of his duty and obligations as a Christian. Besides, though the
religion of the immaculate JESUS is altogether gentle, generous, and
beneficient; though its whole tendency is to correct the passions, sweeten the
^^ positions, and enlarge the affection of men; and though it enforces all this
upon us by motives surprisingly powerful and affecting; yet such is the
perverseness of the human heart, that jealousies and contentions, envy, wrath,
and malice, too often find admittance there. Was it not then an instance of our
Savior's wisdom and benevolence, by uniting us together at the sacrament of
his body and blood, to inspire us with condescension, compassion, and love, and
to urge the putting away all bitterness, anger, evil-speaking, and revenge.

WE ought, therefore, to be very careful how we perform this duty appointed by
our dying Savior? We should, in order to receive it worthily, employ our
meditation on the design and excellency of the gospel; on the noble system of
doctrines and duties it contains; on the illustrious, divine, and complete
example of the blessed JESUS; on the important privileges, the valuable
promises, and the ravishing prospects his revelation affords; and on the bright
and convincing evidence with which it is attended. We should contemplate that
essential and unparelleled benevolence of the Deity, in forming the way for our
redemption, on the readiness manifested by the Son of God, in undertaking our
cause; and on his wonderful transactions in the prosecution of this grand, this
amazing work: above all, we should impress upon our souls a strong sense of the
special and immediate purposes for which this sacramen^ was appointed, and when
we actually join in communion, we should be careful that our affections be
properly directed, and warmly engaged.

TO have our hearts fixed upon the vanities, the profits, and the cares of this
world, is a direct violation of the ordinance; and therefore we should be
extremely careful to maintain a right temper and behavior at that time. We
should study to abstract our thoughts as much as possible, from every foreign,
every terrestial consideration, and to have our passion fervently employed in
the solemn service. 'Retire, O my soul,' each of us should say, 'from this
inferior scene of things, from all its pleasures and all its pursuits, and hold
communion with the Almighty and his Son, the immaculate JESUS. Meditate upon
that infinite grace of omnipotence, which contrived the amazing plan, that
displayeth pardon, peace, and endless happiness to so undeserving a creature as
thou art. Recollect that surprising condescension and tenderness of thy
compassionate Redeemer, which induced him to bring down from heaven, salvation
to the sons of men. Call to mind the admirable instructions he offered, the
charming pattern he exhibited, the hard labors and sufferings he endured in
the course of his ministry; especially call to mind the ignominy, the
reproaches, the agonies he endured when he hung upon the cross, and purchased
for thee eternal mercy. Think upon these affecting subjects, till thine heart
is filled with sorrow for thine iniquities; till thy faith becomes lively,
active, and fruitful; till thy gratitude and love are elevated to the highest
pitch; till thy obedience is rendered uniform, steady and complete. Have thou,
O my God, and Parent of universal nature! have thou so illustriously manifested
thy compassion for sinners, as not to spare thine own Son? Have thou sent the
Savior into this lower world, in order to raise the children of men to
immortality, perfection, and glory? And am I now in thy presence, on purpose to
celebrate this institution, which requires me to commemorate the death of the
great Messiah; to declare my public acceptance of his excellent revelation, and
my regard to my Christian brethren? May then the remembrance of his
benificence, dwell upon my mind, and upon my tongue for ever and ever! May I
consider and comply with the intention of his gospel; and may the sentiments of
kindness and charity toward my fellow-mortals, and fellow-disciples, with
increasing purity, with increasing zeal, reign in my breast.'

WHEN we partake of this sacred ordinance, such are the views that should
possess our souls: ^ut it will signify little to entertain these views at that
time, unless the effects of them are apparent in our future conduct and
conversation; for a transient flow of affections, or sallies of immediate
delight, were not principally intended in this institution. The blessed JESUS
did not ordain it as a ceremony or charm, but as a proper method of
establishing our hearts in virtuous and pious dispositions. Though ye have,
therefore, O Christians, obeyed the Redeemer's command in this appointment, and
found your passions greatly moved, yet this is not the whole required at your
hands; it will justly be expected, that ye should live to the honor of your
divine Master. As you have solemnly professed your faith in him, and your love
toward him, the reality of your faith and love should be demonstrated by
walking more strictly in the way of his precepts, and by abounding in that
heavenly character and temper, which his spotless example so engagingly
recommends: thus only will the sacrament become subservient to the most
beneficial purposes; thus only will it be instrumental in qualifying us for
sharing in the dignity and felicity possessed by our exalted Savior. May,
therefore, all the followers of the immaculate JESUS, advance from holiness to
holiness, till they arrive at the regions of eternal felicity, by uniting
together at his sacred table.

HAVING thus instituted his last supper, our blessed Savior was deeply
affected with his own thoughts: and after delivering the sacramental cup,
telling them that his blood was shed for them, he mentioned the treachery of
Judas a second time: But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me
on the table. This second declaration was made very properly after the
institution of the sacrament, which exhibits the highest instance of our great
Redeemer's love to mankind, his dying to obtain the remission of their sins;
for it abundantly proves, that the person who could deliberately be guilty of
such an injury to so kind a friend, must have been a monster, the foulness of
whose ingratitude, cannot be reached by the force of language. Some of the
disciples, particularly struck with horror at the thought of Judas's treachery,
rebuked him, by asking him with surprise, how he could betray his Master? This
accusation, Judas, no doubt, repelled, by impudently denying the fact; but
consciousness of guilt, giving edge to the reproaches of his brethren, and to
every circumstance of the affair, he, thinking himself affronted, immediately
left the company, exceedingly displeased.

OUR blessed Savior's sufferings were now at hand: the traitor Judas was gone
to the chief priests and elders, for a band of soldiers to apprehend him; but
this did not discompose the Redeemer of mankind; he took occasion to meditate
on the glory that would accrue both to himself and to the Almighty, from those
sufferings, and spoke of it to his disciples: Now, said he, is the Son of man
Glorified, and God is glorified in him. He also told them, that having already
done honor to his Father, by the past actions of his life, and being about to
honor him yet further by his sufferings and death, which would display his
perfections, particularly his infinite love to the human race, in the most
astonishing and amiable light, he was in his turn to receive honor from the
Almighty; intimating that his human nature was to be exalted to the right hand
of Omnipotence, and that his mission from God was to be supported by
irrefragable attestation. But his disciples, imagining that he spoke of the
glory of a temporal kingdom, their ambition was again revived, and they began
to dispute with as much keenness as ever, which of them should be the greatest
in that kingdom. This contention, JESUS composed by the arguments he had
formerly used for the same purpose. Amongst the Gentiles, said he, they are
reckoned the greatest, who have the greatest power, and have exercised it in
the most absolute manner: but your greatness shall be very different from
theirs; it shall not consist in being unlimited with regard to tyrannical
power, even though it should be joined with an affection of titles, which
denote qualities truly honorable; but whosoever desires to be great, or chief
among you, let him be so by his humility, and the service he renders to the
rest, in imitation of me your Master, whose greatness consists in this, that I
am become the servant of you: adding, as they had continued with him in this
temptation, he would bestow upon them such a kingdom, as his Father had
appointed for them. At the same time, to check their ambition, and lead them to
form a just notion of his kingdom, he told them, that he was soon to leave
them, and that whither he was going, they could not at that time, follow him;
for which reason, instead of contending with one another, which of them should
be the greatest, they would do well to be united among themselves, in the happy
bond of love: for, by loving one another sincerely and fervently, they would
prove themselves his disciples, to the conviction of mankind, who could not be
ignorant, that the distinguishing part of his character was love.

OUR Lord called this a new commandment, not because mutual love had never been
enjoined to mankind before, but because it was a precept of peculiar
excellency: for the word new in the Hebrew language, denotes excellency and
truth: and the reason of this idiom seems to have been, that novelty oftentimes
has the same effect upon the mind as excellency, rendering an object
acceptable, and raising admiration: he also called this a new commandment,
because they were to exercise it under a new relation, according to a new
measure, and from new motives: they were to love one another in the relation of
his disciples, and in that degree of love which he had showed to them; for they
were to lay down their lives for the brethren. This excellent morality,
however, did not make such an impression on Peter, as the words which JESUS had
spoken concerning a place whither his disciples could not come: he therefore
replied, by asking where he was going? To which JESUS answered, Whither I go,
thou can not follow me now; but thou shall follow me afterward.

IN order to make his disciples humble, watchful, and kindly-affectionate one
toward another, he assured them, that Satan was seeking to ruin them all by
his tempations: And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold, Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. Peter was
greatly offended that his Master should have singled him out as the weakest;
for so he interpreted his praying for him particularly: and supposing that he
mentioned Satan's seeking to sift him, as a thing which would hinder him from
following his Master, replied, Why cannot I follow thee now? Is there any road
more terrible than the dark valley of the shadow of death? Yet, I am willing
this moment to accompany thee through these black and gloomy shades.

BUT JESUS knowing his weak, though sincere resolution, answered, art thou so
very confident of thine own strength? I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not
crow this day, before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me, Luke
xxii.34.

OUR dear Lord having finished what he had to say to Peter in particular,
turned himself to his other disciples, and put them in mind, how that, when
they were first sent out, he directed them to rely wholly upon the Almighty for
assistance. 'When I sent you formerly,' said he, 'to preach the gospel, you may
remember, I ordered you to go without any provision either for your sustenance
or defense, assuring you, that though you would indeed meet with great
opposition, yet Providence would dispose some men in all places to be your
friends, and to furnish you with all necessaries; and, accordingly, you found
that you wanted for nothing, but were wonderfully supported without any care or
provision of your own in the whole journey, and finished your work with
success. But now the case is very different; the time of that greatest trial
and distress, whereof I have often forewarned you, is just at hand; and you may
now make all the provision in your power, and arm yourselves against it as much
as you are able: the time, I say, of the greatest trial and distress that ever
yet befell you, is now at hand; for I am just going to be betrayed into the
hands of my inveterate enemies. I have finished the work for which I was sent
into the world; and nothing now remains for me, but to undergo those sufferings
which the prophets have foretold concerning me, and, by submitting at last to a
most cruel and ignominious death, to complete this whole dispensation of
Providence.' The disciples thinking that their great Master meant, that they
should arm themselves in a literal sense, and endeavor to oppose the assaults
that would shortly be made upon them by the Jews, answered, Lord here are two
swords: but the blessed JESUS, who only intended to convey an idea of their
approaching distress and temptations, and to arm them against the surprise,
replied. It is enough.

OUR blessed Savior having thus forewarned his disciples of the great trial
that was coming upon them, and commanded them to arm themselves against it,
proceeded to animate them to sustain the trial manfully, and to comfort them
under the dismal apprehensions it might cause in their minds. Be not terrified
and disconsolate, said the compassionate Redeemer of mankind, because I have
told you that I must undergo great sufferings, and be taken away from you for a
time. You have always been taug^^ to believe in God, who is the Almighty
Preserver and Governor of all things; and (...) rely on him for deliverance in
every affliction and distress. Learn now, in like mann^^ to believe in me, who
have all power committed to me, as preserver and head of (...) church; and
trust in me to accomplish fully all things that I have promised you if yo^ do
this, and persist steadfastly in the belief of my doctrine, and in the
obedience of (...) commands, nothing in this vale of misery, not even
persecution, or death itself, shall (...) able to hinder you from attaining the
happiness I have promised to you: for in heav^^ my Father's house, there is
abundant room to receive you, otherwise I would not ha^^ filled your minds with
the hopes and expectations of happiness: but, as there are m^^^sions sufficient
for you in another state, you may with confidence and assurance, hop^ for the
full accomplishment of my promises, notwithstanding all this present world
(...) contrive to act against you. And ye ought also to bear patiently my
departure from you at this time; since I only leave you to open the portals of
those eternal habitation^ where I shall be ever with you, and to prepare a
place for your reception: after which I will return and take you to myself. Nor
shall you evermore be separated from m^ but continue with me to all eternity,
in full participation of my eternal glory and hap^piness, in the blissful
regions of the heavenly Canaan. You must now surely know the way that leads to
these happy seats of immortality, and whither I am going.

HOWEVER, the disciples, whose minds were not yet fully weaned from the
expectation^ of temporal power and glory, did not understand this discourse of
their great and b^ loved Master. Accordingly, Thomas replied, Lord, we know not
whither thou go; an^ how can we know the way? To which the blessed JESUS
answered, I am the way, and the truth, and the life. Imitating my example, and
obeying my commands, is the way (...) arrive at the place whither I am going;
namely, to my Father's house, and to the ^^ joyment of his eternal happiness:
nor can any man go thither by any other way. (...) ye say ye do not know the
Father, I tell you that no man who knows me, can ^^ ignorant of my Father, of
his will, and of the manner of pleasing him; for my Fath^^ and I are one: so
that if ye know me, ye must know the Father also; and indeed ye (...) know him,
and have been sufficiently instructed in his precepts. Then Philip answered
Lord, show us but once the Father, and we shall be fully satisfied. ^ut JESUS
replied have I been so long continually with you, and do thou not yet know
me, Philip? I tell you, I and my Father are the same; so that to know one, is
to be acquainted with both* What then, can you mean, by desiring to see the
Father, as if you could still be ignoran^ of him after being so long acquainted
with me? Do you not believe that the Father an^ I are one and the same?
Whatsoever I speak, is the declaration of his will, and whatsoever I do, is the
operation of his power. Believe me, that the Father and I are one; and if ye
refuse to believe my own affirmation, yet, as my works carry in them undeniable
evidences of a divine power, let them convince you.

YOU then surely have matter sufficient to comfort and support your spirits
under the thoughts of my departure from you. Ye have abundant reason to
believe, that I have power to perform all the promises I have made you, and the
design of my departure is actually to perform them. When I am returned to my
Father, ye shall soon receive sufficient pledges of my care and remembrance of
you: ye shall be endued with power not only to perform the same works ye have
seen me do, as healing diseases, giving sight to the blind, casting out devils,
and the like, for the conviction of the Jews, but even to do greater things
than those; to speak with all kinds of tongues, and to propagate my religion
through all the nations of the earth, even amonst the Gentiles.

CHRIST given Instructions to his Disiples


AS being my disciples, and in order to promote the work of the gospel,
whatsoever ye shall ask of my Father, in my name, shall certainly be granted
you: that God may be greatly glorified, by the extraordinary success and
spreading the religion of his Son, I say, that whatsoever ye shall ask, I will
take care, that after my return to the Father, it shall be granted you; only ye
must remember, as the necessary condition upon which all depends, that ye be
careful above all things, to continue steadfast and immovable in your obedience
to my commands: this is the only true mark ye can give of the sincerity of your
love toward me; it is more than your grieving at my departure.

I say, the Father shall send you another advocate and comforter, even his Holy
Spirit, the author and teacher of truth, who shall guide and direct, assist and
comfort you in all cases. This Spirit, the sensual and corrupt world cannot
receive, having no knowledge of him, nor disposition to be governed by him; but
ye know him, and are disposed to entertain him: he is already in you, by his
secret and invisible efficacy; and shall hereafter appear in you openly, by
great and visible manifestations of himself. Thus, though I must depart from
you, yet I do by no means leave you comfortless: I leave with you a promise of
the Holy Spirit, and I leave you in expectation also of my own return: for
though, after a very little while, I shall appear no more to the world; yet, as
I shall live again, and ye also shall live with me, to you I will appear.

THEREFORE, when I have conquered and triumphed over death, ye shall understand
more fully, and it shall apppear more visible by great and manifest effects,
that I act, in all things, agreeable to my Father's will, and am perfectly
invested with his power; and that ye in like manner, have my power and
commission communicated to you: so that there is a perfect unity and community
between us; only ye must remember, that the one necessary condition, on which
all depends, is, that ye continue steadfast and immovable in your faith in me,
and in your obedience to my commands. He, and he only, who embraces my
doctrine, and obeys and practices it, shall be judged to be sincere in his love
toward me: And he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and will manifest myself to him.

JUDAS Thaddeus here interrupted his Master, saying, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?

TO which JESUS replied, I have already told you the reason of my acting in
this manner; because the generality of the world are not disposed to obey my
commandments, the necessary condition of maintaining communion with me: but ye
are disposed to embrace my doctrine, and to obey it; and, therefore, I manifest
myself to you. And whoever else will so love me as to keep my commandments, him
also will I and my Father love, and will maintain communion with him, and all
spiritual blessings shall be poured down upon him, and he shall be made
partaker of happiness and eternal life. On the contrary, whoever loves me not,
that is, obeys not my commandments, shall have no intercourse or communion with
me; neither will my Father love or honor him, or make any manifestations of
himself to him: for as my commandments are not my own, but the Father's
commandments, therefore, whoever dishonours me, my Father will look upon him as
dishonouring himself.

I have briefly spoken these things unto you now, according to the shortness of
the time I am to continue with you, and to comfort you for the present, against
my departure. But when the comforter whom I promised you is come, even the Holy
Spirit, whom my Father shall send you on my account, shall instruct you more
fully, recalling to your remembrance what you have forgotten, explaining what
is yet obscure, and supplying what is further necessary to be taught you, and
to be understood by you. In the mean time I take my leave of you, and my
blessing I leave with you; not formally, and after the common fashion of the
world, but affectionately and sincerely, retaining a careful remembrance of
you, and with an earnest desire and intention of returning again speedily to
you. Wherefore, be not overmuch grieved for me and my departure, nor fearful of
what may then befall yourselves: I go away from you, but it is with a^
intention, as I have already told you, to return to you again. If you loved me
with a wise and understanding affection, you would rejoice instead of grieving
at my present departure; because I am going to the Supreme Author of all glory
and happiness, even to my Father.

I have now told you these things before they come to pass, that when ye see
them happen, your faith in me, and your expectation of the performance of all
my promises, may be confirmed and strengthened; the time will not allow me to
say much more to you at present; my end draws near; the ruler of this world,
the prince of the power of darkness, is at this instant employing all his
wicked instruments to apprehend and destroy me: not that either the power of
the Devil, or the malice of man, can at all prevail over me, but because the
time of my suffering, according to the appointment of Divine Wisdom, is
arrived; and that I may demonstrate to the world my love and obedience to my
Father, I willingly submit myself to be put to death by the hands of sinful and
cruel men. Rise up, let us be going, that I may enter on my sufferings. See
John, chap. xiv. ver. 1, to the end.

THUS having spoken, they finished the passover with singing a hymn, and went
out to the Mount of Olives. The hymn which they sung was probably that which
the Jews call the Hallem, or great hymn, which consisted of the hundred and
thirteenth and five subsequent Psalms; part of which was sung at the beginning
of the solemnity, and part at the end.

WHEN they arrived at the place which was to be the scene of his sufferings, he
desired them to fortify themselves by prayer, and forewarned them of the
terrible effects his sufferings would have upon them; they would make them all
stumble that very night, agreeable to the prophecy of Zechariah: I will smile
the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. Therefore,
he not only mentioned his own resurrection, but told them they should see him
in Galilee, after he was risen from the dead, in order to strengthen their
faith.

PETER, on our blessed Savior's mentioning the offense that his disciples
would take at his sufferings, recollected what had been said to him in
particular, before they left the house. Grieving therefore afresh, to find his
Master entertain such thoughts of him, and being now armed with a sword, the
vehemence of his temper urged him to boast a second time of his courageous and
close attachment to his Master: Though all men, said he, should be offended
because of thee, yet will I never be offended. But JESUS, knowing that
confidence and security are great enemies to virtue, thought proper to forewarn
him against his danger, and told him, that the cock should not crow before he
had denied him. Peter, however, still continued to repeat his confidence, I
will die with thee, but never deny thee. The disciples all joined with Peter in
professing their fixed resolution of suffering death, rather than they would
deny their Master; but the event fully confirmed the predictions of our
Savior. From whence we may learn, how ignorant men are of themselves.

OUR dear Lord, not willing to lose one single moment of the short time of his
ministry that yet remained, continued to instruct his disciples in the great
truths he came into the world to explain; and from the vines, which were
growing round him on the Mount of Olives, he began his excellent discourse,
with the parable of the vine, which we shall endeavor to explain in the
following manner.

HITHERTO, said the compassionate Redeemer of mankind, the Jewish church and
nation have been the peculiar care of Providence; as a choice and a goodly
vine, likely to bring forth much fruit, is the especial care of the husbandmen:
but from henceforth, my church, my disciples, and the professors of my
religion, of whatsoever country or nation they be, shall become the people of
God, and the peculiar care of Divine Providence* I will be to them as the root
and stock of a vine, of which my Father is the husbandman and vine-dresser, and
they are the branches.

AS the skilful vine-dresser, in the management of a choice vine, cuts off all
barren and superfluous branches, that they may not burden nor exhaust the tree
and prunes, and dresses the fruitful branches, that they may grow continually,
and bear more fruit: so in the government of my church, all useless, wicked,
and incorrigible members, my Father, by his just judgment, cuts off and
destroys; but those who are sincerely pious and good, he, by the various and
merciful dispensations of his providence toward them, tries, purifies, and
amends, that they may daily improve and be more and more abundant in all good
works. Now ye, my apostles, are such members as these, being purified in heart
and mind, and prepared for every good work, by your lively faith in me, and
sincere resolutions to obey my commands. Continue steadfastly in this state,
and then you may be sure of deriving all spiritual blessings from me, as the
branches receive sap and nourishment from the vine: but as a branch, without
continuing in the vine, cannot bear any fruit, but presently dries up and
perishes; so ye, unless ye continue steadfast in your communion with me, by a
lively faith and sincere obedience, so as to receive grace and spiritual
blessings, can never bring forth any good fruit of true holiness and
righteousness, but will fall into vanity, superstition, and wickedness, and
will utterly perish at last. I say, I am, as it were, the root and stock of the
vine, whereof ye are the branches: he that continues to adhere to me, by
constant faith in me, by imitating my example, and by obeying my commands,
shall bring forth much fruit, of true virtue and holiness, unto everlasting
life; even as a branch which continues to grow in a vine, and receives sap and
nourishment from it: but he that does not continue his relation to me in this
manner, is a false and useless professor of my religion, and shall be cast out
from me, and perish for ever; even as a fruitless branch is cut off from the
vine, and left to whither and dry, and is at last burnt in the fire* but if ye
continue in me, by believing my words, and holding fast what ye believe, and
obeying and practicing it, no power, or malice, either of men or of devils,
shall be able to hurt you, or oppose your doctrines: for though I be absent
from you in the body, yet I will hear your prayers, and my Father himself also
will hear you; and whatsoever ye shall ask, for the glory of the Almighty, and
the propagation of my true religion in the world, shall certainly be granted
you: but, above all things, carefully remember to demonstrate your continuance
in me, by abounding in all good works of holiness, righteousness, and charity.
This is the honor which my Father desires and expects from you, even as it is
the glory and desire of a vine-dresser, that his vine should bring forth much
fruit; and this is the honor that I myself expect from you, that ye should
prove yourselves to be really and indeed my disciples, by imitating my example,
and obeying my commands: this ye are bound to do, not only in duty, but in
gratitude also; for as my Father has loved me, so have I also loved you, and
ye in like manner ought to love me again, that you may continue to be loved by
me: but the way to express your love toward me, and to continue to be loved by
me, is to keep my commandments; even as I, by keeping my Father's commandments,
have expressed my love toward him, and continue to be loved by him.

I have spoken to you these things before my departure, that the comfort ye
have taken in my presence, may be continued in my absence, and even increased
at the coming of the Holy Spirit, as it will be upon this condition, which I
have so often repeated to you, that you keep my commandments: and the principal
of these commandments is, that ye love one another, not after the common
fashion of the world, but in such a manner as I have loved you; nor can you be
ignorant what sort of love that is, when I tell you that I am now going to lay
down my life for you: this is the highest instance, in which it is possible for
man to express his love toward his greatest friends and benefactors; and this
I am now going to do for you, and for all mankind: I do not consider you as my
benefactors, but as my friends, upon this easy condition only, that ye keep my
commandments. I might, indeed, justly call you servants, considering the
infinite distance between me and you, and the obligation ye have to obey my
commandments: but I have not treated you as servants, who are not admitted into
their master's councils, but as friends, revealing to you with all freedom and
plainness, the whole will of my Father.

I say, I have behaved myself to you, as to the nearest friends; not that you
first obliged me, or did any acts of kindness for me, but I have freely, and of
my own good pleasure, chosen you to be my apostles, and the preachers of my
gospel, that you may go and declare the will of God to the world, and bring
forth much and lasting fruit, in the conversion of men to the knowledge of the
truth, and to the profession and practice of true religion and virtue. In the
performance of this work, whatsoever ye shall ask of my Father in my name, it
shall certainly be granted you, in order to enable you to perform it
effectually, and with full success.

IN all these things which I have spoken unto you, concerning the greatness of
my love toward you, in choosing you to be my apostles, in revealing unto you
the whole will of my Father, and in laying down my life for you; I have urged
and inculcated upon you this reason chiefly, as I at first told you, that ye
may learn, after my example, to love one another. The world, indeed, you must
expect, will hate and persecute you upon my account; but this you ought not to
be surprised or terrified at, knowing that I myself have met with the same
treatment before you.

BUT the reason why the generality of the world have opposed and persecuted me,
is because my doctrine is inconsistent with their lusts and passions, their
covetousness and unjust ambition; and, for the same reason, there is no doubt
but they will oppose and persecute you also. If ye were of the spirit of the
world, flattering men in their sins, and teaching doctrines consistent with
their lusts and passions, the world, doubtless, would love and honor you: but
since I have chosen you out of the world, to reprove its vices, and to preach
the necessity of reformation, and of men amending their lives, if the world
hate and persecute you, wonder not.

THEREFORE, be not surprised, when ye meet with opposition; nor think to find
better treatment in the world, than I myself have done. Remember what I have
already told you, that the disciple is not above his Master, nor is he that is
sent, greater than he that sent him. If men had generally and readily embraced
my doctrine, you might, indeed, have had some reason to expect, that they would
willingly have received yours also: but since I myself have suffered great
indignities and persecutions from wicked and perverse, from obstinate and
incorrigible men, only for opposing their vices, it is highly reasonable that
you should expect to undergo the like treatment upon the like account: in all
which sufferings you will moreover have this comfortable consideration to
support you, that the justice of your own cause, and the injustice of your
persecutors, will by that very means most evidently appear: seeing ye are
persecuted only for professing and preaching in my name, the doctrine of true
religion and virtue; and they persecute you only, because they know not God,
and out of mere malice will not bear to be instructed in his command. Indeed,
had not I appeared to the world with all possible demonstrations of authority
and truth, teaching men, a most holy and undeniable doctrine, sufficient to
reform their manners and amend their lives, and moreover demonstrating my
divine commission, by such proofs as ought to satisfy and convince the most
doubting and suspicious minds; they might have had some plea and excuse of
ignorance for their unbelief; but now, since all reasonable evidence has been
offered them, and proper methods used for their conversion and salvation, and
yet they wilfully and obstinately reject these means of grace, it is plain they
have no excuse for their sin; but they oppose and persecute you only because
they will not forsake their worldly lusts, and out of mere malice will not bear
to be instructed in the commands of the Almighty: so that they who oppose and
persecute you, as they have before persecuted me, show plainly that they are
haters of God, and of his most holy commandments; which is, as I have already
told you, a plain evidence of the injustice of your persecutors, and of the
justice of your own case.

I say, if I had not done such works amongst them as no man ever did, they
might, indeed, have had some appearance of excuse for their sin: but now,
having seen abundant proofs of my authority, and undeniable evidence of the
truth, of my doctrine, and yet wilfully and obstinately persisting to oppose
it, because inconsistent with their lusts; it is plain that their dishonouring
me, is a dishonor done to God himself, and a direct contempt of his commands;
so that they are utterly inexcusable. But it is no wonder, when men have given
themselves wholly up to be governed by worldly affections, passions, and vices,
they should act contrary to all the reason and evidence in the world: for this
is but the natural consequence of obstinate and habitual wickedness; and hereby
is only fulfilled in me, what holy Daivd long since prophetically complained
of, that they hated him without a cause.

HOWEVER, notwithstanding all the opposition that wicked and incorrigible men
will make against my doctrine, there will not be wanting powerful promoters of
it, who shall effectually overcome all opposition; for the comforter, whom I
said I will send you from heaven, even that spirit of truth, which comes
forth, and is sent from the Father, shall, when he comes, with wonderful
efficacy bear testimony to the truth of my doctrine, and cause it to spread
through the world with incredible success; nay, and ye yourselves also, though
now so weak, fearful, and doubting, shall then very powerfully bear testimony
to the truth of all the things whereof ye have been eyewitnesses from the
beginnig, having been all along present with me.

I have thus warned you beforehand, of the opposition and persecution ye must
expect to meet with in the world, that when it comes ye may not be surprised
and terrified so as to be discouraged thereby from persisting in the
performance of your duty. Ye must expect particularly, that the chief priests
and rulers of the Jews, men of great hypocrisy and superstition, zealous for
their ceremonies and ritual traditions, but careless to know and obey the will
of Omnipotence in matters of great and eternal obligation, and invincibly
prejudiced against the spiritual holiness and purity of my doctrine; these, I
say, you must expect will excommunicate you as apostates, and cast you out of
all their societies, as the vilest of malefactors; nay, to such an absurd
height of malice will their superstition carry them, that they will even fancy
they promote the service of God, and the cause of religion, when they most
barbaroustly murder and destroy you: but I have warned you of all this
beforehand, that ye may prepare and fortify yourselves against it, that ye may
remember I fortold it to you, and that your faith in me may thereby be
strengthened, when it comes to pass.

INDEED, I did not tell you particularly of these things at the beginning, when
you first followed me and became my disciples, because then I was to continue
with you in person, and support you in all things by my immediate presence: but
now, being about to leave you, I think it necessary to acquaint you what things
are likely to come upon you after my departure, and also what comfort you may
expect to support you under them, at the same time.

I must now mention the melancholy part, namely, that I am going from you, and
that great temptations will befall you in my absence; this, indeed, ye readily
apprehend, and suffer your hearts to be overwhelmed with grief at the thoughts
of it: but the comfortable part of my discourse, namely, that my departure is
only in order to return to him that sent me, and that I will soon after send
you the Holy Spirit, and the other advantages that will thence result to you,
are neither considered nor are you solicitous about them. Nevertheless, if ye
will listen, I will plainly tell you the truth: ye are so far from having
reason to be dejected at the thoughts of my departure, that on the contrary, it
is really profitable and expedient for you, that I should now depart; for such
is the order and dispensation of Providence toward you, and the appointment of
my Father's eternal and all-wise council, that before I go and take possession
of my kingdom, the comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, cannot be sent unto
you; but when I am departed from you, and have all power in heaven and earth
committed unto me, then I will send him unto you: and when he comes he shall
abundantly support and comfort you under all your troubles; shall powerfully
plead your cause against your adversaries; and shall, with wonderful efficacy,
cause the doctrine of the gospel to spread and prevail in the world against all
opposition: he shall particularly, and in a most extraordinary and convincing
manner, make the world sensible of the greatness and heinousness of a sin of
which they were not aware; of the righteousness and justice of a dispensation
they did not understand, and of the execution of a most remarkable judgment
they did not expect. First, by wonderfully attesting and confirming the truth
of my doctrine, by the gift of tongues, and other wonderful signs, he shall
convince the world of the greatness and heinousness of their sins, in
disbelieving and rejecting me. Secondly, by demonstrating, that my departure
out of the world, was not perishing and dying, but only a returning to my
Father in order to be invested with all power both in heaven and earth, he
shall convince the world of the righteou^ness and justice of my cause, and of
the excellency of that dispensation which I preached and declared to mankind.
Lastly, he shall convince men of my power and authority to execute judgment
upon mine enemies, for establishment of my kingdom upon earth, by mightily
destroying the power of the Devil, and the dominion of sin, and propagating the
doctrine of true religion in the world, with wonderful efficacy and success.

MANY other things are yet hereafter to be done in relation to the settling and
establishing of my church, which, if it were proper, I would now acquaint you
with, but ye are not yet prepared to understand and receive them. Howbeit, when
the Spirit of Truth, whom I promised you, is come, he shall enlarge your
understandings, remo^^ your prejudices, and instruct you in all necessary and
divine truths, to enable you to go through that great work, which I have begun
in person, and which I will carry o^ by your ministry; for the Spirit is not to
begin any new work, or to found any new doctrine of himself: but as I have
taught and will teach you only in my Father's name, so the Spirit shall
instruct you only in mine and my Father's will, and in things necessary to
promote and carry on the same design. Every thing that he does shall be only in
order to manifest my glory, and establish my religion in the world; even as
every thing that I have done, has been only to manifest my Father's glory, and
reveal his will to mankind: for as all that I have taught is only what I
received from my Father, so all that the Spirit shall teach you, is only what
he receives from me. Whatsoever, I say, the Spirit shall teach you, is only
what he receives from me; for receiving from my Father, I call receiving from
me, and teaching his will, is teaching mine; seeing all things that the Father
has, are common to me, and all power and dominion is committed to me by him.

BE careful now to remember what matter for comfort I have given you, and
support yourselves with it, under the approaching distress. It is now, indeed,
but a very little while before I shall be taken away from you; nevertheless,
let not this cause you to despair: for, after I am departed, it will be also
but a little while before I appear to you again; inasmuch as my being taken
away from you, is not perishing, but only returning to my Father. At these last
words of JESUS, the disciples were greatly disturbed and troubled, not
understanding his true meaning, that in a very short time he should be taken
from them by death; and that, after having overcome death by a glorious
resurrection, he would appear to them again before his ascension into heaven.
Not understanding this, they inquired, one of another, what can he mean by
telling us, that in a very little time he shall be taken out of our sight; and
that in a very little time more, we shall see him again, and this because he
goes to the Father? The meaning of all this we cannot understand.

BUT JESUS observing their perplexity, and knowing that they were desirous of
a^king him, replied, Why are ye thus disturbed and perplexed about what I told
you? Is it a thing so very hard to be understood, that I said, within a very
little time I should be taken away from you, and that within a very little time
more, I should appear to you again? Verily, verily, I tell you, I must soon
depart out of this world: and when the world, who are your enemies, will
rejoice and triumph over you, as if they h^d destroyed me, and wholly
suppressed you; ye for your parts will be overwhelmed with grief and sorrow;
but, within a short time, I will return to you again, and then your sorrow
shall be turned into exceeding great joy; even as a woman, when she is in
labor, has great pain and sorrow for the present, but, as soon she is
delivered forgets all her sufferings, and rejoices greatly at the birth of her
son; so ye, while ye are under the immediate apprehension of my departure from
you, and during that time of distress and temptation which shall befall you in
my absence, will be full of sorrow and anxiety of mind; but when I ruturn to
you again, then ye shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, and
the cause of continuance of it, no power or malice of man shall ever be able to
take from you any more.

HOWEVER, though I shall return to you again, and your hearts will thereupon be
filled with inexpressible joy, and which never shall be taken from you any
more; yet there will be no necessity that I should then continue long with you
in person, to instruct you upon every occasion, as I have now done with my own
mouth: for besides that the Holy Spirit will be sent to instruct you in all
things necessary, my Father himself also will hear your petitions and be ready
to grant you whatsoever you shall desire of him in my name, as being my
disciples. Hitherto ye have asked nothing of God in my name; but from
henceforth put up your petitions in my name, and whatsoever ye shall so ask for
the glory of God, and in order to enable you to g^^ through the work of your
ministry successfully, shall certainly be granted you; th^^ your joy, which
will begin at my appearing to you again after my death, may be completed by the
wonderful success and efficacy of your own ministry. These things ^ have told
you, at present, imperfect and obscurely, according as your capacities are able
to bear them; but the time is coming, when your prejudices being removed, I
will speak to you with more openness, freedom and plainness the whole will of
my Father, concerning the nature and establishment of my kingdom and what
things ye ought to pray unto him for, and in what manner.

YE shall, at that time, with firm assurance pray to my Father in my name, for
what ye want; and I need not tell you, that I will intercede with the Father on
your behalf: for besides the love he has for me, and the power and authority my
prayers have with him, he has moreover, of himself, a great love for you, and a
ready disposition to grant your prayers, because ye are become grateful and
acceptable to him, by your love toward me, which ye have shown, in embracing
willingly that holy doctrine which I have revealed to you from him.

NOW to conclude: the sum of what I have told you, is briefly and plainly this:
I came down from heaven from God my Father, and have lived upon earth in the
state of frail and mortal man, that I might reveal to mankind the will of my
heavenly Father, and the way to attain eternal life and happiness: and now
having finished this great work, I am about to leave this world, and return
again to my Father from whence I at first came. These last words of JESUS,
being somewhat more plain and express, than any he had before spoken, so that
now the disciples clearly perceived that the departure he had so often
mentioned, was no other than his actual going out of this world, they replied,
Now, Lord thou speak plainly, and without any figure; so that we apprehend
fully what thou means; And now that our curiosity is satisfied, thou have
likewise greatly comfirmed our faith; having given us a certain token, whereby
we are assured that thou knows all things, even the hearts and secret thoughts
of men, since thou has answered us a question which gave us great perplexity,
and were desirous to ask thy opinion of, but were afraid: but now we are
convinced, that thou art endued with a truly divine power and did indeed come
from God. To which JESUS answered, and do you now at length firmly believe in
me? Are you resolved to continue steadfast in this faith? Do you think
yourselves able to persevere immovably in the possession of it? Be not
confident of your own strength but pray that ye may be delivered from
temptation in time of distress, such as will come upon you much sooner than ye
expect: for I tell you, that ye will all of you within a few hours utterly
forsake me, and fly, in hopes to secure yourselves, leaving me alone; and yet I
should not stay alone since my Father is with me, who is more than all: I have
therefore acquainted you with these things beforehand, that your minds may be
furnished with sufficient matter of comfort and strength to bear up under all
temptations, from the consideration of my having foretold both what distresses
will befall you, and how ye shall terminate your victory over all your enemies!
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the
world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world, John xvi.33.

THUS having finished his discourse, JESUS lift up his eyes to heaven, and
prayed, saying, O Almighty Father! now the time of my sufferings, for which I
was sent into the world, is arrived; I entreat thee support me under it, and
make me triumph over death, by a glorious resurrection and ascension into
heaven; that by this means the glory may redound to thee; and cause thy will to
be believed and obeyed through all the world, to the salvation of mankind;
according to the full intent of that office and power with which thou did
originally invest me to receive all fitly disposed persons into the covenant of
salvation, and to assist and preserve them in it unto everlasting happiness:
the condition of this covenant is, that they firmly believe and obey thee, as
the only true God, and JESUS CHRIST, as the true Messiah, whom thou have sent.
In order to the bringing about this great design of salvation, I have declared
thy will to mankind; I have published thy precepts, and discharged the great
mission entrusted to me; I have preached the doctrine of repentance to
salvation, and have finished the work which thou sentest me to do, to the glory
of thy name upon earth; and now to complete the great design, do thou, O
Almighty Father! likewise glorify me with thine own self; support me under my
sufferings; let me prevail and triumph over death, by a glorious resurrection,
and exalt me again to the same glory in heaven which I had with thee before the
creation of the universe. I have manifested thy will to my disciples, the men
that thou gave me out of the world, and to all such as were fitted and
disposed to receive it; to such as by a pious habit, and teachable disposition.
were prepared to embrace whatever doctrine should appear to come from thee. To
those persons thou did in thine infinite wisdom appoint, that thy truth
should be made known, and not to the prejudiced and vicious world: therefore,
to them I have revealed the mysteries of thy kingdom, the precepts of thy
gospel, and the doctrine of thy salvation; and this doctrine they have
willingly embraced steadfastly, adhered to, and sincerely obeyed; as they are
fully satisfied and convinced, that what I taught them as from thee, was really
a divine doctrine taught by thine immediate appointment and command; and that I
did not preach any human invention or institution of men, but was really sent
by thy divine authority and commission. For these persons, therefore I now
pray, that as thou have begun the work of their salvation by my preaching and
revealing to them thy will, while I have been present with them here upon
earth; so also that thou would preserve them when I am departed from this
world, and complete the work of their salvation by my resurrection and
ascension into heaven after my death. I do not pray for the unbelieving
impenitent world, but for those who have embraced that most holy doctrine,
which thou have taught them through me by my preaching; for those who have
glorified and will glorify my name by their ministry, and who consequently are
to be esteemed as thine own, in common with me. I am now about to leave the
world in order to return to thee, but these my disciples, who continue after
me, I recommend to thy divine protection, when I am gone; endue them with
powers to persevere in preaching and practicing the truth, and to deliver the
same holy doctrines which I have given to them, that so they may remain
inseparably united to me, as I am to thee: so long as I have been with them, in
the world, I have watched over them, and kept them from falling away, both by
example, preaching, and continual admonition, according to the power and
authority which thou did commit to me; nor has one of my apostles miscarried
under my care, except that persidious traitor who, as the Scripture foretold,
has ungratefully conspired with my enemies to destroy me, and will perish
according to his deserts. While I have continued with my disciples, I have
watched over them and preserved them under mine own eye: but now, as I am going
to leave the world I beseech thee to keep and assist them by thy good Spirit;
and let the expectation of their continuing under thy special care and
protection, be their comfort and support in my absence. The world, indeed, will
persecute and hate them on this account, as my doctrine is repugnant to the
lusts and affections, the passions, designs, and inclinations of worldly men;
it must necessarily be, that the vicious and incorrigible world will oppose and
persecute them, as it has before persecuted me; ^ beseech thee, therefore, to
take them under thy particular care, to support them against the violence and
oppression of an evil world: I do not desire that thou should tak^ them out
of the world, but preserve them in it to be instruments of thy word, thy glory,
and to be teachers of thy truth; nor suffer them to be either destroyed by the
malice and violence of a perverse and wicked generation, or corrupted by the
evil customs and opinions of it.

ACCORDING to the example of purity which I have set before them, they are of a
temper and spirit very different from the current affections and common
dispositions of the world. Do thou preserve and increase in them that
moderation and candor of mind; cause them to be thoroughly affected and
impressed with that true doctrine so frequently recommended to them from my
mouth, so as to express it visibly in their lives and practice, and to promote
it zealously in their preaching, that they may become worthy and successful
ministers of my gospel, both by word and good example.

AS thou have sent me into the world to reveal thy will to mankind, so send I
these my apostles to continue preaching the same doctrine begun by me; and the
principal design of my exemplary life, constant teaching, and now voluntarily
offering myself to death for it, is to sanctify and enable them to preach with
success and efficacy for the salvation of me. Neither pray I for these my
apostles only, but for all others, who shall, by their preaching and practice,
promote thy true religion; and being converted from the world, may, by their
sincere endeavors, go on to reform others, convincing the world of the
excellency of their religion, and consequently enforcing men to acknowledge the
truth and divine authority thereof: for promoting which great end, I have
communicated to my apostles the same power and authority of doing mighty works
for the conformation of their doctrine, and the evidence of thy truth, as thou
did communicate to me; that so I working in them as thou have done in me, and
thus confirming with great efficacy and demonstration of Spirit, they may
establish the same doctrine which I published in person, that the world may, by
this evidence, be convinced that I was really sent by thee, and that my
disciples act by the same divine commission as I did.

ALMIGHTY and Holy Father, all those whom thou have thus given me, who have
wisely embraced my doctrine, and sincerely obeyed it, I desire that thou
would make them partakers of the same happiness with myself, and exalt them
to behold the incomprehensible glory wherewith thou did originally invest me
in thy eternal love, before the foundation of the world. The generality of
mortals, O righteous Father! the covetous and ambitious, the crafty and
designing men of this world have not known thee, nor been willing to embrace
and obey the revelation of thy will; but I have known thy will, and have made
it known to my disciples, men of simplicity and honesty; and they have embraced
and obeyed it: and I will continually make it known to them more and more, that
they may grow up and improve in faith, in holiness, and in all good works, so
as finally to arrive, and cause others to arrive, at that eternal happiness,
which is the effect of thy infinite love and mercy toward me and them.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
CHRIST's Agony and Prayer in the Garden of Gathsemane: Judas betrayeth JESUS
with a Kiss: The Officers and Soldiers, at CHRIST's Word, fall to the Ground:
CHRIST heals a Servant of the High Priest, whose Ear was cut off by Peter:
His Disciples flee: He is led bound to Annas and Caiaphas.

THE prayer of our great Intercessor being ended, he, with his disciples, came
down from the Mount of Olives into the field below, called Gathsemane, through
which the brook Cedron ran, and in it, on the other side of the brook, was a
garden, called the garden of Gethsemane. Here he desired his disciples to sit
down, perhaps at the garden-door within, till he should retire to pray, taking
with him, Peter, James, and John, those three select disciples whom he had
before chosen to be witnesses of his transfiguration, and now to be
eyewitnesses of his passion, leaving the other disciples it the garden-door,
to watch the approach of Judas and his band. The sufferings he was on the point
of undergoing were so great, that the very prospect of them terrified him, and
made him express himself in this doleful exclamation, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch. On this great occasion he
sustained those grievous sorrows in his soul, by which, as well as by dying on
the cross, he became a sin-offering, and accomplished the redemption of
mankind, He now withdrew from about a stone's cast, and his human nature being
now overburdened beyond measure he found it necessary to retire and pray, that
if it was possible, or consistent with the salvation of the world, he might be
delivered from the sufferings which were then lying on him: it was not the fear
of dying on the cross which made him speak or pray in such a manner: to suppose
this, would infinitely degrade his character make his sufferings as terrible as
possible, and clothe them with all the aggravating circumstance of distress:
yet the blessed JESUS, whose human nature was strengthened by being connected
with the divine, could not shrink at the prospect of sufferings, or betray a
weakness which many of his followers, who, though mere men, were strangers to;
having encountered more terrible deaths without the least emotions. He
addresses his Divine Father with a sigh of fervent wishes, that the cup might
if possible, be removed from him: in the Greek, it is, 'O that thou would
remove this cup from me.' And having first kneeled and prayed, he fell
prostrate on his face, accompanying his address with due expressions of
resignation, adding immediately, Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.
Having prayed, he returned to his disciples, and finding them asleep, he said
to Peter. Simon, sleep thou? Could not thou watch one hour? Can thou so
soon forget thy Master? Thou who so lately boasted of thy courage and constancy
in my service.

HOWEVER, in his greatest distress, he never lost sight of that kind concern he
had for his disciples: Watch ye, he says, and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation. Neither was he on those extraordinary occasions, in the least moved
with the offenses which they had committed through frailty and human weakness:
on the contrary, was always willing to make excuses for them; alleging in
their defense, that the spirit truly was ready, but the flesh was weak. It
seems from these particulars, that he spent some considerable time in his
addresses, because the disciples fell asleep in his absence, and he himself
retired again to pray; for the sorrows of our Lord continuing to increase upon
him, affected him to such a degree, that he retired a second time, and prayed
to the same purpose, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from
me, except I drink it, thy will be done. After which he returned again to them,
and found the^ asleep, for their eyes were heavy. He returned thus frequently
to his disciples, that they by reading hi^ ^^^tress in his countenance and
gusture, might be witnesses for his pa^^sion, which proves that his pains were
beyond description, intense and complicated; for he went away the third time to
pray, and notwithstanding an angel was sent from heaven to comfort and
strengthen him; yet they overwhelmed him, and threw him into an agony; upon
which he still continued to pray more earnestly: but the sense of his
sufferings still increasing, they strained his whole body to so violent a
degree, that his blood was pressed through the pores of his skin, which it
pervaded, together with his sweat, and fell down in large drops to the ground:
And he left them, and we^^ away again. And there appeared an angel unto him
from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly; and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to
the ground. Thus did he suffer unspeakable sorrows in his soul, as long as the
Divine wisdon thought proper. At length he obtained relief, being heard on
account of his perfect and entire submission to the will of his heavenly
Father: And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, be
found them sleeping for sorrow. This circumstance shows how much the disciples
were affected with their Master's sufferings: the sensations of grief which
they felt on seeing his unspeakable distress, so overpowered them, that they
sunk into sleep. Our blessed Savior for the last time came to his disciples,
and seeing them asleep, he said, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the
hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise
let us be going: behold, he is at hand that does betray me.

THE owner of the garden, it seems where he now was, had been our Lord's
acquaintance, perhaps his disciple, who believing on him, considered himself as
highly honored in JESUS's frequenting it, for the sake of retirement or
devotion, and, therefore, had given him the free use of it whenever he pleased.
We are told that Judas knew the place; for Jesus oftimes resorted thither, with
his disciples. The chief priests and elders being informed by Judas, that the
proper time for apprehending JESUS was now come, sent a band of soldiers with
him, and servants carrying lanterns and torches, to show them the way; because,
though it was always full moon at the possover, the sky might be dark with
clouds, and the place wither they were going was shaded with trees: at the same
time, a deputation of their number accompanied the band, to see that every one
did his duty. Judas having thus received a band of men and officers from the
chief priests and Pharisees, comes thither with lanterns and torches, and
weapons; for they were exceeding anxious to secure and get him into their
hands, and the soldiers having perhaps never seen JESUS before, found it
necessary that Judas should distinguish him, and point him out to them by some
particular sign. St. Luke seems to say, that Judas went before them at a little
distance, to prepare them for the readier execution of their office, by kissing
his Master, the token they had agreed upon, that they might not mistake him and
seize a wrong person: And he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went
before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him. Nor can the account which
St. John has given us, be understood on any other supposition, who says, that
after Judas was come up with the soldiers, JESUS went out of the garden, and
asked them, who it was they were seeking? To which they replied Jesus of
Nazareth. It therefore follows, that they were at a loss to know him, which
they could not have been, had they seen Judas kiss him: the kiss, therefore,
must have been given in the garden before the band came up; nor is their
agreement about the sign inconsistent with this supposition; because that
confusion which commonly attends the commission Peter denying our LORD JESUS
CHRIST (...) maid ^er^^nt in the High Priest's ^ouse
of an evil action, might prevent Judas from giving the sign at the proper
season. He went before the soldiers, on pretense that he would lead them to the
place, and show them the man by kissing him: however, to conceal his villainy
from his Master and the disciples, he walked hastily, and without waiting for
the band, went up directly and saluted him; feigning, perhaps, to apprize him
of his danger. But JESUS did not fail to convince him that he knew the meaning
and intent of his salutation, saying, Betrayest thou the Son of man with a
kiss? Judas certainly concealed his treachery so well, that Peter did not
suspect him, as it is probable, he would have struck at him rather than at
Malchus, the high-priest's servant, if he had.

OUR Lord's appointed time for suffering being now come, he did not, as
formerly, avoid his enemies; but, on the contrary, on their telling him they
faught JESUS of Nazareth, he replied, I am he: thereby insinuating to them,
that he was willing to put himself into their hands: at the same time to show
them that they could not apprehend him without this own consent, he in an
extraordinary manner, exerted his divine power, he made the whole band fall
back, and threw them to the ground: Jesus, therefore, knowing all things that
should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye? They
answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto them, I am he. And Judas
also, which betrayed him, stood with them. As soon then as he had said unto
them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground. But the soldiers and
the Jews imagining, perhaps, that they had been thrown down by some demon or
evil spirit, with whom the Jews said he was in confederacy, advanced toward
him a second time: Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus
of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you, that I am he; expressing again
his willingness to fall into their hands: If therefore ye seek me, let these go
their way. If your business be with me alone, suffer my disciples to pass: for
the party had surrounded them also. He seems to have made this request to the
soldiers, that the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, Of them which thou
gave me have I lost none. For as he always proportions the trials of his
people to their strength; so here he took care that the disciples should escape
the storm, which none but himself could bear.

SOME of the soldiers, more daring than the rest, at length rudely caught
JESUS, and bound him: upon which Peter drew his sword, and smote off the ^ar of
the high-priest's servant, who probably was showing greater forwardness than
the rest in this business: Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, and smote
the high-priest's servant, and cut of his right ear; the servant's name was
Malchus. The enraged apostle was on the point of singly attacking the whole
band, when JESUS ordered him to sheath his sword, telling him, that his
unseasonable and imprudent defense might prove the occasion of his destruction:
Then said Jesus unto him, put up again thy sword into its place; for all they
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. He told him likewise, that it
implied both a distrust of the Divine Providence, which can always employ a
variety of means for the safety of good men, and also his ignorance in the
Scriptures: Think thou, said he, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he
shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall
the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Matt. xxvi. 53, 54.

LEGION was a Roman military term, being the name which they gave to a body of
five or six thousand men: wherefore, in regard that (...) band which now
surrounded them, was a Roman cohort, our Lord might make use of this term by
way of contrast, to show what an inconsiderable thing the cohort was, in
comparison of the force he could summon to his assistance; more than twelve
legions, not of soldiers, but of angels. He yet was tenderly inclined to
prevent any bad consequences, which might have flowed from Peter's rashness, by
healing the servant, and adding, in his rebuke to him, a declaration of his
willingness to suffer: The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it?

OUR Lord's healing the ear of Malchus, by touching it, seems to imply, that he
created a new one in the place of that which was cut off; but though he
performed the cure some other way, it equally demonstrates both his goodness
and his power. No wound or distemper was incurable in the hand of JESUS;
neither was any injury so great that he could not forgive. It seems somewhat
surprising that this evident miracle did not make an impression upon the chief
priests, especially as our Lord put them in mind, at the same time, of his
other miracles; for having first said, Suffer ye thus far; and he touched his
ear, and healed him; he added, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords
and staves? When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no
hands against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkness. Luke
xxii.51, 52, 53. They had kept at a distance during the attack, but drew near,
when they understood that JESUS, was in their power; for they were proof
against all conviction, being obstinately bent on putting him to death. And the
disciples, when they saw their Master in the hands of his enemies, forsook him
and fled, according to his prediction; notwithstanding they might have followed
him without any danger, as the priests had no design against them: Then all the
disciples forsook him, and fled. Then the band, and the captain and officers of
the Jews, took Jesus, and bound him. But it was not the cord which held him;
his immense charity was by far a stronger band: he could, with more ease than
Sampson, have broken those weak ties, and exerted his divinity in a more
wonderful manner; he could have stricken them all dead, with as much ease as he
had before thrown them on the ground: but he patiently submitted to this, as to
every other indignity which they pleased to offer him; so meek was he under the
greatest injuries. Having thus secured him, they led him away: And there
followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked
body; and the young man laid hold on him: and he left the linen cloth, and fled
from them naked. This, perhaps, was the proprietor of the garden; who, being
awakened with the noise, came out with the linen cloth, in which he had been
lying, cast around his naked body; and forgetting the dress he was in, and
having a respect for JESUS, followed him.

HE was first led to Annas, father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that
year. Annas having himself discharged the office of high priest, was
consequently a person of distinguished character, which, together with his
relation to the high priest, made him worthy of the respect they now paid him:
but he refused singly to meddle in the affair; they, therefore, carried JESUS
to Caiaphas himself, at whose palace the chief priests, elders, and Scribes
were assembled, having staid there all night to see the issue of their
stratagem. This Caiaphas was he that advised the council to put JESUS to death,
even admitting he was innocent, for the safety of the whole Jewish nation. He
was advanced to the sacerdotal dignity by Valerius Gratus, Pilate's
predecessor, and was divested of it by Vitellius, governor of Syria, after he
had deposed Pilate from his procuratorship; and therefore seems to have enjoyed
it during the whole course of Pilate's government.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
Peter thrice denies his having any Knowledge of JESUS; but on his LORD's
turning and looking on him, he repents.

THE trial of our blessed Lord in the high-priest's palace, and Peter's denying
him, being co-temporary events, might be repeated by the evangelical historians
according to their pleasure. The evangelists Matthew and Mark describe the
trial first, as it is the principal fact; but Luke after the denials of Peter.
John has preserved the natural order here; for he begins with the first denial,
because it happened immediately after Peter entered the palace, then gives the
history of the trial as the principal fact, concluding with the subsequent
denials. But though this be the natural order, we shall view the denials
together, previous to the trial, in order to form a better idea of them.

WHEN JESUS was apprehended, the apostles, in great consternation, forsook him,
and fled, according to the prediction concerning them: some of them, however,
recovering out of the panic that had seized them, followed the band at a
distance, to see what the issue would be. Of this number was Peter, and another
disciple, whom John has mentioned, without giving his name, and who, therefore,
is supposed to have been John himself. This disciple being acquainted at the
high-priest's, got admittance for himself first, and soon after for Peter, who
had come with him: And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple:
that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the
palace of the high priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out
that other disciple, and spoke unto her that kept the door, and brought in
Peter. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set
down together, Peter sat down among them. The maid servant who kept the door
concluding Peter to be a disciple also, followed after him to the fire, and
looking earnestly at him, charged him with the supposed crime: Then says the
damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's
disciples? This blunt attack threw Peter into such confusion, that he flatly
denied his having any connection with JESUS, replying, I am not, and adding, I
know not, neither understand I what thou say. As if he had said, I do not
understand there is any reason for your asking me such a question. Thus, the
very apostle who had before acknowledged his Master to be the Messiah, the Son
of the Living God, who was honored with the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
had so confidently boasted of fortitude, and firm attachment to him in the
greatest dangers, proved an arrent deserter of his cause upon trial. His
shameful fears were altogether inexcusable, as the enemy who attacked him was
one of the weaker sex, and the terror of the charge was, in a great measure,
taken off by the insinuation made in it, that John was likewise known to be
CHRIST's disciple; for, as he was known at the high-priest's, he was
consequently known in that character: Art thou not also one of this man's
disciples? Art thou not one of them as well as he who is sitting with you?
Equivocation, mental reservation, and such like base arts, are below the
dignity and courage of reasonable creatures; but downright lying, and that in
the presence of John his fellow-disciple, is abominable, and can only be
accounted for, by the confusion and panic which had seized him on this
occasion. As Peter's inward perturbation must have appeared in his countenance
and gesture, he did not choose to stay long with the servants at the fire; he
went out, therefore, into the porch, where he was a little concealed: And he
went out into the porch, and the cock crew, namely, for the first time. And the
maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is one of
them; and he again denied it with an oath, I know not the man: thus aggravating
his former crime by that of perjury.

PETER having been thus attacked without doors, thought proper to return and
m^^ with the crowd at the fire: And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. From
this cir^cumstance, we may conclude, that the ensuing was the third denial; and
that Peter le^^ the porch where the second denial happened, and was come again
into the hall: Here one of the servants of the high priest, being his kindsman
whose ear Peter cut off, says, Did n^^ I see thee in the garden with him?
Peter then denied again, and immediately the cock cre^* The words of Malchus's
kindsman, bringing to Peter's remembrance what he had do^^ to that servant,
threw him into such a panic, that when those who stood by repeated the charge,
he impudently denied it: He even began to curse and to swear, saying, I know
not this man of whom ye speak. For, when they heard Peter deny the charge, they
supported it by an argument drawn from the accent with which he pronounced his
answer. Surely, thou art one of them, for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech
agrees thereto; so that, being pressed on all sides, to give his lie the
better color, he profane^ the name of God, by imprecating the bitterest curses
on himself, if he was telling a falsehood: perhaps, he hoped, by these acts of
impiety, to convince them effectually that he was not CHRIST's disciple.

THIS zealous apostle thus denied his Master three distinct times, with oaths
and asseverations, totally forgetting the vehement protestations he had made a
few hours before, that he would never deny him. He was permitted to fall in
this manner, to teach u^ two lessons: first, that whatever a person's
seize might have been formerly, if once he passes the bounds of
innocence, he commonly proceeds from bad to worse, one sin naturally draws on
another; for which reason, the very least appearances of evil are to be
avoided, and the greatest humility and self-diffidence maintained: in the
second place, we may learn, that no sinner who repents, and has confidence in
the goodness of God, should ever despair; for he no sooner denied his Master
the third time, than the cock crew, and awakened in him the first conviction of
his sin: And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the
word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shall
deny me thrice. And Peter went out, and wept bitterly. St. Luke is the only
evangelist who has preserved this beautiful circumstance of CHRIST's turning
and looking on Peter. The members of the council who sat on JESUS, were placed
at the upper end of the hall; in the other, were the servants with Peter at the
fire: so that JESUS being probably placed on some eminence, that his judges,
who were numerous, might see and hear him, could easily look over toward
Peter, and observe him denying him, and in passionate terms, loud enough to be
heard, perhaps, over all the place. The look pierced him, and, with the crowing
of the cock, brought his Master's prediction fresh into his mind. He was stung
with deep remorse; and, being unable to contain himself, he covered his face
with his garment to conceal the confusion he was in, and going out into the
porch wept very bitterly. All this passed while the priests examined JESUS with
many taunts and revilings; and while the most zealous of CHRIST's disciples was
denying him with oaths and imprecations, the others insulted him in the most
inhuman manner. Thus a complication of injuries, insults, and indignities, was
at one time heaped upon the blessed Redeemer, the meek and mild JESUS, the
suffering and wonderfully patient Son of the adorable Majesty of heaven.

Peter^s* Repentance for ha^ing ^hamefully denied our BLESSED SAVIOR in the
High Priests house.


CHAPTER XXXV.
The Trial of JESUS before the Sanhedrim, or grand Council of the Jews.

THE band of soldiers having seized JESUS, led him to the high-priest's house,
where all the chief priests, the Scribes, and the elders were assembled: And as
soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and the chief priests, and the
Scribes, came together, and led him into their council. Probably the trial did
not begin immediately on our Lord's arrival; for though many of the judges were
at the high-priest's before him, some persons of distinction might be absent,
whose coming, the rest were, out of respect, inclined to wait for: but, as the
passover was at hand, they had no time to lose; so that as soon as the council
was fully met, the trial was begun: And the high priest asked Jesus of his
disciples, and of his doctrine. He enquired of him what his disciples were, for
what end he had gathered them, whether it was to make himself a king, and what
the doctrine was which he taught them? In these questions there was a great
deal of art; for as the crime laid to our Savior's charge was, that he had set
up for the Messiah, and deluded the people, they expected he would claim that
dignity in their presence, and so would, on his own confession have condemned
him, without any further process. This was unfair, as it was artful and
ensnaring: to oblige a prisoner on his trial to confess what might take away
his life, was a very inequitable method of proceeding; and JESUS expressed his
opinion thereof with very good reason, and complained of it, bidding them prove
what they had laid to his charge by witnesses: Jesus answered him, I spoke
openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither
the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. Why ask thou me?
Ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold they know what I
said. It was greatly to the honor of our blessed Redeemer, that all his
actions were done in public, under the eye even of his enemies; because, had he
been carrying on any imposture, the lovers of goodness and truth had thus
abundant opportunities of detecting him with propriety: he therefore, in his
defense, appealed to that part of his character; yet his answer was construed
disrespectful: for, when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood
by, struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the
high priest so? To which he meekly replied with the greatest serenity. If I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?
Show me, prove before this court, wherein my crime consists, or record it in
the evidence on the face of my trial; which if thou cannot, how can thou answer
this inhuman treatment to a defenseless prisoner, standing on his trial before
the world, and in open court, and strike me undeservedly?

IN this instance JESUS became an example of his own precept; and if a man
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. Matt. v.39. bearing
the greatest injuries with an unprovoked patience, worthy of the meek Lamb of
God.

JESUS having declined answering the questions, whereby the council expected to
have drawn from him an anknowledgment of his being the Messiah, they proceeded
to examine many witnesses to prove his having assumed that character; as they
considered such a pretension as blasphemy in his mouth, who being only a man,
according to their opinion, could not, without the highest affront to the
Divine Majesty, pretend to the title of the Son of God, as it belonged only to
the Messiah. But in this examination they acted like interested and enraged
persecutors, rather than impartial judges, forming their questions in the most
artful manner, in order, if possible, to draw expressions from them, which they
might pervert into suspicions of guilt, as some foundation for condemning
JESUS, who had so long and faithfully labored for their salvation. Their
witnesses, however, disappointed them, some of them disagreeing in their story,
and others mentioning things of no manner of importance.

AT last, two persons agreed in their depositions, namely, in hearing him say,
that he was able to destroy the temple of God, and to raise it in three days.
But this testimo^^ was absolutely false; for our great Redeemer never said he
could destroy and build the temple of Jerusalem in three days, as they
affirmed. It is true, that after banishing the traders from the temple, when
the Jews desired to know by what authority he undertook to make such a
reformation, he referred them to the miracle of his resurrection! saying,
Destroy this Temple (pointing probably to his body) and in three days I will
raise it up. The witnesses, therefore, either through malice or ignorance,
perverted his answer into an affirmation, that he was able to destroy, and
build the magnificent temple of Jerusalem in three days: and the judges
considering that such an act could only be performed by Divine Power,
interpreted his assertion as blasphemy.

OUR Savior, during the whole time, made no reply to the evidences that were
produced against him, which greatly provoked the high priest, who, supposing
that he intended by his silence, to put an affront on true council, rose from
his seat, and with great perturbation, demanded the reason for so remarkable a
conduct: Answerest thou nothing, said he, what is it which these witness
against thee? And some of the council added, Art thou the Christ? To which our
blessed Savior answered, If I should tell you plainly, you would not believe
me; and if I should demonstrate it to you by the most evident and undeniable
arguments, ye would neither be convinced nor release me.

AFTER these things, the high priest finding it impossible to ensnare JESUS,
and being desirous of rendering the trial as shor^ as possible, said to him, I
adjure thee solemnly, by the dreadful and tremendous name of God, in whose
presence thou stands, that th^^ tell us plainly and truly, whether thou art the
Messiah, the Son of God? This question was artfully contrived; for, if JESUS
should answer it in the affirmative, they were ready to condemn him as a
blasphemer; if in the negative, they intended to punish him as an impostor, who
had deceived the people by accepting from them the honors and titles of the
Messiah.

THE blessed JESUS was not, however, intimidated by the consequence attending
his conconfession of the truth; for being adjured by the chief magistrate, he
immediately confessed the charge, adding, ye shall shortly see a convincing
evidence of this truth, in that wonderful and unparalleled destruction which I
will send upon the Jewish nation; in the quick and powerful progress which the
gospel shall make over the earth; and finally, in my glorious appearance in the
clouds of heaven at the last day, the sign you have so often demanded in
confirmation of my being sent from God.

THIS answer of our blessed Savior's, caused a number of them to cry out at
once, as astonished at the supposed blasphemy, art thou the Son of God? To
which our great Redeemer replied, Ye say that I am: a manner of speaking among
the Jews, which expressed a plain and strong affirmation.

THE high priest, on hearing this second assertion, rent his cloths with great
indignation, and said unto the council, Why need we trouble ourselves to seek
for any more witnesses? Ye yourselves, nay, this whole assembly are witnesses,
that he has spoken manifest and notorious blasphemy; what think ye? To which
they all replied, that, for assuming to himself the character of the Messiah,
he deserved to be put to death.

THE servants and common people then began to fall upon him as a man already
condemned; spitting upon him, buffeting him, and offering him all manner of
rudeness and indignities; they blindfolded him, and some of the council, in
order to ridicule him for having pretended to be the great Prophet, bid him
exer^ise his prophetical gift, in declaring by whom he was smitten. Surely
those miscreants could hardly invent any thing more expressive of the contempt
in which they held our great Redeemer's pretensions to be the Messiah.

THUS was the great Judge of all the earth placed at the bar of frail mortals,
falsely accused by the witnesses, unjustly condemned by his judges, and
barbarously insulted by all. Yet, because it was agreeable to the end of his
coming, he patiently submitted, though he could with a frown, have made his
judges, his accusers, and those who had him in custody, to expire in a moment,
or utterly dwindle away.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
JESUS is led before Pilate: Judas relents, carries back the Money, and hangs
himself: The Governor refuses to judge our blessed Savior, declares him
innocent, and sends him to Herod; who, after hearing his Accusers, sends him
back again.

THE Savior of the world, whom the whole Jewish nation had so long expected,
having been thus condemned by the Sanhedrim, they consulted together, and
resolved to carry him before the governor, that he might likewise pass sentence
on him. The Roman governors of Judea, generally resided at Caesarea; but at the
great feasts they came up to Jerusalem to prevent or suppress tumults, and to
administer justice: it being a custom for the Roman governors of provinces to
visit the principal towns under their jurisdiction on this latter account.
Pilate, being accordingly come to Jerusalem some time before the feast, had
been informed, probably by Joseph of Arimathea, of the great ferment amongst
the rulers, and the true character of the person on whose account it was
raised; for he entertained a just notion of it: he knew that for envy they had
delivered him. He knew the cause of their envy, was impressed with ^ favorable
opinion of JESUS, and wished, if possible, to deliver him from his vile
persecutors, who sought to put him to death.

THE Jewish council early in the morning, brought JESUS to the hall of
judgment, or governor's palace. They themselves, however, went not into the
hall, but stood without, lest they should be rendered incapable of eating the
passover, by being defiled.

JUDAS Iscariot, who had delivered his Master into the hands of the council,
finding his project turned out very different from what he expected, was filled
with the deepest remorse for what he had done. He saw all his golden dreams of
temporal honors and advantages, sunk at once to nothing; he saw his kind, his
indulgent Master condemned, and forsaken by all his followers. He saw all this,
and determined to make all the satisfaction in his power for the crime he had
committed: accordingly, he came and confessed openly his sin before the chief
priests and elders, offered them the money they had given him to commit it, and
earnestly wished he could recall the fatal transaction of the preceding night.
It seems he thought this was the most public testimony he could possibly give
of his Master's innocence, and his own repentance: I have, said he, committed a
most horrid crime, in betraying an innocent man to death. But this moving
speech of Judas had no effect on the callous hearts of the Jewish rulers: they
affirmed, that however they might think the prisoner innocent, and for that
reason had sinned (...) bringing the sentence of death upon his head, they were
not to blame; because th^^ knew him a blasphemer, who deserved to die: What is
that to us? said they, see th^^ that. Nay, they even refused to take back the
money they had given him as a re^^^^ for performing the base act of betraying
his Master, who had deserved from him the (...) of treatment.

CONVINCED now, that it was not in his power to assist his Savior, Judat's
^^^^science, being stung with remorse, lashed him more furiously than before
sugge^^^^ thoughts, which by turns, made the deepest wounds in his soul. The
innocence (...) benevolence of his Master, the many favors he himself had
received from him, (...) the many kind offices he had done for the sons and
daughters of affliction, crowd^^ (...) once into his mind, and rendered his
torment intolerable. He was, if we may (...) allowed the comparison, like one
placed on the brink of the infernal lake. Rac^^^ with these agonizing passions,
unable to support the misery, he threw down the wa^^^ of his iniquity in the
temple, and confessing at the same time his own sin, and (...) innocence of his
Master, went away in despair, and hanged himself. Thus perish^^ Judas Iscariot,
the traitor, a miserable example of the fatal influence of covetous^^^^ and a
standing monument of divine vengeance, to deter future generations from acti^^
in opposition to the dictates of conscience, through a love of the things of
this world^^ for which this wretched mortal betrayed his Master, his friend,
his Savior, and acc^^mulated such a load of guilt on himself as sunk his soul
into the lowest pit of angui^^ and despondency. The people gathered up the
pieces of silver cast down by Jud^^ and delivered them to the priests, who,
thinking it unlawful to put them into the treasury, because they were the wages
of a traitor, agreed to lay them out in pur^chasing the potter's field, and to
make it a common burial-place for strangers. Thi^ the evangelist tells us was
done, that a particular prophecy relating to the Messiah might be fulfilled:
And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valu^^ and
gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me. This prophecy is
found i^ Zechariah, but by a mistake of some copyist, the word Jeremy is
inserted in the Gr^^^^^ manuscripts of St. Matthew's gospel; unless we suppose
with the learned Grotiu^ that this remarkable prophecy was first made by
Jeremiah, and afterward repeated b^ the immediate direction of the Spirit, by
Zechariah; and that therefore, the evangelist has only ascribed the prophecy to
its original author: but however this be, the pro^phecy is remarkable, and was
remarkably fulfilled; and the evangelist puts the truth of this part of the
history beyond all manner of exception, by thus appealing to ^ public
transaction.

WE have before remarked, that the chief priests and elders refused to go
themselves into the judgment-hall, lest they should contract some pollutions in
the house of (...) Heathen, which would have rendered them unfit for eating the
passover. The sa^^ reason also hindered them from entering the governor's
palace on other festivals, wh^^ that magistrate attended in order to administer
justice: a kind of structure was therefore erected, adjoining to the palace,
which served instead of a tribunal or judgment seat. This structure, called in
the Hebrew Gabbatha, was finely paved with small pieces of marble of different
colors: being always exposed to the weather. Perhaps, it resembled a stage,
but larger, open on all sides, and on one part of it a throne was placed,
whereon the governor sat to hear causes. One side of this structure joined to
the palace, and a door was made in the wall, through which the governor passed
to his Judas throwing down the Thirty pieces of Silver ^he Price he had for
betraying our SAVIOR) before the chief priest and Elders* after which he
Hanged himself.
tribunal. By this contrivance, the people might stand round the tribunal in
the open air, hear and see the governor when he spoke to them from the
pavement, and observe the whole administration of justice, without danger of
being defiled either by him or any of his attendants.

THE great Redeemer of mankind was brought before this tribunal: and the priest
and elders having taken their places around the pavement, the governor ascended
the judgment seat, and asked them what accusation they brought against the
prisoner? Though nothing could be more natural than for the governor to ask
this question, yet the Jews thought themselves highly affronted by it. They
probably knew his sentiments concerning the prisoner, and therefore considered
his question as intended to insinuate, that they brought one to be condemned,
against whom they could find no accusation. Pilate might indeed speak to them
in a stern manner, and by that means sufficiently indicate his displeasure:
but, however that be, the Jews haughtily answered, if he had not been a very
great and extraordinary malefactor, we should not have given thee this trouble
at all, much less at so unseasonable an hour as the persent.

JESUS was then examined by Pilate, who finding he had not been guilty either
of rebellion or sedition, but that he was accused of particulars relating to
the religion and customs of the Jews, grew angry, and said, what are these
things to me? Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your own law;
plainly insinuating, that in his opinion, the crime they laid to the prisoner's
charge was not of a capital nature; and that such punishments as they were
permitted by Caesar to inflict, were adequate to any misdemeanor that JESUS was
charged with. But this proposal of the Roman governor was absolutely refused by
the Jewish priests and elders, because it condemned their whole proceeding, and
therefore they answered, We have no power to put any one to death, as this man
certainly deserves, who has attempted not only to make innovations in our
religion, but also set up himself for a king. This eagerness of the Jews to get
JESUS condemned by the Roman governor, who often sentenced malefactors to be
crucified, tended to fulfill the sayings of our great Redeemer, who, during the
course of his ministry, has often mentioned what kind of death he was appointed
to die by the pre-determination of the Omniscient God.

AS Pilate now found it impossible to prevent a tumult, unless he proceeded to
try JESUS, he therefore ascended again the judgment seat, and commanded his
accusers to produce their charges against him. Accordingly, they accused him of
seditious practices, affirming that he had used every method in his power to
dissuade the people from paying taxes to Caesar, pretending that he himself was
the Messiah, the great king of the Jews, so long expected: but they brought no
proof of this assertion. They only insinuated that they had already convicted
him of this crime; which was absolutely false. Pilate, however, asked him, Is
it true, what these men lay to thy charge, that thou have indeed attempted to
set up thyself as king of the Jews? To which JESUS replied, have thou ever
during thy stay in this province, heard any thing of me, that gave thee any
reason to suspect me guilty of secret practices and seditious designs against
the government? Or do thou found thy question only on the present clamor and
tumult that is raised against me? If this be the case, be very careful lest
thou be imposed on merely by the ambiguity of a word: for, to be King of the
Jews, is not to erect a temporal throne in opposition to that of Caesar, but
something very different from it; the kingdom of the Messiah is of a spiritual
nature.

PILATE replied, am I a Jew? Can I tell what their expectations are, and in
what superstitious sense they understand these words? The rulers and chiefs of
their own people, we are the most proper judges of these particulars, have
brought thee before me, as a riotous and seditious person; if this be not the
truth, let me know what is, and the crime thou have been guilty of, and what
they lay to thy charge.

TO which JESUS answered, I have indeed a kingdom, and this kingdom I have
professed to establish; but then it is not of this world, nor have my
endeavors to establish it any tendency to cause disturbances in the
government: for, had that been the case, my servants would have fought for me,
and not suffered me to have fallen into the hands of the Jews: but I tell thee
plainly, my kingdom is wholly spiritual, consisting only in the obedience of
the wills and affections of men to the laws of God.

PILATE said, Thou acknowledges then in general, that thou have pretended to be
a king? To which the blessed JESUS replied, In the sense I have told thee, I
have declared, and do now declare myself to be a king: for this very end I was
born, and for this purpose I came into the world, that I should bear witness to
the truth; and whosoever sincerely loves, and is always ready to embrace the
truth, will hear my testimony and be convinced by it. Pilate said, What is
truth? and immediately went out to the Jews, and said unto them, I have again
examined this man, but can find him guilty of no fault, which, according to the
Roman law, deserves to have the punishment of death inflicted for it.

THOUGH the governor made this generous declaration of the innocence of our
blessed Savior, it had no effect on the superstitious and bigoted Jews: they
even persisted in their accusations with more vehemence than before, affirming
that he had attempted to raise a sedition in Galilee: He stirred up, said they,
the people, beginning from Galilee to this place. JESUS, however, made no
answer at all to this heavy charge: nay, he continued silent, notwithstanding
the governor himself expressly required him to speak in his own defense. A
conduct so extraordinary, in such circumstances, astonished Pilate exceedingly;
for he had great reason to be persuaded of the innocence of our dear Redeemer.
The truth is, he was altogether ignorant of the divine council by which the
whole affair was directed, and the end proposed by it.

MANY reasons induced the blessed JESUS not to make a public defense. He came
into the world purely to redeem lost and undone mankind, by offering up himself
a sacrifice to appease the wrath of his Almighty Father: but had he pleaded
with his usual force, the people had, in all probability, been induced to ask
his release, and consequently his death had been prevented: besides, the gross
falsehood of the accusation, known to all the inhabitants of Galilee, rendered
any reply absolutely unnecessary.

THE chief priests continued, in the mean time, to accuse him with great noise
and tumult: and the meek and humble JESUS still continuing mute, Pilate spoke
again to him, saying, Will thou continue to make no defense? Do thou not hear
how vehemently these men accuse thee? But Pilate recollecting what the chief
priests had said with regard to a sedition in Galilee, asked if JESUS came out
of that country; and on being informed he did, he immediately ordered him to be
carried to Herod, who then resided at Jerusalem; for the governor supposed that
Herod, in whose dominions the sedition was said to have been raised, must be a
much better judge of the affair than himself: besides, his being a Jew,
rendered him more expert in the religion of his own country, and gave him
greater influence over the chief priests and elders: he therefore considered
him as the most proper person to prevail on the Jewish council to desist from
their cruel prosecution: but if, contrary to all human probability, he should,
at their solicitation, condemn JESUS, Pilate hoped to escape the guilt and
infamy of putting an Herod having ^^amined him finding (...) fault in our
Blessed Savior JESUS ^ CHRIST, ^ends him back to Pilate who (...) declares him
faultless.
innocent person to death. He might also propose, by this action, to regain
Herod's friendship, which he had lost by encroaching, in all probability, on
the privileges he (...) invested with.

WHATEVER might be the motive that induced Pilate to send our great Redeemer to
Herod, the latter greatly rejoiced at this opportunity of seeing JESUS, hoping
to have the ^leasure of beholding him perform some great miracle. In this he
was however mistaken: for as Herod had apostatized from the doctrine of John
the Baptist, to which he was once a convert, and had even put this teacher to
death, the blessed JESUS, however liberal of his miracles to the sons and
daughters of affliction, would not work them to gratify the curiosity of a
tyrant, nor even answer one of the many questions he proposed.

FINDING himself thus disappointed, Herod ordered our blessed Savior to be
clothed with an old robe, resembling in color, those worn by kings, and
permitted his attendants to insult him; perhaps to provoke him to work some
miracle, though it should prove of a hurtful kind. From Herod's dressing him in
this manner, it evidently appears, that the chief priests and elders had
accused him of nothing, but his having assumed the character of the Messiah;
for the affront put upon him was plainly in derision of that pretension.

THE other head of accusation, namely, his having attempted to raise a sedition
in Galilee, on account of the tribute paid to Caesar, they did not dare to
mention, as Herod could not fail of knowing it to be a gross and malicious
falsehood; and no crime worthy of death being laid to his charge, Herod sent
him again to Pilate. It seems, that though he was displeased with the great
Redeemer of mankind for refusing to work a miracle before him, yet he did not
think proper to be unjust to him. Perhaps he was restrained by the remorse he
felt on account of the death of John the Baptist, and therefore declined
bringing a greater weight upon his conscience.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
Pilate gives the Jews their Choice of JESUS or Barabbas to be released: Upon
the Clamor of the common People, Barabbas is loosed, and JESUS delivered up to
be crucified: He is crowned with Thorns, spit on, and mocked.

THE Roman governors at the passover, made it a custom to court the favor of
the populace, by gratifying them with the release of any one prisoner they
pleased. And at this feast, there was one in prison named Barabbas, who, at the
head of a number of rebels, had made an insurrection in the city, and committed
murder during the tumult.

THERE being now again a great multitude of people assembled before the
governor's palace, they began to call aloud on him to perform the annual office
of mercy, customary at the festival they were now celebrating. Pilate, glad of
this opportunity, told them, that he was willing to grant the favor they
desired; and asked them whether they would have Barabbas or JESUS released unto
them? But without waiting for an answer, he offered to release JESUS, knowing
that the chief priests had delivered him through envy; especially as Herod had
not found him guilty of the crimes he had been accused of.

DURING these transactions, Pilate received a message from his wife, then with
him at Jerusalem, and who had that morning been informed of something in a
dream which gave her great uneasiness. Perhaps it presaged the vengeance of the
Almighty pursuing her husband and family, on account of the injustice he was
going to commit. But whatever the dream was, it had so great an effect on this
Roman lady, that she could not rest till she had sent an account of it to her
husband, who was then sitting on the tribunal in the pavement, and begged him
to have no hand in the death of the righteous person who was then brought to
his bar.

AS the people had not yet determined whether they would have JESUS or Barabba^
released to them; Pilate, therefore, when he received the message from his
wife, called the chief priests and rulers together, and, in the hearing of the
multitude, made a speech to them, in which he gave them an account of the
examination which JESUS had undergone, both at his own and Hedod's tribunal,
declaring that in both courts it had turned out honorably to his character;
for which reason he proposed to them, that he should be the object of the
peoples' favor, and be acquitted.

THE intent of Pilate, in doing the priests the honor to consult their
inclinations in particular, might, in all probability, be with a design to
soften their stony hearts, and, if possible, to move them for once to pity an
unhappy, and innocent man. But he was persuaded, that if pity was absolutely
banished from their callous breasts, his proposal would have been acceptable to
the people, whom he expected would embrace the first opportunity of declaring
in his favor. Yet in this he was disappointed. They cried out all at once,
Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas.

YE apostate mortals, a few hours ago ye listened with rapture to his heavenly
discourses, beheld with transport the many salutary miracles wrought by this
benevolent son of the Most High, and earnestly importuned him to take
possession of the throne and scepter of David! Now nothing will satiate your
infernal malice but his precious blood! But remember ye miscreants, ye monsters
in the human form, that this same JESUS, whom ye beheld with such contempt
before the tribunal of the Roman governor; this JESUS, whose blood your
infernal mouths so loudly requested, shall one day come in the clouds of heaven
to take vengeance on his enemies! And how will you be able to bear the sight of
his appearance, when the very heavens themselves will melt at his presence,
"the sun become black as sackcloth of hair," the moon be turned into blood, and
the stars fly from their spheres? How will ye then repent of your unjust
demand, and call to the mountains and rocks to fall on you, and hide you from
the presence of that immaculate Lamb of God, the tremendous judge of quick and
dead!

THE governor himself was astonished at this determination of the multitude,
and repeated his question, for he could hardly believe what he had himself
heard. But on their again declaring that they desired Barabbas might be
released, he asked them, What he should do with Jesus, which is called Christ?
as if he had said, you demand that Barabbas should be released; but what shall
I then do with JESUS? you cannot surely desire me to crucify him, whom so many
of you have acknowledged as your Messiah? But they cried, saying, crucify him,
crucify him. Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil has he done? And they
cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him. They were so resolutely determined
to have him destroyed, that notwithstanding Pilate urged them again and again
to desire his release, declared his innocence, and offered several times to
dismiss him; they would not hear it, uttering their rage, sometimes in hollow,
distant inarticulate murmurs, and sometimes in furious outcries: to such a
pitch were their passions raised by the craft and artful insinuations of the
priests, and their own thirst for his blood.

Pontius Pilate washing his hands in Water, to show the People (...) was
innocent of the Blood of CHRIST whose Death th^^^ earnestly demanded.


The Roman Soldiers under Pilate SCOURGING, ^^^^^e^ing other indignities to our
blessed SAVIOR, previous to being delivered up to the Jews.


Our blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST Crowned with Thorns by the Roman Soldiers


FINDING it therefore in vain to struggle with their prejudices, Pilate called
for water, and washed his hands before the multitude, crying out at the same
time, that the prisoner had no fault, and that he himself was not accessory to
his death.

PILATE, by this act and declaration, seems to have intended to make impression
on the Jewish populace, by complying with the institutions of Moses, which
orders, in case of an unknown murder, the elders of the nearest city to wash
their hands publicly, and say, Our hands have not shed this blood. And in
allusion to this law, the Psalmist says, I will wash mine hands in innocence.
According therefore, to the Jewish rites, Pilate made the most solemn and
public declaration of the innocence of our dear Redeemer, and of his resolution
of having no hand in his death. Perhaps he flattered himself, that by this
solemn appeal, he should have terrified the Jewish populace; for a person of
his understanding and education, could not but be sensible, that all the water
in the universe was not sufficient to wash away the guilt of an unrighteous
sentence. But notwithstanding the solemnity of this declaration, the Jews
continued inflexible* (...) out, with one voice, His blood be on us and on our
children. Dreadful imprecation (...) ^^ocks humanity! An imprecation which
brought on them the dreadful vengeance of Omnipotence, and is still a heavy
burden on that perfidious people, who are dispersed all over the earth!

PILATE, finding it impossible to alter their choice, released unto them ^s.
And as it was the general practice of the Romans to scourge those criminals
they condemned to be crucified, Pilate ordered the blessed JESUS to be scourged
before he delivered him to the soldiers to be put to death. The soldiers having
accordingly scourged JESUS, and received orders to crucify him, carried him
into the Praetorium, or common hall, where they added the shame of disgrace to
the bitterness of his punishment; for sore as he was by reason of the stripes
they had given him, they dressed him in a purple robe, in derision of his being
the King of the Jews. Having dressed him in this robe of mock-majesty, they put
a reed in his hand, instead of a scepter, and after platting a wreath of
thorns, they put it on his head for a crown; forcing it down in so rude a
manner, that his temples were torn* and his face besmeared with his most
precious blood. To the Son of God in this condition, the rude soldiers bowed
the knee, pretending to do it out of respect; but, at the same time gave him
severe blows on the head, which drove the prickles of the wreath afresh into
his temples, then spit on him, to express their highest contempt and disdain.

THE office of governor, obliging Pilate to be present at this shocking scene
of inhumanity, he was ready to burst with grief. The fight of an innocent and
virtuous man, treated with such shocking barbarity, raised in his breast the
most painful sensations of pity: and though he had given sentence that it
should be as the Jews desired, and had delivered our dear Redeemer to the
soldiers to be crucified, he was persuaded, that if he showed him to the people
in that condition, they must relent, and petition him to let him go. Filled
with this thought, he resolved to carry him out, and exhibit to their view, a
spectacle capable of softening the most envenomed, obdurate, enraged enemy. And
in order to render the impression still more poignant, he went out himself, and
said unto them, Though I have sentenced this man to die, and have scourged him
as one that is to be crucified; yet I once more bring him before you, that I
may again testify how fully I am persuaded of his innocence, and that ye may
yet have an opportunity of saving his life, and clearing the guiltless.

NO sooner had the governor finished his speech, than JESUS appeared on the
pavement, with his hair, his face, his shoulders all clotted with blood, and
the purple robe bedaubed with spittle. And that the sight of JESUS in this
distress might make the greater impression on the people, Pilate, while he was
coming forward, cried out, Behold the man! As if he had said, will nothing make
you relent? Have you lost all the feelings of humanity and bowels of
compassion? Can you bear to see the innocent, a son of Abraham, thus injured?
Perhaps also, the soldiers were suffered to buffet JESUS again on the pavement
before the multitude, in order to excite their pity, or at least their pride:
for though they might not pity JESUS as a person unjustly condemned; yet when
they saw one of their countrymen insulted by Heathens, it was natural for the
governor to suppose, that their national pride being provoked, it would have
induced them to have demanded his enlargement: but all this was to no purpose.
The priests, whose rage and malice had extinguished not only the sentiments of
justice and feelings of pity, natural to the human heart, but also that love
which countrymen bear for each other, no sooner saw JESUS, than they began to
fear the fickle populace might relent, and therefore, laying decency aside,
they led the way to the multitude, crying out with all their might, Crucify
him! Crucify him! Release not this man, but Barabbas!

THE governor, vexed to see the Jewish rulers thus obstinately bent on the
destruction of a person, from whom they had nothing to fear that was dangerous,
either with regard to their church or state, passionately told them, that if
they would have him crucified, they must do it themselves; because he would not
suffer his people to murder a man who was guilty of no crime. But this they all
refused, thinking it dishonorable to receive permission to punish a person who
had been more than once publicly declared innocent by his judge: besides they
considered with themselves, that the governor might afterward have called it
sedition, as the permission had been extorted from him. Accordingly they told
him, that even though one of the things alleged against the prisoner were
true, he had committed such a crime in the presence of the council itself, as
by law deserved the most ignominious death, He had spoken blasphemy, calling
himself the Son of God, a title which no mortal could assume without the
highest degree of guilt: We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because
he made himself the Son of God, a divine person.

PILATE's fear was increased when he heard that JESUS called himself the Son of
God: but knowing the obstinacy of the Jews in all matters of religion, he was
afraid they would make a tumult in earnest; or, perhaps he was himself more
afraid than ever to take away his life, because he suspected it might be true.
He doubtless remembered the miracles said to have been performed by JESUS, and
therefore suspected that he really was the Son of God: for it is well known
that the religion which the governor professed, directed him to acknowledge the
existence of demigods and heroes, or men descended from the gods: nay, the
Heathens believed, that their gods themselves sometimes appeared upon earth in
the form of men, and conversed with them.

THESE kind of reflections induced Pilate to go again into the judgment-hall,
and ask JESUS from what father he sprung, and from what country he came? But
our blessed Savior gave him no answer, lest the governor should reverse his
sentence, and absolutely refuse to crucify him. Pilate marvelled greatly at
this silence, and said unto JESUS, Why do thou refuse to answer me? Thou
can not be ignorant that I am invested with absolute power, either to release
or crucify thee. To which JESUS answered, I well know that thou art Caesar's
servant, and accountable to him for thy management. I forgive thee any injury,
which, contrary to thy inclination, the popular fury constrains thee to do unto
me. Thou have thy power from above, from the emperor: for which cause, the
Jewish high priest, who has put me into thy hands, and by pretending that I am
Caesar's enemy, forces thee to condemn me; or if thou refusest, will accuse
thee as negligent of the emperor's interest; he is more guilty than thee: He
that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin, being instigated thereto by
malice.

HEARING this sweet and modest answer, such an impression was thereby made on
Pilate, that he went out to the people, and declared his intention of releasing
JESUS, whether they gave their consent or not. Upon which the chief priests and
rulers of Israel cried out, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's
friend: whosoever makes himself a king, speaks against Caesar. If thou
releasest the prisoner, who has set himself up for a king, and endeavored to
raise a rebellion in the country, thou art unfaithful to the interest of the
emperor thy master. This argument was weighty, and shook Pilate's resolution to
the very basis: he was terrified at the thought of being accused to Tiberius,
who in all affairs of government always suspected the worst, and punished the
most minute crimes relative thereto, with death. The governor being thus
constrained to yield contrary to his inclination, was very angry with the
priests for stirring up the people to such a pitch of madness, and determined
to affront them. He therefore brough JESUS out a second time into the pavemant,
wearing the purple robe and the crown of thorns; and, pointing to him, said,
Behold your King; ridiculing the national expectation of a Messiah, as their
deliverer.

STUNG to the quick, by this sarcastical expression, they cried out, Away with
him, away with him, crucify him. To which Pilate answered, with the same
mocking air, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no
king but Caesar. Thus did they publicly renounce their hope of the Messiah,
which the whole economy of their religion had been calculated to cherish; they
also publicly acknowledged their subjections to the Romans; and, consequently,
condemned themselves, when they afterward rebelled against the emperor
Vespasian, who, with his son Titus, destroyed their city and temple.

WE may hear observe, that the great unwillingness of the governor to pass
sentence of death upon Jesus, has something in it very remarkable. For from the
character of Pilate, as drawn by the Roman historians themselves, he seems to
have been far from possessing any true principle of virtue. To what then could
it be owing, that so wicked a man should so steadily adhere to the cause of
innocence, which he defended with uncommon bravery, and perhaps would never
have abandoned it, had he not been forced by the theatenings of the chief
priests and rulers of Israel? And when he did yield, and passed sentence upon
our dear Redeemer, why did he still declare him innocent? This can certainly be
attributed to no other cause than to the secret and powerful direction of the
providence of the Almighty, who intended that at the same time his son was
condemned and executed as a malefactor, his innocence should be made appear in
the most public manner, and by the most authentic evidence; even that of the
judge himself. It was the power of the Almighty that set bounds to the
inveterate malice and fury of the Jews, that would not suffer them to stain the
innocence of the blessed JESUS, at the same time they deprived him of his life;
but said to their boisterous malice, as he had before said to the foaming
billows of the ocean, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall
thy proud waves be stayed: for none can stay his hand, or control his will.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
JESUS is led forth to Calvary: Simon, the Cyrenian, compelled to carry the
Cross: He is crucified between two Malefactors: A Title is put upon the Cross
by Pilate, and Lots cost for his Garment: The Multitude, the Rulers, the
Priests, and the Soldiers revile JESUS: The Conversion of one of the Thieves:
The great and unnatural Eclipse of the Sun: JESUS speaks to his Friends from
the Cross, cries, "It is finished," recommends his Spirit into the Hands of his
heavenly Father, and expires.

O MY soul! come and follow thy Redeemer to the last scene of the most innocent
and useful course that was ever passed on earth; follow him to Calvary's horrid
eminenee, to Calvary's fatal catastrophe; there fix thy most constant attention
on that lovely, that sorrowful spectacle. Behold the spotless victim nailed to
a tree, and stabbed to the heart; hear him pouring out prayers for his
murderers, before he poured out his soul for transgressors; see the wounds that
stream with forgiveness, and bleed balm for a distempered world, O! see the
justice and goodness of the Almighty, his mercy and his vengeance; all his
tremendous and gracious attributes manifested; manifested with inexpressible
splendor, in the most ignominious, and yet grandest of transactions that ever
the world beheld!

AFTER sentence was pronounced against the blessed JESUS, the soldiers were
ordered to prepare for his execution; a command which they readily obeyed, and
after clothing him in his own garments, led him away to crucify him. It is not
said that they took the crown of thorns from his temples; probably he died
wearing it, that the title placed over his head might be the better understood
by the spectators.

THE ministers of Jewish malice we may suppose, remitted none of the
circumstances of affliction, which were ever laid on persons condemned to be
crucified. Accordingly, JESUS was obliged to walk on foot to the place of
execution, bearing his cross; but the fatigue of the preceding night spent
without sleep, the sufferings he had undergone in the garden; his having been
hurried from place to place, and obliged to stand the whole time of his trials;
the want of food, and the loss of blood he had sustained, and not his want of
courage on this occasion made him faint under the burden of his cross. The
soldiers, seeing him unable to bear the weight, laid it on one Simon, a native
of Cyrene, in Egypt, the father of Alexander and Rufus, well known among the
first Christians, and forced him to bear it after the great Redeemer of
mankind. The soldiers did not this, however, out of compassion to the suffering
JESUS, but to prevent his dying with the fatigue, and by that means avoiding
the punishment designed for him.

IN this journey to Calvary our blessed Savior was followed by an innumerable
multitude of people, particularly of women, who lamented bitterly the severity
of his sentence, and showed all the tokens of sincere compassion and grief.
JESUS, who always felt the woes of others more than he did his own, forgetting
his distress at the very time when it lay heaviest upon him, turned himself
about, and, with a benevolence and tenderness truly divine, said to them,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and for your
children. For, behold, the days are coming in the which they shall say, Blessed
are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave
suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us: and to the
hills, Cover us. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? As if he had said, Dry up th^se tears, ye daughters of
Jerusalem, which ye shed in compassion to me, and reserve them for the
deplorable fate of yourselves and your children; for the calamities that will
soon fall on you and your offspring, are truly terrible, and call for the
bitterest lamentation. In those days of vengeance you will passionately wish
that you had not given birth to a generation; whose wickedness has rendered
them the objects of the wrath of the Almighty to such a degree as was never
before experienced in the world. Then shall they wish to be crushed under the
weight of enormous mountains, and concealed from their enemies in the bowels of
the earth. The thoughts of these calamities afflict my soul far more than the
feeling of my own sufferings: for if the Romans are permitted to inflict
punishments on me who am innocent, how dreadful must the vengeance be which
they shall inflict on a nation whose sins cry aloud to heaven, hastening the
pace of the divine judgments, and rendering the perpetrators as proper for
judgment as dry wood, is for flames of fire.

AT the place of execution, which was called Golgotha, or the place of a skull,
from the criminal bones which lay scattered there, some of our Redeemer's
friends offered him a stupifying potion, to render him insensible of the
ignominy and excruciating pain of his punishment; but as soon as he tasted the
potion he refused to drink it, being determined to bear his sufferings, however
sharp, not by intoxicating and stupifying himself, but by the strength of
patience, fortitude, and faith.

HAVING therefore refused the potion, the soldiers began to execute their
orders by stripping him quite naked, and in that condition began to fasten him
to his cross. But while they were piercing his hands and his feet with nails,
instead of crying out with the sharpness of the pain, he calmly, though
severely prayed for them, and for all those who had any hand in his death;
beseeching the Almighty to forgive them, and excusing them himself by the only
circumstance that could alleviate their guilt; I mean, their ignorance. Father,
said the compassionate Redeemer of mankind, forgive them: for they know not
what they do. This was infinite meekness and goodness, truly worthy of the only
begotten Son of God; an example of forgiveness, which, though it can never be
equalled by any, should be imitated by all, when suffering in a good cause.

BEHOLD now the appointed soldiers dig the hole in which the cross was to be
erected. The cross is placed in the ground, and the blessed Jesus lies on the
bed of sorrows; they nail him to it; they erect it; his nerves crack; his blood
distills; he hangs upon his wounds naked, a spectacle to heaven and earth. Thus
was the only begotten Son of God, who came down from heaven to save the world,
crucified by his own creatures; and, to render the ignominy still greater,
placed between two thieves: Hear, O heavens! O earth, earth hear! The Lord has
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against him; by
rejecting the only Savior, and the God of all their mercies.

CRIMES committed by malefactors were usually written on a white board with
black, and placed over their heads on the cross. In conformity to this custom,
Pilate wrote a title in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin languages, that all
foreigners as well as natives, might be able to read it, and fastened it to the
cross, over the head of JESUS; and the inscription was JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE
KING OF THE JEWS. But when the chief priests and elders had read this title
they were greatly displeased; because, as it represented the crime for which
JESUS was condemned, it insinuated that he had been acknowledged for the
Messiah: besides, being placed over the head of one who was dying by the most
infamous punishment, it implied that all who attempted to deliver the Jews,
should perish in the same manner. The faith and hope of the nation, therefore,
being thus publicly ridiculed, it is no wonder that the priests thought
themselves highly affronted; and, accordingly came to Pilate, begging that the
writing might be altered; but as he had intended the affront in revenge for
their forcing him to crucify JESUS, contrary both to his judgment and
inclination, he refused to grant their request: What I have written, said he, I
have written; and persisted in his resolution not to alter the inscription.

THE soldiers, having nailed the blessed JESUS to the cross, and erected it,
divided his garments amongst them; but his coat, or vesture, being without
seam, woven from the top throughout, they agreed not to rend it, but to cast
lots for it, that the prediction of the prophet concerning the death and
sufferings of the Messiah might be fulfilled: They parted my garments amongst
them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. A sufficient indication that
every circumstance of the death and passion of the blessed JESUS was long
before determined in the court of heaven; and accordingly, his being crucified
between two malefactors was expressly foretold, And he was numbered with the
transgressors.

WHEN the common people, whom the vile priests had incensed against the blessed
JESUS, by the malicious falsehoods they had spread concerning him, and which
they pretended to found on the deposition of witnesses, saw him hang in so
infamous a manner upon the cross, and reading the inscription that was placed
over his head, they expressed their indignation against him by sarcastical
expressions: Ah, thou, said they, that d^stroyst the temple, and buildest it in
three days save thyself, and come down from the cross.

THE multitude were not the only persons who mocked and derided the blessed
JESUS, while he was suffering to obtain the remission of the sins of all
mankind. The rulers, who now imagined they had effectually destroyed his
pretensions to the character of the Messiah, joined the populace in ridiculing
him, and with a meanness of soul which many infamous wretches would have
scorned, mocked him, even while he was struggling with the agonies of death:
they scoffed at the miracles by which he demonstrated himself to be the
Messiah, and promised to believe in him, on condition of his proving his
pretensions by descending from the cross: He saved others, said they, himself
he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe him; not knowing what they said.

NOTHING could be more false and hypocritical than this pretension of the
stiff-necked Jews; for they continued in their unbelief, notwithstanding they
well knew that he raised himself from the dead; a much greater miracle than his
coming down from the cross would have been, a miracle attested by witnesses
whose veracity they could not call in question: it was told them by the
soldiers whom they themselves placed at the sepulcher to watch the body, and
who they were obliged to bribe largely to conceal the truth. It is therefore
abundantly evident, that if the blessed JESUS had descended from the cross, the
Jewish priests would have continued in their infidelity; and consequently that
their declaration was made with no other intention than to insult the Redeemer
of mankind, thinking it impossible for him now to escape out of their hands.
The soldiers also joined in this general scene of mockery, If thou be the King
of the Jews said they, save thyself. If thou art the great Messiah expected by
the Jews, descend from the cross by miracle, and deliver thyself from these
excruciating torments, inflicted by thy enemies.

ONE of the thieves could not forbear mocking the great Lord of heaven and
earth, though laboring himself under the most racking pains, and struggling
with the agonies of death: but the other exercised a most extraordinary faith,
at a time when our great Redeemer was deserted by his Father, mocked by men,
and hanged upon the cross, as the most ignominious of malefactors. This Jewish
criminal seems to have entertained a more rational and exalted notion of the
Messiah's kingdom than even the disciples themselves; they expected nothing but
a secular empire: he gave strong intimations of his having an idea of CHRIST's
spiritual dominion; for at the very time when JESUS was dying on the cross, he
begged to be remembered by him when he came into his kingdom: Lord, said he,
remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Nor did he make his request in
vain: the great Redeemer of mankind answered him, Verily, I say unto thee,
today shall thou be with me in Paradise: Thereby evidencing the immediate
happiness of the righteous after death.

LET us now attentively consider the history of our blessed Savior's passion,
as it offers to our view events absolutely astonishing: for when we remember
the perfect innocence of our great Redeemer, the uncommon love he bore to the
children of men, and the many kind and benevolent offices he did for the sons
and daughters of affliction; when we reflect on the esteem in which he was held
all along by the common people, how cheerfully they followed him to the
remotest corners of the country, nay, even into the desolate retreats of the
wilderness, and with what pleasure they listened to his discourses; when we
consider these particulars, I say, we cannot help being astonished to find them
at the conclusion, rushing all of a sudden into the opposite extremes, and
every individual as it were, combined to treat him with the most barbarous
cruelty and insult.

PILATE having asked the people, if they desired to have JESUS, released, his
disciples, though they were very numerous and might have made a great
appearance in his behalf, remained absolutely silent, as if they had been
speechless or infatuated. The Roman soldiers, notwithstanding their general had
declared him innocent, insulted him in the most inhuman manner; the Scribes and
Pharisees ridiculed him; the common people, who had received him with Hosannas
a few days before, wagged their heads at him as they passed by, and railed on
him as a deceiver: nay, the very thief on the cross reviled him, in the midst
of his sufferings.

THOUGH this sudden revolution in the minds of the whole nation may seem
unaccountable; yet if we could assign a proper reason for the silence of the
disciples, the principle, which influenced the rest might be discovered in
their several speeches. The followers of the blessed JESUS had attached
themselves to him, in expectation of being raised to great wealth and power in
his kingdom, which they expected would have been established long before this
time: but seeing no appearance at all of what they had so long hoped for, they
permitted him to be condemned perhaps, because they thought it would have
obliged him to break the Roman yoke by some miraculous act of divine power.

THE soldiers were angry that any one should pretend to royalty in Judea, where
Caesar had established his authority: hence they insulted our blessed Savior
with the title of King, and paid him, in mockery, the honors of a sovereign;
and as for the common people, they seemed to have lost their opinion of him,
probably because he had neither convinced the council, nor rescued himself when
they condemned him. They began, therefore, to consider the story of his
pretending to destroy the temple and build it in three days, as a kind of
blasphemy, because it required divine power to perform such a work.

THE most implacable and diabolical malice irritated the priests and Scribes
against him; because he had torn off their masks of hypocrisy, and showed them
to the people in their true colors. It is therefore, no wonder that they
ridiculed his miracles, from whence he derived his reputation. In short, the
thief also fancied that he would have delivered both himself and them, if he
had been the Messiah; but as no such deliverance appeared, he upbraided him for
making pretensions to the high character he assumed.

NOW, my soul, take a view of thy dying Savior, breathing out his soul upon
the cross! Behold his unspotted flesh lacerated with strip^^, by which thou are
healed! (...) his hands extended and nailed to the cross; those beneficient
hands, which were inc^^^^santly stretched out to unloose the heavy burdens, and
to impart blessings of every kin^* Behold his feet rivetted to the accursed
tree with nails: those feet which always we^^ about doing good, and traveled
far and near to spread the glad tidings of everlasting salvation! View his
tender temples encircled with a wreath of thorns, which shoot their keen
afflictive points into his blessed head; that head which was ever meditating
peace to poor lost and undone sinners, and spent many a wakeful night in ardent
prayers for their happiness! See him laboring in the agonies of death,
breathing out his soul into the hands of his Almighty Father, and praying for
his cruel enemies! Was ever love like this! was ever benevolence so finely
displayed? O, my soul! put thou thy trust in that bleeding, that dying Savior;
then, though the pestilence walks in darkness, and the sickness destroys at
noonday: though thousands fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right
hand, thou need not fear the approach of any evil! Either the destroying
angel pass over thee, or dispense the corrections of a friend, not the scourges
of an enemy, which, instead of hurting, will work for thy good: then, though
profaneness and infidelity, far more malignant evils breathe their contagion,
and taint the morals of multitudes around thee, thou shall be safely hid in the
hollow of his hand, and freed from every danger, in time, and for ever.

THEN, O my soul, take sanctuary under that tree of life, the ignominious cross
of they bleeding Savior; let us fly for safety to that city of refuge opened
in his bleeding wounds: these will prove a sacred hiding place, not to be
pierced by the flames of divine wrath, or the fiery darts of temptation: his
dying merits, his perfect obedience, will be as rivers of water in a dry place,
or as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. But particularly in that last
tremendous day when the heavens shall be rent asunder, and wrapped up like a
scroll; when his Almighty arm shall arrest the sun in his career, and dash the
structure of the universe to pieces; when the dead, both small and great, shall
be gathered before the throne of his glory, and the fates of all mankind hang
on the very point of a final irreversible decision: then, if thou have
faithfully trusted in him, and made his precepts thy constant directors, thou
shall be owned and defended by him. O reader! may both thou that perusest, and
he who has written this for thy soul's advantage, be covered at that
unutterably important juncture, by the wings of his redeeming love, then shall
we behold all the horrible convulsions of expiring nature with composure, with
comfort! we shall even welcome the consummation of all things, as the times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, and be eternally happy with him.

BEHOLD the sun, conscious of the sufferings of his Maker, and as it were to
hide his face from this detestable action of mortals, is wrapped in the pitchy
mantle of chaotic darkness! This preternatural eclipse of the sun continued for
three hours, to the great terror and astonishment of the people present at the
execution of our dear Redeemer. And surely nothing could be more proper than
this extraordinary alteration in the face of nature, while the Sun of
Righteousness was withdrawing his beams, not only from the promised land, but
from the whole world; for it was at once a miraculous testimony given by the
Almighty himself to the innocence of his Son, and a proper emblem of the
departure of him who was the Light of the world, at least till his luminous
rays, like the beams of the morning, shone out anew with additional splendor,
in the ministry of his apostles, after his ascension.

THE darkness which now covered Judea and the neighboring countries, beginning
about noon, and continuing till JESUS expired, could not be the effect of an
ordinary eclipse of the sun. It is well known that these phenomenon can only
happen at the change of the moon, whereas the Jewish passover at which our dear
Redeemer suffered, was always celebrated at the full; besides, the total
darkness of an eclipse of the sun, never exceeds twelve or fifteen minutes,
whereas this continued full three hours. Nothing, therefore, out the immediate
hand of that Almighty Being which placed the sun in the ^^^tre of the planetary
system, could have produced this astonishing darkness: nothing but Omnipotence
who first lighted this glorious luminary of heaven, could have deprived it of
it is cheering rays. Now ye scoffers of Israel, whose blood have ye so earnestly
desired, and wished it might fall upon you and your children! behold all nature
is dressed in the sable veil of sorrow, and in a language that cannot be
mistaken, mourns the departure of its Lord and master; weeps for our crimes,
and depreciates the vengeance of heaven upon our guilty heads! Happy for you
that this suffering JESUS is compassion itself, and even in the agonies of
death, prays to his heavenly Father to avert from you the stroke of his
justice, thereby opening the gate of mercy even to you hi^ murderers!

THE Heathens themselves considered this preternatural eclipse of the sun as a
miracle, and one of them cried out, 'Either the world is at an end, or the God
of nature suffers!' And well might he use the expression; for never since this
planetary system was called from its primitive chaos, was known such a
deprivation of light in the glorious luminary of day. Indeed, when the Almighty
punished Pharaoh for refusing to let the children of Israel depart out of his
land, the sable veil of darkness was for three days drawn over Egypt: but this
darkness was confined to a part of that kingdom; whereas this that happened at
our Savior's crucifixion, was universal, and not merely local.

THE disciples naturally considered the darkness, when it began, as a prelude
to the deliverance of their Master: for though the chief priests, elders, and
people, had sarcastically desired him to descend from the accursed tree, his
friends could not but be persuaded, that he who had delivered so many from
incurable diseases, who had created limbs for the maimed, and eyes for the
blind, who had given speech to the dumb, and called the dead from the chambers
of the dust, might easily save himself even from the cross. When, therefore,
his mother, his mother's sister Mary Magdalene, and the beloved disciple
observed the veil of darkness begin to extend over the face of nature, they
drew near to the foot of the cross, probably in expectation that the Son of God
was going to shake the frame of the universe, unloose himself from the cross,
and take ample vengeance on those cruel and perfidious enemies who had so
despitefully treaed him.

AT this awful period, the blessed JESUS was in the midst of his sufferings;
yet when he saw his mother and her companions, their grief greatly affected his
tender breast, especially the distress of his mother. The agonies of death,
under which he was now laboring, could not prevent his expressing the most
affectionate regard both for her and for them: for that she might have some
consolation to support her under the greatness of her sorrows, he told her, the
disciple whom he loved, would, for the sake of that love, supply his place to
her after he was taken from them, even the place of a son; and, therefore, he
desired her to consider him as such, and expect from him all the duties of a
child: Woman said he, behold thy son!

THIS remarkable token of filial affection toward his mother, was not the only
instance the dying JESUS gave of his sincere love for his friends and
followers; the beloved disciple had also a token of his high esteem: he singled
him out as the only person among his friends, to supply his place with regard
to his mother. Accordingly, he desired him expressly to reverence her in the
same manner as if she had been his own parent: a duty which the favorite
disciple gladly undertook; for he carried her with him to his house, and
maintained her from that hour to the day of her death; her husband Joseph
having been dead some time before.

WE have now before us an evident proof, that in the midst of the heaviest
sufferings human nature ever sustained, the blessed JESUS demonstrated a divine
strength of benevolence; even at the time when his own distress was at the
highest pitch, and nature was dressed in the robe of mourning for the
sufferings of her great Creator: his friends had so large a share of his
concern, that their happiness interrupted the sharpness of his pains, and for a
short time engrossed his thoughts.

NOW the moment when JESUS should resign his soul into the hands of his
heavenly Father approached, and he repeated part of the twenty-second Psalm,
uttering with a loud voice, these remarkable words, Eloi, Eloi, lama
sabacthani? that is, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Or, My God, My
God, how long a time have thou forsaken me! as the words may be rendered.

IT is believed by some, that our blessed Savior repeated the whole Psalm, as
it was customary with the Jews, in making quotations, to mention only the first
words of the Psalm or section which they cite. If so, as this Psalm contains
the most remarkable particulars of our Redeemer's passion, being as it were a
summary of all the prophecies relative to that subject, by repeating it on the
cross, the blessed JESUS signified that he was now accomplishing the things
that were predicted concerning the Messiah. And as the Psalm is composed in the
form of a prayer, by pronouncing it at this time, he also claimed of his
Father, the performance of all the promises he had made, whether to him or to
his people; the chief of which are recorded in the latter part of the Psalm
above mentioned.

WHEN some of the people, who stood by, heard our blessed Savior pronounce the
first words of this Psalm, they misunderstood him, probably from their not
hearing him distinctly, and concluded that he called for Elias; upon which one
of them filled a sponge with vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave him to drink,
being desirous of keeping him alive as long as possible, to see whether Elias
would come to take him down from the cross. But as soon as JESUS had tasted the
vinegar, he said, It is finished: that is, the work of man's redemption is
accomplished; that great work which the only begotten Son of God came into the
world to perform, is finished. In speaking these words, he cried with an
exceeding loud voice, and after that, he addressed his Almighty Father in words
which form the best pattern of recommendatory prayer at the hour of death;
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; and having uttered these words, he
bowed his head, and yielded up the ghost.

AT the very instant that the blessed JESUS resigned his soul into the hands of
his heavenly Father, behold, the vail of the temple was miraculously rent from
the top to the bottom; probably in the presence of the priest who burnt incense
in the holy place, and who doubtless published the account when he came out:
for our blessed Savior expired at the ninth hour, the very time of offering
the evening sacrifice. Nor was this the only miracle that happened at the death
of the great Messiah; no, the earth trembled from its very foundations, the
flinty rocks burst assunder, and the sepulchers hewn in them were opened, and
many bodies of saints deposited there, awaked after his resurrection from the
sleep of death, left the gloomy chambers of the tomb, went into the city of
Jerusalem, and appeared unto many. In all probability these saints were
disciples of our blessed Savior, who had but lately passed through the valley
of the shadow of death; for when they went into the city, they were known to be
saints by the persons who saw them, which could not well have happened if they
had not been co-temporaries with them.

AS the rending of the veil of the temple intimated, that the entrance into the
holy place, the type of heaven, was now laid open to all nations; so the
resurrection of a number of saints from the dead, demonstrated that the power
of death and the grave was broken: the sting was taken from death, and the
victory wrested from the grave. In short, our dear Redeemer's conquests over
the enemies of mankind, were shown to be complete, and an earnest was given of
the general resurrection.

THE remarkable events which attended that awful period when JESUS gave up the
ghost, did not only affect the natives of Judea, but the Roman centurion, who
was placed near the cross, to prevent disorders of any kind, glorified the
Almighty, and cried out, Truly this man was the Son of God. And all the people
when they beheld heaven itself bearing witness of the truth of our great
Redeemer's mission, smote their breasts and returned. They had been instant
with loud voices to have him crucified; but when they saw the face of the
creation wrapped in the gloomy mantle of darkness during his crucifixion, and
found his death accompanied with an earthquake, as if nature had been in agony
when he died, they rightly interpreted these prodegies to be so many
testimonies from the Almighty of his innocence, and their passions which had
been inflamed and exasperated against him, became quite calm, or exerted in his
behalf.

SOME were angry with themselves for neglecting the opportunity the governor
gave them of saving his life; some were stung with remorse for having been
active in procuring Pilate to condemn him, and even offering the most bitter
insults, while he labored under the cruelest of sufferings; and others were
deeply affected at beholding the pains he suffered, which were as severe as
they were undeserved. These various passions being visibly painted in their
countenances, afforded a melancholy spectacle; the whole multitude returning
from the cruel execution, with their eyes fixed upon the earth, pensive and
silent; their hearts ready to burst with grief, groaning deeply within
themselves, sheddding floods of tears, and smitting on their breasts, to
testify their sorrow.

IT is observable that the grief they now felt for the blessed JESUS was
distingiushed, from their former rage against him by this remarkable
particular, that their rage was entirely owing to the artful insinuations of
the priests; whereas their grief was the genuine, the natural feeling of their
own hearts, greatly affected with the truth and innocence of him who was the
object of their commiseration: and as flattery had no share in this mourning,
so the expressions of their sorrow was such as became a real, an unfeigned
passion. Nor was this unaffected mourning shown by only a few persons, who
might have been represented as the particular friends of the suffering JESUS;
no, it was the general condition of the people who had repaired to Calvary, in
order to behold the crucifixion of our dear Redeemer, that when they parted
after he had given up the ghost, they covered the roads, and, as it were,
darkened all the surrounding country.

CHAPTER XXXIX.
A Roman Soldier thursts his spear into our Savior's Side: Joseph of Aramathea
comes to Pilate, and begs of him the Body of JESUS.

BY the law of Moses, it was expressly forbidden that the bodies of those who
were hanged should remain all night on the tree. In conformity to this law, and
because the Sabbath was at hand, the Jews begged the governor, that the legs of
the three persons crucified might be broken, to hasten their death. To this
request Pilate readily consented; and accordingly gave the necessary orders to
the soldiers to put it in execution: but on perceiving that JESUS was already
dead, the soldiers did not give themselves the trouble of breaking his legs, as
they had done those of the two malefactors that were crucified with him. One of
them, however, either out of wantonness or cruelty, thrust a spear into his
side and out of the wound flowed blood and water. Some suppose that the spear
reached his heart; but however th^^ be, it is certain, from the water which
issued from the wound, that he pierced the pericardium; and consequently must
have killed him, had he not before been deprived of life.

IT was of the greatest importance to mankind that this wound was given, for it
abundantly demonstrated the truth of our Savior's death, and consequently
prevented all objections that the enemies to our holy faith would otherwise
have raised against it. The evangelist adds, that the legs of our great
Redeemer were not broken, but his side pierced, that two particular prophecies
might be fulfilled: A bone of him shall not be broken; and, they shall look on
him whom they have pierced, and be convinced of the horrid impiety of the deed,
as many of them afterward were, on the preaching of Peter.

THERE was a person amongst the disciples of the blessed JESUS, called Joseph
of Arimathea; he was equally remarkable for his birth, fortune, and office.
This man, who was not to be intimidated by the malice of his countrymen, went
boldly to Pilate, and begged the body of his great Master: he had indeed
nothing to fear from the Roman governor, who, during the whole course of our
Savior's trial, had shown the greatest inclination to release him; but he had
reason to apprehend, that this action might draw upon him the malice of the
rulers of the Jews, who had taken such great pains to get their Messiah
crucified. The great regard, however, he had for the remains of his Master,
made him despise the malice of the Jews, being persuaded that Omnipotence would
defend him, and cover his enemies with shame and confusion: and he well knew,
that if no friend procured a grant of the body, it would be ignominiously cast
out amongst the executed malefactors, and perhaps be exposed to many
indignities.

THE governor was at first surprised at the request of Joseph, thinking it
highly improbable that he should be dead in so short a time. He had indeed
given orders for the soldiers to break the legs of the crucified persons; but
he knew it was not uncommon for them to live many hours after that operation
was performed: for though the pain it left must be exquisitive in the last
degree, yet as the vital parts remain untouched, life would continue some time
in the miserable body. Pilate therefore called the centurion to know the truth
of what Joseph had told him; and being convinced, from the answer of that
officer, that JESUS had been dead some time, he readily granted the request.

The body of CHRIST said in the Sepulcher.


HAVING obtained his desire, this worthy counselor repaired to mount Calvary;
and being assisted by Nicodemus, took the body down from the cross. The latter
was formerly so cautious in visiting JESUS, that he came to him by night; but
in paying the last duties to his Master, he used no a^t to conceal his design:
he showed a courage far superior to that of any of the apostles; not only
assisting Joseph in taking down the body of JESUS from the cross, but bringing
with him a quantity of spices necessary in the burial of his Savior.
Accordingly, they wrapped the body, with the spices, in fine linen, and laid it
in a new sepulcher which Joseph had hewn out of a rock for himself. This
sepulcher was situated in a garden near mount Calvary; but being not entirely
finished when they deposited in it the body of the blessed JESUS, they fastened
the entrance by rolling a very large stone upon it.

WHAT a wonderful spectacle was now exhibited in this memorable sepulcher! He
who clothes himself with light, as with a garment, and walks upon the wings of
the wind, was pleased to wear the habiliments of mortality, and dwell amongst
this prostrate dead! Who can repeat the wondrous truth too often! Who can dwell
upon the enchanting theme too long! He who sits enthroned in glory, and
diffuses bliss amongst all the heavenly host, was once a pale and bloody
corpse, and pressed the floor of this little sepulcher! Wonder, O heavens! and
be astonished O earth!

IN that solemn hour how great was thy triumph, O death? never did thy gloomy
realms contain such a prisoner before. -- Prisoner, did I say? No, he was more
than conqueror. He arose far more mightily than Sampson from a transient
slumber; broke down the gates, and demolished the strong holds of those dark
dominions. And this, O mortals, is your consolation and security! JESUS has
trod the dreadful path, and smoothed it for your passage. JESUS, sleeping in
the chambers of the tomb, has brightened the dismal mansion, and left an
inviting odor in those beds of dust. The dying JESUS is your sure protection,
your unquestionable passport through the territories of the grave. Believe in
him with all your hearts, and love and obey him, and you will find him the high
way to Sion: he will transmit you safe to paradise. Believe in him, and you
shall be no losers, but unspeakable gainers by your dissolution. For hear what
the oracle of heaven says on this important point: 'Whoso believes in me,
shall never die.' Death shall no longer be inflicted as a punishment, but
rather vouchsafed as a blessing. Their exit is the end of their frailty, and
their entrance upon perfection: their last groan is the prelude to life,
immortality, and joy.

THE women of Galilee, who had watched their dear Redeemer in his last moments,
and accompanied his body to the sepulcher, observing that the funeral rites
were performed in a hurry, agreed among themselves, as soon as the sabbath was
passed, to return to the sepulcher, and embalm the body of their great Savior,
by anointing and swathing him in the manner then common amongst the Jews.
Accordingly, they returned to the city, and purchased the spices necessary for
that purpose; Nicodemus having furnished only a mixture of myrrh and aloes for
the above end.

THE chief priests and Pharisees, during these transactions, remembering that
JESUS had more than once predicted his own resurrection, came to the governor,
and informed him of it; begging, at the same time, that a guard might be placed
at the sepulcher, lest his disciples should carry away the body, and affirm
that he was risen from the dead. This happened a li^^le before it was dark in
the evening, called by the Evangelist the next day, because the ^ews began
their day at sunset. This request being thought reasonable by Pilate, he gave
them leave to take as many soldiers as they pleased out of the cohort, which at
the feast came from the castle Antonia, and kept guard in the porticoes of the
temple. For that they were not Jewish but Roman soldiers, whom the priests
employed to watch the sepulcher, is evident from their asking them of the
governor: besides, when the soldiers returned with the news of our Savior's
resurrection, the priests desired them to report that his disciples had stolen
him away while they slept* and to encourage them to tell that falsehood boldly,
promised that if their neglect of duty came to the governor's ears, proper
methods should be used to pacify him, and deliver them from any punishment: a
promise which there was no need of making to servants under their own immediate
command.

NOW the priests having thus obtained a guard of Roman soldiers, men, long
accustomed to military duties, and therefore most proper for watching the body,
set out with them to the sepulcher; and to prevent these guards from combining
with the disciples in carrying on any fraud, placed them at their post, and
sealed the stone which was rolled to the door of the sepulcher. Thus, whilst
the priests cautiously proposed to prevent the resurrection of our great
Redeemer from being palmed upon the world, and doubtless intended* after the
third day was past, to show his body publicly as an impostor, they placed the
truth of this stupendous miracle beyond all doubt, by furnishing a number of
unexceptionable witnesses to it, whose testimony they themselves could not
refuse or gainsay, and therefore attempted to stifle it.

CHAPTER XL.
Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, go out to view the Sepulcher, and bring
Spices to embalm the Body of JESUS: A great Earthquake accompanies the
Resurrection: An Angel descends, and JESUS rises from the Dead: The Behavior
of the Jewish Rulers thereupon.

AFTER the Sabbath, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, came very early in the
morning to visit the sepulcher, in order to embalm our Lord's body: for the
performance of which they had, in concert with several other women from
Galilee, brought unguents and spices. But before they reached the sepulcher,
there was a great earthquake preceding the most memorable event that ever
happened amongst the children of men, the resurrection of the Son of God from
the dead: For the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled
back the stone from the door of the sepulcher, and sat upon it: his countenance
was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow; and for fear of him the
keepers did shake, and became as dead men; they fled into the city, and the
Savior of the world rose from the dead. The angel, who had till then sat upon
the stone quitted his station, entered into the sepulcher, and probably placed
the linen clothes and napkin in the order they were afterward found and
observed by John and Peter.

IN the mean time, Mary Magdelene and the other Mary were still on their way to
the sepulcher, together with Salome, who joined them on the road; as they
proceeded on their way, they consulted amongst themselves with regard to the
method of putting their intention of embalming the body of their beloved Master
in execution; particularly with respect to the enormous stone which they had
seen placed there with the utmost difficulty two days before: Who, said they,
s^all roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulcher? for it was very
great. But in the midst of their deliberation about removing this great and
sole obstacle to their design (for it does not appear they knew any thing of
the guard) they lift up their eyes, and perceived it was already rolled away^s
alarmed at so extraordinary and so unexpected a circumstance, Mary Magdalene
concluded, that the stone could not be rolled away without some design; and
that they who rolled it away could have no other design, than that of removing
our Lord's body: and being convinced by appearances that they had really done
so, she ran immediately to acquaint Peter and John of what she had seen, and
what she suspected; leaving Mary and Salome there, that if the other women
should arrive during her absence, they might acquaint them with their surprise
at finding the stone removed, and of Mary Magdalene's running to inform the
apostles of the extraordinary event.

THE Soldiers who where terrified at seeing an awful messenger from on high,
roll away the stone from the door of the sepulcher, and open it in quality of a
servant, fled into the city, and informed the Jewish rulers of these miraculous
appearances. This account was highly mortifying to the chief priests, as it was
a proof of our Savior's resurrection that could not be denied; they therefore
resolved to stifle it immediately; and, accordingly, bribed the soldiers to
conceal the real fact, and to publish every where, that his disciples had
stolen the body out of the sepulcher. What! the body taken away while the
sepulcher was guarded by Roman soldiers? Yes! the disciples stole the body
while the soldiers slept. A story so inconsistent, and which so evidently
carries the marks of its own confutation with it, deserves no answer. The
priests themselves could not be so stupid as not to foresee what construction
the world would put upon the relation of persons, who pretended to know and
tell what was done while they were asleep, and in a state of insensibility.

CHAPTER XLI.
The Speech of the Angel to the Women, informing them that JESUS was risen:
Peter and John go into the Sepulcher: CHRIST appears to Mary Magdalene: The
company of Women set out a second Time in Quest of Peter and John: JESUS meets
them: Mary Magdalene and the Company of Women return from their several
Interviews with JESUS: Peter runs to the Sepulcher a second Time, and as he
returns sees his Great Lord and Master.

AFTER Mary Magdalene was gone to inform the disciples that the stone was
rolled away from the mouth of the sepulcher, and the supposed body taken away,
Mary and Salome drew near toward the sepulcher, and at their arrival found
what they expected, the body of their beloved Master gone from the place where
it had been deposited by Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea; but at the same
time beheld, to their great astonishment, a beautiful young man, in shining
raiment, very glorious to behold, sitting at the right side of the sepulcher.
Matthew tells us, that it was the angel who had rolled away the stone, and
frightened away the guards from the sepulcher. It seems he had now laid aside
his terrors in which he was then arrayed, and assumed the form and dress of a
human being, in order that these pious women, who had accompained him during
the greatest part of the time of his public ministry, might not be terrified:
but, notwithstanding his beauty and benign appearance, they were greatly
affrighted, and on the point of turning back when the heavenly messenger, to
banish their fears, told them, in a gentle accent, that he knew their errend:
Fear not, said he; for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is
not here; for he is risen, as he said: and then invited them to come down into
the sepulcher, and view the place where the Son of God had lain; that is, to
look on the linen clothes, and the napkin that was about his head, and which he
had left behind him when he rose from the dead: for to look at the place in any
other view would not have tended to confirm their faith of his being risen.

GREATLY encouraged by the agreeable news, as well as by the sweet accent with
which this messenger from the heavenly Canaan delivered his speech, the women
went down into the sepulcher, when behold another of the angelic choir
appeared. Probably the one sat at the head and the other at the feet, where the
body of JESUS had lain; the position in which they appeared to Mary Magdalene
afterward.

HOWEVER they did not yet seem to give credit to what was told them by the
angels; and therefore the other gently chid them for seeking the living amongst
the dead, with an intention to do him an office due only to the latter, and for
not believing what was told them by a messenger from heaven, or rather for not
remembering the words which their great Master had himself told them with
regard to his own resurrection: Why seek ye the living amongst the dead? He is
not here, but is risen: remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in
Galilee, saying, The son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men,
and be crucified, and the third day rise again.

AFTER this, when the women had satisfied their curiosity by looking at the
place where our Lord had lain, and where nothing was to be found but the linen
cloths, the angel who first appeared to them resumed the discourse, and bade
them to go and tell his disciples, particularly Peter, the glad-tidings of his
resurrection from the dead; that he was going before them to Galilee; and that
they should there have the pleasure of seeing him in person.

THE disciples, it may reasonably be supposed, were ordered to go into Galilee
to meet their great and beloved Master, because they were now most of them in
Jerusalem, celebrating the passover; and it may easily be imagined that, on the
receiving the news of the Lord's resurrection, many, if not all of them, would
resolve to tarry in Jerusalem, in expectation of meeting him: a thing which
must have proved of great detriment to them at that time of the year, when the
harvest was about to begin, the sheaf of first fruits being always offered on
the second day of the passover-week. In order therefore to prevent their
staying so long from home, the message was sent directing them to return to
Galilee, with full assurance, that they should there have the pleasure of
seeing their great Lord and Master; and by that means be happily relieved from
the suspicion of his being an impostor, which doubtless had arisen in their
minds, when they saw him expire on the cross. Hereupon the women, highly elated
with the news of their Lord's resurrection, left the sepulcher immediately, and
ran to carry the disciples these glad-tidings.

IN the mean time, Peter and John, having been informed by Mary Magdalene, that
the stone was rolled away, and the body of JESUS not to be found, were
hastening to the grave, and missed the women who had seen this vision of
angels. These disciples being astonished at what Mary Magdalene had told them,
and desirous of having their doubts cleared up, made all the haste possible to
the sepulcher; and John being younger than Peter, arrived at the sepulcher
first, but did not go in, contenting himself with stooping down and seeing the
linen cloths lying which had been wrapped about our Savior's body. Peter soon
arrived, and went into the sepulcher, where he saw the linen cloths lie; and
the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but
wrapped together in a place by itself.

IT is the opinion of some, that our dear Redeemer folded up the napkin, to
show the perfect calmness and composure with which he arose, as out of a common
sleep: but however that be, it is certain that he left the grave clothes in the
sepulcher, to CHRIST after his Resurrection appearing in the character of is
Gardener to MARY MAGDALENE.
show that his body was not stolen away by his disciples, who in such a case
would not have taken time to have stripped it: besides, the circumstance of the
grave-clothes, disposed the disciples themselves to believe, when the
resurrection was related to them; but at present they had not the least
suspicion that he was risen from the dead, as the angels had affirmed.

HAVING thus satisfied themselves that what Mary Magdalene had told them was
really true, those two disciples returned to their respective habitations: but
Mary continued weeping at the door of the sepulcher: she had, it seems,
followed Peter and John to the garden, but did not return with them, being
anxious to find the body; accordingly, stepping down into the sepulcher to
examine it once more, she saw two angels sitting, the one at the head and the
other at the feet, where the body of JESUS had lain. They were now in the same
position, as when they appeared to the other women; but had rendered themselves
invisible while Peter and John were at the sepulcher, seeking our Lord.

MARY, beholding these heavenly messengers dressed in the robes of light, was
greatly terrified: but they, in the most endearing accent, asked her, Woman,
why weepest thou? To which she answered, Because they have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him. On pronouncing these words, she turned
herself about, and saw JESUS standing near her; but the terror she was in, and
the garments in which he was now dressed, prevented her from knowing him for
some time. JESUS repeated the same question used before by the angel, Woman,
why weepest thou? To which Mary who now supposed him to be the gardner,
answered, Sir, if his body was troublesome in the sepulcher, and thou have
removed him, tell me where he is deposited, and I will take him away. But our
blessed Savior willing to remove her anxiety, called her by her name, with his
usual tone of voice. On which she immediately knew him; and falling down before
him, would have embraced his knees, according to that modesty and reverence
with which the women of the East saluted the men, especially those who were
their superiors in station and dignity.

JESUS refused this compliment, telling her, that he was not going immediately
into heaven: he was often to show himself to his disciples before he ascended,
so that she would have frequent opportunities of showing her regard to him: and
at the same time, said to her, Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend
unto my father, and your father; and to my God, and your God. Thus did the
blessed JESUS contemplate with a singular pleasure the work of redemption he
had just finished. The happy relation between God and man, which had been long
cancelled by sin, was now renewed: the Almighty, who had disowned them on
account of their rebellion was again reconciled unto them: he was become their
God and Father: they were exalted to the honorable relation of CHRIST's
brethren, and the sons of God; and their father loved them with an affection
far exceeding that of the most tenderhearted parent upon earth.

THE kindness of this message sent by our dear Redeemer to his disciples, will
appear above all praise, if we remember their late behavior; they had every
one of them forsaken him in his greatest extremity when he was scourged and
mocked by the Roman soldiers, derided by his countrymen, and spitefully
entreated by all, they hid themselves in some place of safety, and preferred
their own security to the deliverance of their Master: when he fainted under
the burden of the cross, not one of them was there to assist him; Simon, a
Cyrenian ^as compelled by the Roman soldiers to ease him of this pondrous
burden. But notwithstanding they had refused to assist their Master during his
sufferings for the sins of the world, he graciously, he freely forgave them; he
assured them of their pardon, and even called them by the endearing name of
brethren, notwithstanding their former slighting conduct.

WE cannot help observing that there is something very remarkable in this part
of the history: none of the apostles, or male disciples were honored with the
first visions of the ^ngels, or with the immediate news of the resurrection of
the Son of God, much less with the appearance of JESUS himself. The angels in
the sepulcher kept themselves invisible all the time that Peter and John were
observing the linen cloths and satisfying themselves that the body of their
Master was not there: perhaps the male disciples in general were treated with
this mark of disrespect, both because they had, with shameful cowardice,
forsaken their Master when he was betrayed into the hands of his enemies, and
because their faith was so weak that they had absolutely despaired of his being
the Messiah when they saw him expire on the cross: but how different was that
conduct of the women! Laying aside the weakness and timidity natural to their
sex, they showed an uncommon magnanimity on this melancholy occasion; for in
contradiction to the whole nation, who with one voice required JESUS to be
crucified as a deceiver, they proclaimed his innocence by tears, cries, and
lamentations, when they saw him led forth to suffer on mount Calvary;
accompanied him to the cross, the most infamous of all punishments; kindly
waited on him in his expiring moments, giving him all the consolation in their
power, though at the same time the sight of his sufferings pierced them to the
heart; and when he expired, and was carried off, they accompanied him to his
grave, not despairing, though they found he had not delivered himself, but to
appearance was conquered by death, the universal enemy of mankind. Perhaps
these pious women entertained some faint hopes that he would still revive; or,
if they did not entertain expectations of that kind, they at least cherished a
strong degree of love for their Lord, and determined to do him all possible
honor.

IT may be observed, a faith so remarkably strong, a love so ardent, and a
fortitude so unshaken, could not fail of receiving distinguishing tokens of the
divine approbation; and they were accordingly honored with the news of
CHRIST's resurrection before the male disciples had their eyes cheered with the
first sight of their beloved Lord, after he arose from the chambers of the
grave; so that they preached the joyful tidings of his resurrection to the
apostles themselves. But there seems to have been other reasons why our great
Redeemer showed himself first to the women: the thoughts of the apostles were
constantly fixed on a temporal kingdom, and they had wrested all his words into
an agreement with that favorite notion; and whatever they could not construe
as consonant to that opinion, they seemed either to have disbelieved or
disregarded.

NOTWITHSTANDING JESUS had foretold his own suffering no less than seven
different times, the apostles were astonished above measure when they saw him
expire on the cross. Immortality and terrestial dominion were, according to
their notion, the characteristics of the Messiah; for which reason, when they
found that instead of establishing himself in the possession of the universal
empire, he had neither delivered himself from an handful of enemies, nor even
from death, they gave over all hopes of his being the Messiah: and as for his
resurrection, they seem not to have entertained the least notion of it; so
that, when the news of this great event was brought to them, they considered it
as an idle tale. But not so the women; they were more submissive to their
Master's instructions, and consequently were much better prepared for seeing
him after his resurrection than the apostles: for though they did not expect
that he would rise from the dead, yet they were not prejudiced against it.

THE apostles, on the other hand, not only absolutely rejected the matter at
first, as a thing incredible, but even after they were acquainted with the
accounts the soldiers had given of this transaction; nay, after they had seen
the blessed JESUS himself, some of them were so unreasonable as still to doubt.
How much rather then would their incredulity have led them to suspect his
appearing as an illusion, had he showed himself to them! These reports led them
to recollect the arguments proper for disposing them to believe; particularly
the prophecies that had been so often delivered in their own hearing,
concerning his resurrection. Hence the angels, when they told this event to
th(...) men, and desired them to carry the news of it to his disciples, put
them in mind of the predictions JESUS himself had made, as a confirmation of
it. Hence we also see the reason why JESUS, before he made himself known to the
disciples at Emmaus, prepared them for a discovery, by expounding to them on
the road, the several prophecies concerning the Messiah, contained in the Old
Testament, which hitherto they had little attended to, or did not understand.

THE company of women, we have observed, returned to the city, while Peter,
John, and Mary Magdalene, were at the sepulcher. On their arrival they told as
many of the disciples as they could find, that they had seen at the sepulcher a
vision of angels, who assured them that JESUS was risen from the dead. This new
information astonished the disciples exceedingly: and as they had before sent
Peter and John to examine into the truth of what Mary Magdalene had told them
concerning the body's being removed out of the sepulcher, so they now judged it
highly proper to send some of their number to see the angels, and learn from
them the joyful tidings of that great transaction of which the women had given
them an account. That this was really the case, appears from what the
disciples, in their journey to Emmaus, told their great Lord and Master; namely
they, when the women came and told them that they had seen a vision of angels,
certain of their number went to the sepulcher, and found it even as the women
had said, but saw not JESUS.

WE may venture to affirm, that this second deputation from the apostles did
not go alone; for as Mary Magdalene returned with Peter and John, who went to
examine the truth of her information, so the women who brought an account of
the vision of angels, in all probability returned with those who were sent to
be witnesses of the truth of their report: besides curiosity, they had an
errand thither. The angels had expressly ordered them to tell the news to Peter
in particular; for which reason, when they understood that he was gone to the
sepulcher, it is natural to think they would return with the disciples to seek
him. About the time that the disciples and women set out for the sepulcher,
Peter and John reached the city, but passing through a different street, did
not meet their brethren in the way.

HAVING a great desire to reach the sepulcher, the disciples soon left the
women behind, and just as they arrived, Mary Magdalene having seen the Lord,
was coming away; but they did not meet her, because they entered the garden at
one door, while she was coming out at another. When they came to the sepulcher,
they saw the angels, and received from them the news of their blessed Master's
resurrection; for St. Luke tells us, they found it even as the women had said.
Highly elated with their success, they departed and ran back to the city, with
such expedition, that they gave an account of what they had seen in the hearing
of the two disciples, before Mary Magdalene arrived. Nor will their speed
appear at all incredible, if we consider that the nature of the tidings the
apostles had to carry gave them wings, as it were, to make their brethren
partakers of their joy at this surprising event.

THE company of women who followed the disciples, happening, in the mean time,
to meet Peter and John, went forward in quest of them: but they had not gone
far from the sepulcher, before JESUS himself met them, and said, All hail! On
which they approached their great Lord and Master, held him by the feet, and
worshipped him. This favor of embracing his knees, JESUS had before refused to
Mary Magdalene, because it was not then necessary; but he granted it to the
women, because the angel's words having strongly impressed their minds with the
notion of his resurrection, they might have tak^^^ his appearance, for an
illusion of their own imagination, had he not permitted them to handle him, and
convince themselves by united reports of their senses; besides, if our Lord
intended that Mary Magdalene should go away as fast as possible, and publish
the news, he might hinder her from embracing his knees, to prevent her losing
any time before she returned.

THESE pious women having tarried some time with JESUS on the road, did not
arrive with the joyful tidings of their great Master's resurrection, till some
time after Peter and John; and perhaps were overtaken by Mary Magdalene on the
road, unless we suppose that she arrived a few minutes before them. But be that
as it may, this is certain, that they arrived either at or near the same time;
so that their accounts of this miraculous event tended to confirm each other's
belief of it.

THE relation of the women having filled the disciples with astonishment, they
consid^^ed the account they had before given them, of their having seen a
vision of angels, as an idle tale, and now they seem to have considered this as
something worse; for the evangelist tell us, they believed not. Peter, indeed,
to whom the angel sent the message, was disposed by his sanguine temper to give
a little more credit to their words than the rest; possibly because the
messengers from the heavenly Canaan, had done him the honor of naming him in
particular. Elated with the respect paid him in particular, he immediately
repaired again to the sepulcher; hoping, in all probability, that his Master
would appear to him, or at least the angel, who had so particularly
distinguished him from the rest of his brethren.

WHEN Peter arrived at the sepulcher, he stooped down; and seeing the linen
cloths lying in the same manner as before, he viewed their position, the form
in which they were laid, and returned wondering greatly in himself at that
which was come to pass. In all probability, it was now that Peter was favored
with the sight of his Master, 1 Cor. xv.5; for the evangelist tell us, that it
happened on the day of our blessed Savior's resurrection.

CHAPTER XLII.
JESUS appears to two of his Disciples on the Road to Emmaus: He appears to his
Apostles on the Evening of the Resurrection, Thomas being absent: He appears
again to the Apostles, and convinces Thomas: Shows himself to his Disciples at
the Sea of Tiberias; and to five hundred of the Brethren in Galilee.

NOT long after the womens' first return to the disciples with the news that
they had seen a vision of angels, who told them, that JESUS was risen from the
dead, two of the brethren departed on their journey to a village called Emmaus,
about two miles distant from Jerusalem. The concern they were in on account of
the death of their great and beloved Master, was sufficiently visible in their
countenances; and as they pursued their journey talking with one another, and
debating about the things that had lately happened amongst them, concerning the
life and doctrine, the sufferings and death of the holy JESUS, and of the
report that was just spread amongst his disciples, of his being that very
morning risen from the dead, JESUS himself overtook them, and joined their
company.

APPEARING like a stranger, they did not in the least suspect, that their
fellow-traveller was no other than the great Redeemer of the sons of men. He
soon entered into discourse with them, by inquiring what event had so closely
engaged them in conversation, and why they appeared so sorrowful and dejected,
as if they had met with some heavy disappointment or sore affliction?

CLEOPHAS, one of the disciples, being surprised at the question, replied, is
it possible, that you can be so great a stranger to the affairs of the world,
as to have been at Jerusalem, and not have heard the surprising events that
have happened there: events that have astonished the whole city, and are now
the constant topic of conversation amongst all the inhabitants? JESUS answered,
what surprising events do you mean? To which Cleophas replied, The transactions
which have happened concerning JESUS of Nazareth, who appeared as a great
prophet and teacher sent from God; and accordingly was highly venerated amongst
the people, for the excellency of his doctrine, and the number, benefit, and
greatness of his miracles. Our chief priests and elders, therefore, envying him
as one who lessened their authority over the people, apprehended him, and found
means to put him to death; but we firmly believed he would have proved himself
the Messiah, or great Deliverer: and this persuasion we a long time supported,
nor were we willing to abandon it, even when we saw him put to death: but it is
now three days since these things were done, and therefore begin to fear we
were mistaken concerning him.

A thing indeed happened this very morning, which extremely surprises us, and
we are very solicitous with regard to the event. Some women who had entertained
the same hopes and expectations as we, going early in the morning to pay their
last duties to their Master, by embalming his body, returned with great haste
to the city, and informed us, that they had been at the sepulcher, but were
disappointed in finding the body; and to increase our surprise, they added,
that they had seen a vision of angels, who told them that JESUS was risen from
the dead. This relation appeared at first to us as an idle tale, altogether
incredible; but two of the company going immediately after to the sepulcher,
found every thing exactly as the women had reported; they saw the angels, but
heard not any thing of the body -- so that we are still in doubt and perplexity
with regard to this wonderful event, and what the end of these things will be.
JESUS replied, why are ye so very averse to believe all that the prophets have
with one voice predicted concerning the Messiah? Is it not clearly, and very
expressly foretold, in all the prophetic writings, that it was appointed by the
council of Omnipotence for the Messiah to suffer in this manner, and that after
sustaining the greatest indignities, reproach, and contempt from the malice and
perverseness of mankind, and even undergoing an ignominious and cruel death, to
be exalted to a glorious and eternal kingdom. After having said this, he began
at the writings of Moses, and explained to them in order, all the principal
passages, both in the books of that great legislator, and the writings of the
other prophets, relating to his own sufferings, death, and glorious
resurrection, as predicted of them.

THIS he did, with such surprising plainness, clearness, and strength, that the
two disciples, not yet suspecting who he was, were as much amazed to find a
stranger so well acquainted with all that JESUS did and suffered, as they at
first wondered at his appearing to be totally ignorant of these transactions.
They were also astonished to hear him interpret and apply the Scriptures to
their present purpose, with such readiness and convincing clearness of
argument, as carried with it a strange and unusual authority and efficacy. When
therefore they came to the village whither they were going, and JESUS seemed as
if he would have passed on and traveled further, they desirous of his company,
pressed him, in the strongest manner, to tarry with them that night, as it was
then late in the evening.

THE great Redeemer of mankind consented to this request, and when they were
sat down to supper, he took bread, and gave thanks to God, and brake it, and
gave it to them in the same manner he used to do while he conversed with them
upon earth, before his death. This engaged their attention, and looking
steadfastly on him, they perceived it was their great and beloved Master; but
they had then no time to express their joy and astonishment to their benevolent
Redeemer; for he vanished out of their sight immediately.

NO sooner did they perceive that their Master was departed, than they said one
to another, How slow and stupid were we before, not to know him on the road
while he explained to us the Scriptures, when besides the affability of his
discourse, and the strength and clearness of his arguments, we perceived such
an authority in what he said, and such a powerful efficacy attending his words,
and striking our hearts with affection, as we could not but have known, if we
had not been remarkably stupid, to have been the very same that used to
accompany his teaching, and was peculiar to our dear Master, who spoke as never
man spoke.

AFTER this surprising event, they did not think proper to stay any longer in
Emmaus, but returned that very night to Jerusalem and found the apostles, with
several other disciples, discoursing about the resurrection of their Master;
and on their entering the room, the disciples accosted them, saying, The Lord
is risen indeed, and has appeared unto Simon.

THE reports of the women were little credited, supposing they were occasioned
more by imagination than reality; but when a person of Simon's capacity and
gravity declared he had seen the Lord, they began to think that he was really
risen from the dead. Their belief of this was greatly confirmed by the arrival
of the two disciples from Emmaus, who declared to their brethren, how JESUS had
appeared to them on the road and how they discovered him to be their Master, by
his breaking of bread, when he sat down to supper with them.

DURING this conversation of the disciples from Emmaus, describing the manner
of the appearing of JESUS to them, and offering arguments to convince those who
doubted the truth of it, their great Master himself put an end to the debate,
by standing in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you.

THE disciples were greatly terrified at this appearance of our blessed
Savior, supposing they had seen a spirit; for as they had secured the doors of
the house where they were assembled for fear of the Jews, and JESUS having
opened the locks, by his miraculous power, without the knowledge of any in the
house, it was natural for them to think that a spiritual substance only could
enter. The circumstance therefore of the doors being shut, is very happily
mentioned by St. John; because it suggests a reason why the disciples took
their Master for a spirit, notwithstanding many of them were convinced that he
was really risen from the dead, and were that moment conversing about the event.

HOWEVER, to dispel their fears and doubts; JESUS came forward, spoke to them
in the most endearing accent, showed them his hands and his feet, and desired
them to handle him, in order to convince themselves by the united report of
their different senses, that it was he himself, and no spectre or apparition:
Why are ye troubled, said the benevolent Redeemer of mankind, and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I
myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have, Luke xxiv.38, 39.

BY these infallible proofs, the disciples were sufficiently convinced of the
truth of their Lord's resurrection, and they received him with rapture and
exultation: but their joy and wonder had so great an affect on their minds,
that some of them, sensible of the great commotion they were in, suspended
their belief, till they had considered the matter more calmly: JESUS therefore
knowing their thoughts, called for meat, and eat with them, in order to prove
more fully the truth of his resurrection from the dead, and the reality of his
presence with them at this time. When JESUS had given this further occular
demonstration of his having vanquished the power of death, and opened the
tremendous portals of the grave, he again repeated his salutation. Peace be
unto you; adding, The same commission that my Father has given unto me, I give
unto you: go ye therefore into every part of the world, and preach the gospel
to all the children of men. Then breathing on them, he said, receive ye the
Holy Ghost, to direct and assist you in the execution of your commission:
whosoever embraces your doctrine, and sincerely repents, ye shall remit his
sins, and your sentence of absolution shall be ratified and confirmed in the
courts of heaven: and whosoever either obstinately rejects your doctrine,
disobeys it, or behaves himself unworthily, after he has embraced it, his sins
shall not be forgiven him; but the censure ye shall pass upon him on earth,
shall be confirmed in heaven, to his condemnation.

AT this meeting of the apostles, Thomas, otherwise called Didymus, was absent;
nor did this happen without the special direction of Providence, that the
particular and extraordinary satisfaction which was afterward granted him,
might be an abundant and undeniable testimony of the truth of our blessed
Savior's resurrection, to all succeeding generations. The rest of the apostles
therefore told him, that they had seen the Lord, and repeated to him the words
he had delivered in their hearing: but Thomas replied, This event is of such
great importance, that unless, to prevent all possibility of deception, I see
him with my own eyes, and feel him with my own hands, putting my fingers into
the print of the nails whereby he was fastened to the cross, and thrusting my
hand into his side which the soldier pierced with his spear; I will not believe
that he is risen from the dead in reality and truth, as ye affirm.

WE have now enumerated, in the most explicit manner, the transactions of that
day, on which the great Redeemer of mankind arose from the dead; a day highly
to be remembered by the children of men, throughout all generations; a day, in
which was fully completed and displayed the conceptions lodged in the breast of
Infinite Wisdom from all eternity; even those thoughts of love and mercy, on
which the salvation of the world depended, Christians have, therefore, the
highest reason to solemnize this day with gladness, each returning week, by
ceasing from their labor, and giving up themselves to prayer, pious
meditations, and other exercises of religion. The redemption of mankind, which
they weekly commemorate, affords matter of eternal thought; it is a subject
impossible to be equalled, and whose luster, neither length of time, nor
frequent reviewing can either tarnish or diminish: it resembles the sun, which
we behold always the same glorious and luminous object; for the benefit we
celebrate is, after so many ages, as fresh and beautiful as ever, and will
always continue the same, flourishing in the memories of all reasonable beings
through the endless revolutions of eternity. Redemption is the brightest mirror
in which we contemplate the goodness of the Almightty, other gifts are only
mites from the divine treasury; but redemption opens, we had almost said
exhausts, all the stores of grace. May it be constantly the favorite subject
of our meditations, more delightful to our musing minds, than applause to the
ambitious ear! May it be the darling theme of our discourses; sweeter to our
tongues, than the droppings of the honeycomb to the taste! May it be our
choicest comfort, through all the changes of this mortal life, and the reviving
cordial, even in the last extremities of dissolution itself, and upon the verge
of the grave!

AFTER our great Redeemer had been risen eight days from the dead, he showed
himself again to his disciples while Thomas was with them, and upbraided that
disciple for his unbelief; but knowing that it did not, like that of the
Pharisees, proceed from a wicked mind, but from an honest heart, and a sincere
desire of being satisfied of the truth, he addressed himself particularly to
this doubting disciple: Thomas, said he, since thou will not be contented to
rely on the testimony of others, but must be convinced by the experience of thy
own senses, behold the wounds in my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into my side, and doubt no longer of the reality of my resurrection
from the tomb.

THE incredulous disciple immediately obeyed the kind invitation of his Master;
and being fully satisfied according to his own desire, he cried out, I am
abundantly convinced thou art indeed my Lord, the very same that was crucified;
and I acknowledge thy almighty power, in having triumphed over death, and
worship thee as my God and Savior.

THE blessed JESUS replied, Because thou have both seen and felt me, Thomas,
thou have believed that I am really risen from the dead. Blessed are they who
without such evidence of the senses, shall, upon credible testimony, be willing
to believe and embrace a doctrine, which tends so greatly to the glory of God,
and the salvation of mankind.

THE blessed JESUS appeared, according to St. John, on several other occasions
to his disciples after his resurrection; and by many infallible proofs, not
mentioned by the evangelists, fully convinced them, that he was alive after his
passion: but that those which are mentioned, are abundantly sufficient to
induce men to believe that JESUS was the Son of God, the great Messiah so often
foretold by the ancient prophets; and that by means of that belief, they may
obtain everlasting life, in the happy regions of the heavenly Canaan, and there
adore and praise him for ever.

JESUS having first by the angels, and afterward in person, ordered his
disciples to repair to their respective habitations in Galilee, it is
reasonable to think they would leave Jerusalem as soon as possible. This they
accordingly did, and on their arrival at their respective places of abode,
applied themselves to their usual occupations; and the apostles returned to
their old trade of fishing on the lake of Tiberius. Here they were toiling with
their nets very early in the morning, and saw JESUS standing on the shore, but
did not then know him to be their Master, as it was something dark, and they at
a considerable distance from him. He, however, called to them, and asked if
they had taken any fish; to which they answered, they had caught nothing: he
then desired them to let down their nets on the right side of the boat, and
they should not be disappointed. The disciples imagining that he might be
acquainted with the places proper for fishing, did as he had directed them, and
enclosed in their net so vast a multitude of fishes, that they were not able to
draw it into the boat, but were forced to drag it after them in the water
toward the land.

THEY had toiled, it seems, all the preceding night to no purpose; and
therefore such remarkable success could not fail of causing various conjectures
amongst them, with regard to a stranger on the shore, who had given them such
happy advice. Some of the disciples declared they could not imagine who he was;
but others were persuaded, that this person was no other than their great and
beloved Master, John was fully convinced of his being the Lord, and accordingly
told his thoughts to Simon Peter; who making no doubt of it, girt on his
fisher's coat, and leaped into the sea, in order to get ashore sooner than the
boat could be brought to land, dragging after it a net full of such large
fishes as were almost ready to sink it.

THE disciples, when they came ashore, found a fire kindled, and on it a fish
broiling, and near it some bread: but neither being sufficient for the company,
JESUS bid them bring some of the fish they had now caught, and invited them to
eat with him. Thus did the blessed JESUS prove again to his disciples the
reality of his resurrection, not only by eating with them, but by working a
miracle, like that which, at the beginning of his ministry, had made such an
impression upon them, as disposed them to be his constant followers. This was
the third time that JESUS appeared publicly to a great number of his disciples
in a body, besides his showing himself to particular persons, upon special
occasions and at diverse times.

AFTER they had eaten, JESUS reminded Peter how diligent and zealous he ought
to be, in order to wipe off the stain of his denying him, when he was carried
before the high priest: Simon, son of Jonas, said our blessed Savior to him,
art thou more zealous and affectionate in thy love toward me, than the rest of
my disciples? To which Peter answered, Yea, Lord; thou know that I love
thee. He was taught modesty and diffidence by his late fall; and therefore,
would not compare himself with others, but humbly appealed to his Master's
omniscience for the sincerity of his regard to him. JESUS answered, Express
then thy love toward me by the care of my flock committed to thy charge: Feed
my Lambs, feed my sheep. I well know indeed, continued the blessed JESUS, that
thou will continue my faithful shepherd even until death: for the time will
come when thou, who now girdest on thy fishers' coat voluntarily, and
stretchedst out thy hands to come to me, shall in thine old age be girt by
others, and forced to stretch out thy hands against thy will, in a very
different manner, for the sake of thy constant profession of my religion

JESUS, by these last words, signified the manner of Peter's death, and that he
should finally suffer martyrdom for the glory of God, and the testimony of the
truth of the Christian religion, which he had been instrumental in propagating
to the world.

THE disciples being now about to meet their great Lord and Master, according
to the message he had sent them by the women, and having, in all probability,
appointed this meeting at some former appearance, not mentioned by the
evangelists, the brethren set out for the mountain in Galilee, perhaps that on
which he was transfigured. Here five hundred of them were gathered together,
waiting the joyful sight of their great Master, after he had triumphed over
death and the grave; some of them not having yet seen him after his
resurrection from the dead.

THE disciples did not wait long before JESUS appeared, on which they were
seized with rapture; and with hearts overflowing with gladness, they approached
their kind, their benevolent Master, and worshipped him. Some few, indeed,
doubted, it being a thing agreeable to nature for men to be afraid to believe
what they vehemently wish, lest they should indulge themselves in false joys,
which vanish like the morning cloud. But JESUS afterward appeared frequently
to them, and gave all of them full satisfaction, and instructed them in many
things relating to their preaching the gospel, establishing the church, and
spreading it through the known world.

OUR blessed Savior, either at his appearance on the mountain, or some
subsequent appearance, not mentioned by the evangelists, probably ordered them
to return to Jerusalem, as he proposed to ascend visibly into heaven from the
top of the mount of Olives.

CHAPTER XLIII.
JESUS ascends into Heaven: The principal Arguments of the Deists against our
blessed Savior's Resurrection considered and refuted: Reflections on the Life
and Doctrine of our great Redeemer.

ABOUT twelve days before the feast of Pentechost, called in the law the feast
of weeks, and nearly forty days after our blessed Savior arose from the dead,
the disciples repaired to Jerusalem, probably in conformity to a command given
them by their great Master at one of his appearances; unless we suppose they
went up to that city, in order to purify and prepare themselves for the
solemnity now approaching.

HOWEVER that may be, the blessed JESUS made his last appearance here to his
apostles: and, after instructing them in many particulars concerning the
kingdom of God, and the manner they were to behave themselves in propagating
the doctrine of the gospel, he put them in mind that, during his abode with
them in Galilee, he had often told them, that all things written in the law,
the prophets, and the Psalms concerning him, were to be exactly accomplished.
At the same time, he opened their understandings, that is, he removed their
prejudices by the operation of his spirit, cleared their doubts, improved their
memories, strengthened their judgments, and enabled them to discern the true
meaning of the Scriptures respecting his divine mission.

BEING thus qualified by him for receiving the truth, he again assured them
that both Moses and the prophets had foretold that the Messiah was to suffer in
the very manner he had suffered, that he was to rise from the dead on the third
day, as he had done, and that repentance and remission of sins was to be
preached in the Messiah's name amongst all nations, beginning with the Jews at
Jerusalem.

AFTER this, he delivered unto them their commission to preach the doctrine of
repentance and remission of sins in his name amongst all nations, and to
testify unto the world the exact accomplishment in him of all things foretold
concerning the Messiah; and, to enable them to perform this important work,
promised to bestow on them the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, which he called
the promise of his Father; because the Almighty had promised them by his
prophets in the Old Testament.

BEING thus fortified for the important work they were going to undertake, he
led them on to the Mount of Olives as far as Bethany; where, standing on a hill
above the town, he told them that he was now raised to the government of heaven
and earth; for which reason, they might go courageously through all the world,
and preach the gospel to every rational creature; assuring themselves that
affairs in all countries should be so ordered, as to dispose the inhabitants
for the reception of the gospel; that they who believed, were to be admitted
into his church by the rite of baptism, in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost; and to be taught, in consequence of their baptism, to obey all
the precepts he had enjoined them: that such baptized believers should receive
pardon of their sins, together with eternal life in the happy mansions of his
Father's kingdom; but that those who refused to embrace the doctrines of the
gospel, should be for ever excluded those happy regions, and have their portion
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; that while they were employed
in this work, he would be with them to the end of the world, to guide them by
his counsel, to assist them by his Spirit, and to protect them by his
Providence. Finally, that those who should, through their preaching, be induced
to believe, should themselves work most astonishing miracles, by which the
gospel should be propagated with the greatest rapidity and success.

AFTER JESUS had spoken these things* he lifted up his hands and blessed them;
and in the action of blessing them, he was parted from them in the midst of the
day, a shining cloud receiving him out of their sight: that is, this brilliant
cloud encompassed him about, and carried him up to heaven, not suddenly, but at
leisure, that they might behold him departing, and see the proof of his having
come down from heaven, as he had promised them.

THE blessed JESUS ascended in a cloud which was more bright and pure than the
clearest lambent flame, being no other than the Shechinab, or glory of the
Lord, the visible symbol of the divine Presence which had so often appeared to
the patriarchs of old, which filled the temple at its dedication, and which, in
its greatest splendor, cannot be beheld with mortal eyes; for which reason, it
is called the light inaccessible in which the Almighty resides, and with which
he is surrounded.

IT was probably on this occasion that our Lord's body was changed, acquiring
the glories of immortality, perhaps in the presence of his disciples, who
steadfastly beheld him as he mounted from the earth. And as he ascended, the
flaming cloud that surrounded him marked his passage through the air, but
gradually lost its magnitude in the eyes of those who stood below, till at last
it vanished, together with their beloved Master, out of their sight; for he was
received up where the Divine Being manifests himself in a peculiar manner, and
was set down on the righthand of the Majesty on high; all power in heaven and
in earth being now given him: and this universal government he will hold, till
he establishes the dominion of righteousness, when he will deliver up the
kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all in all. 1 Cor. xv.28.

THUS did the great Redeemer of mankind depart in a most illustrious manner,
after having finished the grand work which he left the bosom of his Father to
execute; a work which God himself, in the remotest eternity, contemplated with
pleasure, which angels with joy descried as to happen, and which, through all
eternity to come, shall at periods the most immensely distant from the time of
its execution, be looked back upon with inexpressible delight by every
inhabitant of heaven; for though the minute affairs of time may vanish
altogether and be lost, when they are removed far back by the endless
progression of duration, this object is such, that no distance, however great,
can lessen it: the kingdom of heaven is erected on the incarnation and
sufferings of the Son of God, the kingdom and city of the Almighty
comprehending all the virtuous beings in the universe, made happy by goodness
and love; and, therefore, none of them can ever forget the foundation on which
their happiness stands established: the human species in particular, recovered
by the labor of the Son of God, will view their deliverer, and look back on
his stupendous undertaking with the highest rapture, while they are feasting
without interruption, on its delicious fruits: the rest of the members of the
city of God, will contemplate it with perpetual pleasure, as the happy means of
recovering their kindred that were lost; possibly the grand confirmation of the
whole rational system, in subjection to him who reigned for ever, whose favor
is better than life itself, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.

WE have now followed our dear Redeemer through all the transactions of his
life, and enlarged on the stupendous miracles of his resurrection, as the whole
Christian doctrine is founded on that glorious event. And it is abundantly
evident from this history, that our blessed Savior showed himself to his
disciples and friends only, not to the Jews in general. This circumstance gave
Spinoza a pretense for raising an objection, which his disciples have
considered as the strongest argument against our Lord's resurrection. 'If, say
they, he really rose from the dead, to have showed himself to his enemies as
well as to his friends, would have put the truth of his resurrection beyond all
doubt, than which nothing could be more necessary to the cause of Christianity;
and therefore, the supposition of his having confined his appearances, after
his resurrection, to a few select friends, renders the affair extremely
suspicious and unworthy of credit.'

THIS argument however plausible it may appear at first sight, is destitute of
the least force; because it may be demonstrated, that if JESUS had showed
himself to his enemies, and to all the people in general, these appearances,
instead of putting the truth of his resurrection beyond all doubt, would have
weakened the evidence of it, at least in after-ages; and, consequently, have
been of infinite prejudice to mankind -- for upon the supposition that our
blessed Savior had showed himself openly, one of these two things must
necessarily have happened; either his enemies, submitting to the evidence of
their senses, would have believed his resurrection, or, resisting that
evidence, they would reject it altogether. We shall begin with taking the
latter into consideration.

ITS very evident, that those enemies of the great Redeemer of mankind, who
resisted the evidence of their senses, or who, though really convinced, would
not acknowledge their conviction, must have justified their disbelief by
affirming that the person who appe^^^d to them, as risen from the dead, was not
JESUS whom the Roman governor had crucified, but an impostor who personated
him. On any other foundation their infidelity would have been ridiculous and
absurd; but, if the unbelieving Jews, by our Lord's appearing personally to
them, would have been laid under a necessity of denying the reality of his
resurrection, even though persuaded of it in their own minds, the evidence of
fact could have gained nothing by such public appearances; because the
generality of the Jews were not capable of passing a judgment upon the
falsehood which CHRIST's enemies must have made use of to support their denial
of his resurrection, being unacquainted with JESUS, they could not certainly
tell whether he was really the person whom the Romans had crucified. His
apostles, disciples, and acquaintance, who, by their long attendance on him,
knew his stature, shape, air, voice, and manner, were the only proper persons
by whose determination the point in dispute could be decided; consequently, if
our Lord had appeared to all the people, if any considerable number of his
enemies had continued in their infidelity, the whole stress of the evidence of
his resurrection must have wrested on the evidence of the very persons who
according to the plan pitched upon by Providence, bear witness to it now, and
upon whose testimony the world has believed it: so that, instead of gaining an
additional evidence by the proposed method, of showing JESUS publicly to all
the people, we should have had nothing to trust to but the testimony of his
disciples, and that clogged with the encumbrance, that his resurrection was
denied by many to whom he appeared, and who were not convinced by the testimony
of their senses.

IN the second place, it may be supposed that in case our blessed Savior had
showed himself publicly, the whole nation of the Jews must have believed, and
that future generations would thus have had the fullest evidence of the truth
of his resurrection, beyond all possibility of a doubt.

HOWEVER, this will not appear to be the case, if we consider, that the
greatest part of our Lord's enemies having not given themselves the trouble of
attending him often, cannot be supposed to have been so well acquainted with
his person as to know him with certainty; for which reason, though he had
showed himself to them, even their belief of his resurrection must, in a great
measure, have depended on the testimony of his disciples and friends: if so, it
is not very probable that his appearing publicly would have had any great
effect on the Jews, to persuade them to embrace a crucified Messiah. It is far
more reasonable to believe, that they would have rejected the whole, and
continued in their infidelity, unless a divine power interposed to remove the
veil from their hearts.

IN order to give the argument all the force the Deists can desire, let us
further suppose, that, in consequence of our blessed Savior's appearing to all
the people of the Jews, the nation in general would have been convinced of the
truth of his resurrection, and become his disciples; what advantage would the
cause of Christianity have reaped from such effects of our Lord's public
appearance? Would the evidence of his resurrection have become thereby the more
unquestionable? or would the modern infidels have been the better disposed to
believe in this crucified JESUS? By no means: for we do not find that men of
this class are at all the more ready to believe the miracles of Moses in Egypt,
at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, because the whole nation were witnesses
of them. The truth is, had our blessed Redeemer persuaded all the people of the
Jews, by appearing personally to them, the objections against his resurrection
would have been ten times more numerous and forcible than they are at present;
for would not the whole have been called a state-trick, a Jewish fable, a mere
political contrivance, to patch up their broken credit, after they had so long
talked of a Messiah, who was to come at that time? Besides, we should certainly
have been told, that the government being engaged in the plot, a fraud of this
kind might have easily been carried on, especially as the people in general
would eagerly fall in with it; because it was so exactly adapted to their
prejudices, and because the few who had sagacity enough to detect the fraud,
could have no opportunity of examining into it; or, if they did examine and
detect the fraud, would not have dared to make any discovery of it, in
opposition to the whole weight of the state: so that they would let it pass
quietly, without once calling it in question.

THE resurrection of our great Redeemer universally believed amongst the Jews,
and published to the world by the unanimous voice of the nation would, to say
the truth, have been liable to an infinite number of objections, which are all
effectually cut off by the method made choice of by the wisdom of Providence;
for as the people in general, and the rulers in particular, continued in their
infidelity, the persons concerned in this supposed fraud, must have carried it
on under the greatest disadvantages. The reason is, that instead of making many
friends to assist them, which a fraud of this kind requires, all men were their
enemies, and interested to discover the cheat. The Jewish rulers, in particular
gave all possible encouragement to make the strictest scrutiny into the fact,
and into all its circumstances; and many doubtless, zealously made the inquiry
with the utmost exactness. The apostles who preached the resurrection, exposed
themselves to the fiercest resentment of the men in power; because the
resurrection of our great Redeemer cast the greatest reflection upon those who
had put him to death. It should also be remembered, that if the generality of
the nation had not continued in their unbelief, the apostles, who preached the
resurrection, would not have suffered these persecutions, which in every
country were raised against them, chiefly by the Jews; and consequently one of
the strongest arguments for the truth of their testimony would have been
wanting: whereas, by their having been persecuted to death for their preaching
the resurrection of their great Master, they fully demonstrated how sincerely
they believed the great fact which they preached, in continual jeopardy of
their lives, notwithstanding the virulent malice and restless persecution of
their enemies.

WE have thus endeavored to answer, in the plainest and most satisfactory
manner, the principal objection made by the Deists against the truth of our
blessed Savior's resurrection; and shall conclude this chapter with a few
reflections on the life of the blessed JESUS; a life the greatest and best that
was ever led by man, or was ever the subject of any history since the universe
was called from its original chaos, by the powerful word of the Almighty* which
spoke it into being.

AS the human character of the blessed JESUS results from the accounts given of
him by the evangelists (for they have not formally drawn it up) so it is
entirely different from that of all other men whatsoever; for whereas they have
selfish passions, deeply rooted in their breasts, and are influenced by them in
almost every thing they do, JESUS was so entirely free from them, that the most
severe scrutiny cannot furnish one single action in the whole course of his
life wherein he consulted his own interest only: no, he was influenced by very
different motives; the present happiness and eternal welfare of sinners
regulated his conduct; and while others followed their respective occupations,
JESUS had no other business than that of promoting the happiness of the sons of
men; nor did he wait till he was solicited to extend his benevolent hand to the
distressed; he went about doing good, and always accounted it more blessed to
give than to receive; resembling God rather than man, in every act of his life.

PERSONS of the most exalted faculties are apt to be elated with success and
applause, or dejected by censure and disappointments: but the blessed JESUS was
never elevated by the one, nor depressed by the other; he was never more
courageous than when he met with the greatest opposition and cruel treatment,
nor more humble than when the sons of men worshipped at his feet. He came into
the world inspired with the grandest purpose that ever was formed, that of
saving from eternal perdition, not a single nation, but the whole world; and in
the execution of it, went through the longest and heaviest train of labors
that ever was sustained, with a constancy and resolution, on which no
disadvantageous impression could be made by any accident whatever: calumny,
threatenings, bad success, with many other evils constantly attending him,
served only to quicken his endeavors in this glorious enterprise, which he
unweariedly pursued, even till he finished it by his death on the cross.

MANKIND are prone to retaliate injuries received, and seem to take a
satisfaction in complaining of the cruelties of those who oppress them;
whereas, the whole of CHRIST's labors breathed nothing but meekness, patience,
and forgiveness, even to his bitterest enemies, and in the midst of the most
excruciating torments. The words Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do, uttered by him when his enemies were nailing him to the cross, fitly
express the temper which he maintained through the whole course of his life,
even when assaulted by the heaviest provocations. The truth is, he never
signified, on any occasion, the least resentment by speech or action, nor
indeed any emotion of mind whatever, except such as flowed from pity and
charity; consequently such only as expressed the deepest concern for the
welfare of mankind, to which his glorious life and sufferings effectually
opened the way.

THE greatest and best men have had their failings, which tarnish the luster of
their virtues, and show them to have been nothing more than men. This was the
case with Noah, Abraham, Moses, Job, David, Paul, and other heroes celebrated
in history; but it was otherwise with JESUS; he was superior to all the men
that ever lived, both with regard to the purity of his manners and the
perfection of his virtues: he was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from
sinners. Whether we consider him as a teacher, or as a man, he did not sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. ii.22. His whole life was
perfectly free from spot or weakness, ^t the same time it was remarkable for
the greatest and most extensive exercises of virtue: but never to have
committed the least sin in word or in deed, never to have uttered any sentiment
that could be censured, upon the various topics of religion and morality, which
were the daily subjects of his discourses, and that through the course of a
life filled with the action, and led under the observation of many enemies, who
had always access to converse with him, and who often came to find fault, is a
pitch of perfection evidently above the reach of human nature, and,
consequently, he who possessed it, must have been divine, and a most perfect
Being.

This adorable Person is the subject of the evangelical history. If the reader,
by reviewing his life, doctrine, and miracles, as they are here represented to
him united in one series, has a clearer idea of these things than before, or
observes a beauty in his actions thus linked together, which taken separately,
do not appear so fully; if he feels himself touched by the character of JESUS
in general, or with any of his sermons and actions in particular, thus simply
delineated in writing, whose principal charms are the beauties of truth; above
all, if his dying so generously for men, strikes him with admiration, or fills
him with joy, in the prospect of that pardon which is hereby purchased for the
world; let him seriously consider with himself, what improvement he ought to
make of the divine goodness, what returns of praise and gratitude due from him.

THE Savior of mankind, by his death, has set open the gates of immortality to
all the posterity of Adam; and by his word, spirit, and example, graciously
offers to make them meet for the glorious rewards in the kingdom of the
heavenly Canaan, and to conduct them into the inheritance of the saints in
light: let us, therefore, remember, that, being born under the dispensation of
his gospel, we have, from our earliest years, enjoyed the best means of
acquiring wisdom, virtue, and happiness, the lineaments of the image of God. We
have been called to aspire after an exaltation to the nature and felicity of
the Almighty exhibited to mortal eyes in the man CHRIST JESUS, to fire us with
the noblest ambition. His gospel teaches us that we are made for eternity; and
that our present life is to our future existence, as infancy is to manhood: but
as in the former, many things are to be learned, many hardships to be endured,
many habits to be acquired, and that by a tedious course of exercises, which in
themselves though painful, and possibly useless to the child, yet are necessary
to fit him for the business and enjoyments of manhood; so while we remain in
this infancy of human life, things are to be learned, hardships to be endured,
and habits to be acquired by a laborious course of discipline, which however
painful, must be under ^^e, because necessary to fit us for the employments and
pleasures of our riper existence in the realms above. Enflamed, therefore, with
the love of immortality and its joys, let us submit ourselves to our heavenly
Teacher, and learn of him those graces which alone can render life pleasant,
death desirable, fill eternity with ecstatic joys, and the tongues and hearts
of the blessed with a song of triumph in honor of their Deliverer.

CHAPTER XLIV.
Observations on the Doctrine of our blessed Lord and Savior: The Excellency
of the Religion he enforced and inculcated: And the Reasonableness of, and
Pleasure resulting from, ^ Christian Life.

WE cannot more properly conclude our history of the life of the blessed JESUS,
the author and finisher of our faith, nor place the great doctrines taught by
the benevolent Son of the Most High, in a more conspicuous light, than by
removing a few prejudices which some, we fear too many, have formed against the
religion of the holy JESUS, and show that his yoke is easy, and his burden is
light.

THERE have not, perhaps, been greater enemies to the progress of religion,
than those who deleniate it in a gloomy and terrifying form; nor any guilty of
a more injurious calumny against the gospel, than those who represent its
precepts as rigorous impositions and unnecessary restraints. True religion is
the perfection of human nature, and the foundation of uniform exalted pleasure,
of public order and private happiness. Christianity is the most excellent and
the most useful institution, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come; it is the voice of reason; it is also the language of
Scripture; the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. Prove. iii.17. And our blessed Savior himself assures us, that his
precepts are easy, and the burden of his religion light and pleasant.

THE religion which CHRIST came into this lower world to establish, is a
rational service, a worship in spirit and truth, a worship worthy of the
majesty of the Almighty to receive, and of the nature of man to pay. One of its
important branches is natural religion* reinforced by additional motives and
new discoveries: its positive rights are few, of plain and easy significancy,
and manifestly adopted to establish a sense of moral obligations. The gospel
places religion not in abstruce speculation and metaphysical subtilties; not in
outward show and tedious ceremony; not in superstitious austerities and
enthusiastic vision, but in purity of heart, and holiness of life. The sum of
our duty, according to our great Master himself, consists in the love of God,
and of our neighbor; according to St. Paul, in denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts; and in living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world:
according to St. James, in visiting the fatherless and widows in affliction,
and in keeping ourselves unspotted from the world. This is the constant strain
and tenor of the gospel; this it inculcates most earnestly, and on this it lays
the greatest stress, as most conducive to true and substantial happiness.

IF it be asked, whether the Christian system is only a republication of the
law of nature, or merely a refined system of morality? We reply, No certainly;
it is a great deal more. It is an act of grace, a stupendous plan of
Providence, designed for the recovery of mankind from a state of degradation
and ruin, to the favor of the Almighty, and to the hopes of a happy
immortality through a Mediator. Under this dispensation, true religion consists
in a repentance toward God, and in faith in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as the
person appointed by the supreme authority of heaven and earth, to reconcile
apostate man to his offended Creator, as a sacrifice for sin; our vital head,
and governing Lord. This is the religion of Christians; and what hardship, what
exaction is there in all this? Surely none: nay, the practice of religion is
much easier than the servitude of sin, which at best is the vilest drudgery,
and yields the worst kind of wages.

ALL will readily agree, that our rational powers are impaired, and the soul
weakened by sin; the animal passions are strong and apt to oppose the dictates
of reason; objects of sense, make powerful impressions on the mind; we are in
every situation, surrounded with many snares and temptations: in such a
disordered state of things, to maintain a course of strict piety and
uncorrupted virtue, is a work of great difficulty. There are, however, many
tender propensions and generous instincts interwoven with our very being, as
restraints from vice, and incitements to virtue. The gracious Author of nature
has planted in the human breast, a quick sense of good and evil; a faculty
which strongly dictates right and wrong; and, though, by the strength of
appetite and warmth of passion, men are often hurried into immoral practices;
yet in the beginning, especially when there has been the advantage of a good
education, it is usually with reluctance and opposition of mind. What inward
struggles precede, what bitter pangs attend their sinful excesses! What guilty
blushes and uneasy fears! What frightful prospects and pale reviews! 'Terrors
are upon them, and a fire not blown consumes them.' To make a mock at sin, and
to commit iniquity without remorse, is an attainment that requires length of
time, and much painful labor; more labor than is requisite to attain that
habitual goodness which is the glory of the man, the ornament of the Christian,
his preparation for heaven, and the chief source of his happiness there. The
soul can no more be reconciled to flagrant acts of wickedness and injustice,
than the body to excess, without suffering many bitter pains and cruel attacks,
attacks attended with much anguish and vexation of spirit.

CONSCIENCE may indeed be stopped and put to silence for a while by false
principles, its secret whispers may be drowned by the noise of company, and
stifled by entertainments of sense; but this principle of conscience is so
deeply rooted in human nature, and a^ the same time, her voice is so clear and
strong, that all the sinner's arts will be unable to lull her into a lasting
security. When the hour of calamity arrives, when sickness seizes, and death
approaches the sinner, conscience constrains him to listen to her accusations,
and will not suffer the temples of his head to take any rest: There is no peace
for the wicked; the foundations of peace are subverted, they are at utter
enmity with their reason, with their conscience, and with the God of their
mercies.

THE case is far otherwise with true religion: conscience is on her side:
reason pleads for her, and interest joins in the recommendation. When religion
pure and genuine forms the temper, and governs the life, conscience applauds,
and peace takes her residence in the breast: the soul is in its proper state,
there is order and regularity both in the faculties and actions. Conscious of
its own integrity, and secure of the divine approbation, the soul enjoys a
calmness not to be described: but why do I call this happy frame calmness only?
It is far more than mere calmness: the air may be calm, and the day overcast
with thick mists and dark clouds: the pious and virtuous mind resembles a
serene day, enlighted and enlivened with the brightest rays of the sun; though
all without may be clouds and darkness* there is light in the heart of a pious
man; he is satisfied from himself, and is filled with peace and joy in
believing: in the concluding scene, the awful moment of dissolution, all is
peaceful and serene. The immortal part quit^ its tenement of clay with the
well-grounded hopes of ascending to happiness and glory, without mixture, and
without end.

THE gospel enjoins no duty but what is fit and reasonable: it calls upon all
its professors to practice reverence, submission and gratitude to God; justice,
truth, and universal benevolence to men; and to maintain the government of our
own minds: and what has any one to subject against this? From the least to the
greatest commandment of our dear Redeemer, there is not one which impartial
reason can find fault with; his law is perfect; his precepts are true, and
righteous altogether. Not even those excepted, which require us to love our
enemies, to deny ourselves, and to take up our cross. To forgive an injury is
more generous and manly than to revenge it; to control a licentious appetite
than to indulge it: to suffer poverty, reproach, and even death itself, in the
sacred cause of truth and integrity, is much wiser and better, than, by base
compliances, to make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. Thus in a storm
at sea, or a conflagration on the land, a man with pleasure abandons his lumber
to secure his jewels: piety and virtue are the wisest and most reasonable
things in the world, vice and wickedness the most irrational, absurd, and
pernicious.

THE infinitely wise Author of our being has so framed our natures, and placed
us in such relations, that there is nothing vicious but what is injurious;
nothing virtuous but what is advantageous to our present interest, both with
respect to body and mind. Meekness and humility, patience and universal
charity, are graces which give a joy unknown to transgressors. The divine
virtues of truth and equity are the only bands of friendship, the only supports
of society. Temperance and sobriety are the best preservatives of health and
strength; but sin and debauchery impair the body, consume the substance, reduce
to poverty, and form the direct path to an immature and untimely death. Now
this is the chief excellency of all laws; and what will always render their
burden pleasant and delightful is, that they enjoin nothing unbecoming or
injurious; but, on the contrary, what is profitable, and of a salutary nature.

BESIDES, to render our duty easy, we have the example as well as the commands
of the blessed JESUS. The masters of morality amongst the Heathens gave
excellent rules for regulation of men's manners; but they wanted either the
honesty or the courage to try their own arguments upon themselves. It was a
strong presumption that the yoke of the scribes and Pharisees was grievous,
when they laid heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, which they themselves
refused to touch with one of their fingers. Not thus our great lawgiver, JESUS
CHRIST the righteous; his behavior was, in all respects, conformable to his
doctrine; his devotion toward God, how sublime and ardent! benevolence toward
men, how great and diffusive? He was in his life an exact pattern of innocence:
for he did not sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. In the Son of God
incarnate is exhibited the brightest, the fairest resemblance of the Father,
that earth or heaven ever beheld: an example peculiarly persuasive, calculated
to inspire resolution, and to animate us to use our utmost endeavors to
imitate the divine pattern, the example of the author and finisher of our
faith, of him who loved us, and gave himself for us. Our profession and
character as Christians oblige us to make this example the model of our lives.
Every motive of decency, gratitude and interest, constrains us to tread the
paths he trod before us, more especially when we reflect that it was marked out
to us by Unerring Wisdom.

LET us also remember, that our burden is easy; because God, who knows
whereof we are made, who considers that we are but dust, is ever ready to
assist us. The heathen sages themselves had had some notions of this
assistance, though guided only by a glimmering lamp of reason; but what they
looked upon as probable, the gospel clearly and strongly asserts. We there hear
the apostle exhorting, Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Heb. iv.16. We there
hear the blessed JESUS himself arguing in this convincing manner, If ye, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke ix.13.

WE would not here be understood to mean, that the agency of the spirit is
irresistible, and lays a necessitating biass on all the faculties and
affections. Were this the case, precepts and prohibitions, promises and
threatenings, would signify nothing; and duty and obligation would be words
without a meaning. The spirit assisteth in a manner agreeable to the frame of
human nature; not controlling the free use of reason, but by assisting the
understanding, influencing the will, and moderating the affections; but though
we may not be able to explain the mode of his operations, the Scriptures
warrant us to assert, that, when men are renewed and prepared for heaven, it is
through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. How enlivening
the thought! how encouraging the motive! We are not left to struggle alone with
the difficulties which attend the practice of virtue in the present imperfect
state. The merciful Father of our spirits is ever near to help our infirmities,
to enlighten the understanding, to strengthen good resolutions, and, in
concurrence with our own endeavors, to make us conquerors over all opposition.
Faithful is he to his promises and will not suffer the sincere and well
disposed to be tempted above what they are able to bear. What can be desired
more than this? To promote the virtue and happiness of his moral offspring, the
Supreme Parent has done all that is consistent with the holiness of his
nature, and the free agency of man: if then we are not virtuous and happy, it
is our own faults, and we are utterly inexcusable, in refusing the grace and
mercy proffered in the gospel.

LET us also remember, that the great doctrine of the gospel concerning the
propitious mercy of God to all the penitents through CHRIST JESUS, greatly
contributes to the ease and pleasure of a religious life. Let it be granted,
that the hope of pardon is essential to the religion of fallen creatures, and
one of its first principles; yet, considering the doubts and suspicions which
are apt to arise in a mind conscious of guilt, it is undoubtedly a great and
inestimable favor, to be relieved in this respect by a messenger from
Omnipotence himself. This is our happiness: we are not left to depend upon
consequential reasonings, which the bulk of manking are little used to; but we
are assured, that upon our true repentance, we shall, through the mediation of
CHRIST, receive the full remission of past sins, and be restored to the same
s^ate and favor with our Maker, as if we had never transgressed his laws; here
the gospel triumphs: with these assurances it abounds; upon this head the
declarations of our blessed Savior and his apostles are so express and full
that every one who believes them, and knows himself to be a true penitent, must
banish every doubt and fear, and rejoice with joy unspeakable: Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. xi.28.
All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, ch, xii.31. Be it
known unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you
the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, Acts xiii.38,
39. The blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin, John i.7. What grace and favor
is this! Who can dwell upon the transporting theme too long! Now our way is
plain before us, and the burden we are to bear is made easy. No sins are
unpardonable, if repented of and forsaken; for it is said such shall find mercy.

YOU who have never yet regarded religion, but pursued a course of vice and
sensuality all your lives long, are earnestly entreated to consider, that,
though your conduct has been base to the last degree, your case is not
desperate, far from it: the God whom you have so highly offended commiserates
your errors, is ever ready to extend his pardoning mercy to his most degenerate
creatures upon their repentance and reformation, and, (...) in Christ Jesus
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing unto penitent sinners their
trespasses, 2 Cor. v.19. Let the wicked therefore forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man (...) thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, who will so
liberally extend his mercy to him; and to our God, who will thus abundantly
pardon, Isaiah lv.7.

WHAT still further conduces to render the Chistian religion easy and
delightful is its leading us to the perfect, eternal life of heaven. It cannot
be denied but that we (...) draw from the light of nature strong presumptions
of a future state; the present existence does not look like an entire scene,
but rather like the infancy of human nature, which i^ capable of arriving at a
much higher degree of maturity: but whatever solid foundation the doctrine of a
future state may have in nature and reason, certain it is, that through the
habitual neglect of reflection, and the force of irregular passions, this
doctrine w^^, before the coming of our blessed Savior, very much disfigured,
and, in a great measure lost amongst the sons of men, some of whom affirmed,
that there was neither resurrection, angel, or spirit.

A future state of rewards and punishments was a matter of mere speculation and
uncertainty in the heathen world; it was sometimes hoped for, sometimes doubted
of, and sometimes absolutely denied. The law of Moses, though of divine
original, is chiefly enforced by promises of temporal blessings; and, even in
the writings of the prophets, a future immortality is very sparingly mentioned,
and obscurely represented: but the doctrine of our Savior has brought life
and immortality to light. In the gospel we have a distinct account of another
world, attended with many engaging circumstances, about which the decisions of
reason were dark and confused. We have the testimony of the Author of our
religion, who was raised from the dead, and who afterward, in the presence of
his disciples, ascended into heaven. In the New Testament it is expressly
declared, that good men, when absent from the body, are present with the Lord.
Here we are assured of the resurrection of the body in a glorious form, clothed
with immortal vigor, suited to the active nature of the animating spirit, and
assisting its most enlarged operations and incessant progress toward
perfection. Here we are assured, that the righteous shall go into life
everlasting; that they shall enter into the kingdom of the heavenly Canaan,
where no ignorance shall cloud the understanding, no vice disturb the will. In
these regions of perfection, nothing but love shall possess the soul; nothing
but gratitude employ the tongue: there the righteous shall be united to an
innumerable company of angels, and to the general assembly and church of the
first born: there they shall see their exalted Redeemer at the right hand of
Omnipotence, and sit down with him on his throne; t^^re they shall be admitted
into the immediate presence of the Supreme Fountain of life and happiness, and,
beholding his face, be changed into the same image from glory to glory. -- Here
language -- here imagination fails me! It requires the genius, the knowledge,
and the pen of an angel, to paint the happiness, the blissful scene of the new
Jerusalem, which human eyes cannot behold till this mortal body shall be
purified from its corruption and dressed in the robes of immortality; Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart to conceive the
joys which God has prepared for them that love him. -- What is the Elysium of
the Heathens, compared with the heaven of the Christians? The hope, the
prospect of this is sufficient to reconcile us to all the difficulties that may
attend our progress, sweeten all our labors, alleviate every grief, and
silence every murmur, by impressing on our minds a meek acquiescence with the
divine dispensations in the course of his providence.

BUT the libertine, in the gaiety of his heart, may possibly enquire, why there
should be any difficulties, or restraint at all? God has made nothing in vain.
The appe^^^^ he has planted in the human breast are to be gratified: to deny,
or to restrain them, is ignominious bondage; but to give full scope to every
desire and passion of the heart, without check or control, is true manly
freedom, and only pursuing the dictates of nature.

IN order to confute and expose this loose and careless way of reasoning, let
it be considered, that the liberty of a rational creature does not consist in
an entire exemption from all control, but in following the dictates of reason
as the governing principle, and in keeping the various passions in due
subordination. To follow the regular motion of those affections which the wise
Creator has implanted within us, is our duty: but as our natural desires in
this state of trial are often irregular, we are bound to restrain their
excesses, and not to indulge them, but in a strict subserviency to the
integrity and peace of our minds, and to the order and happiness of human
society established in the world. They who allow the supreme command to be
usurped by sense and brutal appetite, may promise themselves liberty, but are
truly and absolutely the servants of corruption: to be vicious is to be
enslaved. We behold with pity those miserable objects that are chained in the
galleys, or confined in dark prisons and loathsome dungeons; but much more
abject and vile is the slavery of the sinner! No slavery of the body is equal
to the bondage of the mind: no chains press so closely or gall so cruelly as
the ^etters of sin, which corrode the very substance of the soul, fret every
faculty, and degrade men below the brute part of the creation.

WE must indeed confess, that there are some profligates so hardened by custom,
as to be past all feeling; and, because insensible of their bondage, boast of
this insensibility as a mark of their native freedom, and their happiness. Vain
men! they might extol, with equal propriety, the peculiar happiness of an
apoplexy, the profound tranquillity of a lethergy, or, we may add, the ideal
paradise of a fool or a madman.

WE have, in the foregoing observations, endeavored to place in a plain and
conspicuous light, some of the peculiar excellencies of the Christian religion;
and from hence many useful reflections will naturally arise in the mind of
every attentive reader. It is the religion of JESUS that has removed idolatry
and superstition, and brought immortality to light, when concealed under a veil
of darkness almost impenetrable. This has set the great truths of religion in
a clear and conspicuous point of view, and proposed new and powerful motives to
influence our minds, and to determine our conduct. Nothing is enjoined to be
believed, but what is worthy of God; nothing to be practiced but what is
friendly to man. All the doctrines of the gospel are rational and consistent;
all its precepts are truly wise, just, and good. The gospel contains nothing
grievous to an ingenious mind; it debars us from nothing but doing harm to
ourselves or to our fellow creatures; and permits us to range any where but in
the paths of danger and destruction. It only requires us to act up to the
dignity of the rational nature, and to prefer to the vanishing pleasures of
sin, the smiles of a reconciled God, and an eternal weight of glory: and is
this a rigorous exaction, a heavy burden not be endured? How can sinful mortals
harbor a thought so ridiculous and unworthy?

CAN any man who is a real friend to the cause of virtue, and to the interest
of mankind, ever be an enemy to Christianity if he truly understands it, and
seriously reflects on its wise and useful tendency? Impossible, for it
conducteth us to our journey's end by the plainest and securest path, where the
steps are not straightened, and where he that runs stumbleth not. Let us who
live under this last, and most gracious dispensation of God to mankind, count
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our
Lord: and not suffer ourselves, by the slight cavils of unbelievers, to be
moved away from the hope of the gospel. Let us demonstrate, that we believe the
superior excellency of the Christian dispensation, by conforming to its
precepts. Let us show that we are Christians in deed and in truth; not by
endless disputes about trifles, and the transports of a blind zeal, but by
practicing that universal, that exalted goodness, our holy religion recommends,
and by abounding in those fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ,
unto the glory and praise of God. Phil. i.11.

WE may clearly perceive, from what has been said, how groundless all those
prejudices are which some conceive against religion, as if it was a peevish,
morose scheme, burdensome to human nature, and inconsistent with the true
enjoyment of life. Such sentiments are too apt to prevail in the heat of youth,
when the spirits are brisk and lively, and the passions warm and impetuous: but
it is wholly a mistake, and a mistake of the most dangerous tendency. The truth
is, there is no pleasure like that of a good conscience, no real peace but what
results from the practice of virtue; this ennobles the mind, and can alone
support it under all the various and unequal scenes of the present state of
trial; this lays a sure foundation of an easy, comfortable life, of a serene,
peaceful death, and of eternal joy and happiness hereafter: whereas vice is
ruinous to all our most valuable interests; it spoils the native beauty, and
subverts the order of the soul; it renders us the scorn of man, the rejected of
God, and, without timely repentance, will rob us of a happy eternity. Religion
is the health, the liberty, and the happiness of the soul; sin is the disease,
the servitude, and destruction of it, both here and for ever.

IF these arguments be not sufficient to convince you, let me lead you into the
chamber of an habitual rioter, the lewd debauchee, worn out in the cause of
iniquity, his bones full of the sins of his youth, that from his own mouth, as
he lies on his expiring bed, you may learn that the way of transgression is
hard; and that however sweet sin may be in the commission, it biteth like a
serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Prove. xxiii.32. This awful truth is
exemplified in a very strong point of view, by the late celebrated Dr. Young,
in his Centaur not Fabulous, page 149 -- 161, where he draw a most awful
picture of the last scene of an abandoned profligate, who had despised
religion, and led a life of pleasure and dissipation. The relation is as
follows:

"I am going, Reader to represent to thee the last moments of a person of high
birth and spirit, of great parts and strong passions, every way accomplished,
not the least in iniquity: his unkind treatment was the death of a most
valuable wife, and his monstrous extravigance, in effect, disinherited his only
child. And surely the deathbed of a profligate is next in horror, to that
abyss to which it leads: it has the most of hell that is visible upon earth,
and he that has seen it has more than faith to confirm him in his creed. I see
it now, says the worthy divine from whom I shall borrow this relation, for who
can forget it? Are there in it no flames and furies? -- You are ignorant then,
of what a sacred imagination can figure, what a guilty heart can feel! How
dismal is it! The two great enemies of soul and body, sickness and sin, sink
and confound his friends; silence and darkness the shocking scene: sickness
excludes the light of heaven, and sin its blessed hope. Oh, double darkness!
more than Egyptian! acutely to be felt!

"THE sad evening before the death of that noble youth, whose last hours
suggested these thoughts, I was with him. No one was there but his physician,
and an intimate acquaintance whom he loved and whom he had ruined. At my coming
he said, "You and the physician are come too late. -- I have neither life nor
hope. You both aim at miracles. You would raise the dead."

"HEAVEN, I said was merciful. -- Or I could not have been thus guilty. What
has it not done to bless, and to save me? -- I have been too strong for
Omnipotence: I plucked down ruin."

"I said, the blessed Redeemer" -- "Hold! Hold! you wound me! That is the rock
on which I have split! I denied his name."

"REFUSING to hear any thing from me, or take any thing from the physician, he
lay silent, as far as sudden darts of pain would permit, till the clock struck;
then he cried out with vehemence, "Oh time! time! It is fit thou should thus
strike thy murderer to the heart. -- How art thou fled forever? -- A month? --
Oh for a single week! I ask not for years, though an age were too little for
the much I have to do."

"ON my saying we would not do too much; that heaven was a blessed place. --
"So much the worse, It Is lost! It Is lost! Heaven is to me the severest part of
hell!"

"SOON after I proposed prayer. -- "Pray you that can: I never prayed: I cannot
pray. -- Nor need I. Heaven is on my side already: it closes with my conscience
its severest strokes but second my own."

"HIS friend being much touched, even to tears at this (for who could forbear?
I could not) he, with a most affectionate look, said, "Keep these tears for
thys^lf. I have undone thee. -- Do thou weep for me? That Is cruel. What can
pain me more?"

"Here his friend too much affected, would have left him.

"No, stay. Thou still may hope; -- therefore hear me. How madly have I
talked? How madly have thou listened and believed? But look on my present state
as a full answer to thee and to myself. This body is all weakness and pain; but
my soul, as if stung up by torment, to greater strength and spirit, is full
powerful to reason; full mighty to suffer. And that which thus triumphs within
the jaws of mortality, is doubtless immortal. And as for a Deity, nothing less
than an Almighty could inflict the pains I feel."

"I was about to congratulate this passive, involuntary confession, in his
asserting the two prime articles of his creed, extorted by the rack of nature:
when he thus very passionately added, "No, no! let me speak on. -- I have not
long to speak. -- My much injured friend! my soul as my body, lies, in ruins,
in scattered fragments of broken thought: remorse for the past throws my
thoughts on the future: worse dread of the future strikes it back on the past.
I turn, and turn, and find no ray. -- Did thou feel half the mountain that is
on me, thou would struggle with the martyr for his stake, and bless heaven
for the flames; -- that is not an everlasting flame; that is not an
unquenchable fire."

"How were we struck? Yet, soon after still more. With what an eye of
distraction what a face of despair he cried out, "My principles have poisoned
my friend; my extravagance has beggared my boy; my unkindness has murdered my
wife! And is there another hell? Oh! thou blasphemed, yet most indulgent Lord
God! Hell itself is a refuge if it hides me from thy frown. -- "

"SOON after, his understanding failed; his terrified imagination uttered
horrors not to be repeated, or ever forgotten; and before the sun (which I hope
has seen few like him) arose, this gay, young, noble, ingenuous, accomplished,
and most wretched mortal, expired."

IT sometimes happens, we confess, that men who have led very wicked lives have
gone out of the world, as they lived in it defying conscience, and deriding a
future judgment as an idle fiction: but these instances are very rare, and only
prove that there are monsters in the moral as well as in the natural world, who
have sported with their own deceivings, and have even dared to lift their puny
and rebellious arm against Omnipotence.

BUT it will perhaps be said, that the sons of vice and riot have pleasure in
sensual indulgences. Allowed: but it is altogether of the lower kind, empty,
fleeting, and transient; like the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the
mirth of the wicked. It makes a noise and a blaze for the present but soon
vanishes away into smoke and vapor. On the other hand, the pleasure of
religion is solid and lasting, and will attend us through all, even the last
stages of life. When we have passed the levity of youth, and have lost our
relish for the gay entertainments of sense; when old age steals upon us, and
bends us toward the grave, this will cleave fast to us, and give us relief. It
will be so far from terminating at death, that it then commences perfect, and
continually improves with new additions, and ever-blooming joys.

IF our souls are clad in this immortal robe, we need not fear the awful
summons of the king of terrors, nor regret our retiring into the chambers of
the dust. Our immortal part will wing its way to the arms of its Omnipotent
Redeemer, and find rest in the heavenly mansions of the Almighty. And though
our earthly part, this tabernacle of clay, return to its original dust, it is
only to be raised in a more beautiful and heavenly form. If it retires into the
shadow of death, and visits the gloomy habitations of the grave, it is only to
return from a short confinement to endless liberty: for our great Master will
lead his redeemed from the chambers of the grave, and guide them in his
strength to his holy habitation: he will plant them in the mountain of his
inheritance, in the place he has prepared for them, even the sanctuary which
his hands has established; and we shall be with the Lord for ever and ever, to
serve him day and night in his temple, where the inhabitant shall never say, I
am sick; where the wicked shall cease from troubling, and where the weary soul,
will be for ever at rest.

WE shall here subjoin a copy of a letter, sent by Publius Lentulus, governor
of Judea, to the senate of Rome, respecting the person and action of our
blessed Lord and Savior, JESUS CHRIST; which may serve as a strong testimony
and evidence in favor of the divinity of our Lord's person and doctrines
against the stale objections of the Deists, as the authenticity of the ancient
manuscripts, from which it was translated, is founded on the best authority.
Tiberius Caesar was then emperor, and caused the extraordinary intelligence,
contained in this letter, to be published throughout all the Roman provinces.
One would have thought this confirmation, issued by the Roman governor, might
have convinced the generality of the Romans, as well as Jews, concerning the
divinity of our Lord's mission; but such was the universal prejudice of the
people, that nothing would satisfy those who had not given credit to the words
of CHRIST himself. The epistle runs as follows:

"THERE appeared in these our days a man of great virtue, named JESUS CHRIST,
who is yet living amongst us, and of the Gentiles is accepted as a Prophet of
Truth, but by his own disciples called the SON of GOD. He raises the dead and
cures all manner of diseases. A man of stature somewhat tall and comely, with
a very reverend countenance, such as the beholders may both love and fear: his
hair is of the color of a filbert full ripe, and plain almost down to his
ears, but from his ears downward somewhat curled, more orient of color, and
waving about his shoulders. In the midst of his head goes a s^am or partition
of his hair, after the manner of the Nazarites; his forehead very plain and
smooth; his face without spot or wrinkle, beautified with comely red; his nose
and mouth so formed as nothing can be reprehended; his beard somewhat thick,
agreeable in color to the hair of his head, not of any great length, but
forked in the midst; of an innocent, mature look; his eyes gray, clear, and
quick. In reproving he is terrible; in admonishing courteous and fair spoken;
pleasant in speech, mixed with gravity. It cannot be remembered that any have
seen him laugh, but many have seen him weep. In proportion of body well-shaped
and straight; his hands and arms right delectable to behold; in speaking very
temperate, modest, and wise. A man for singular beauty, surpassing the children
of men."

ST. MATTHEW.

ST. MARK.

ST. LUKE.

ST. JOHN.

The EVANGELISTS of our Savior JESUS CHRIST.



THE NEW, COMPLETE, AND AUTHENTIC LIVES OF THE APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS,
DISCIPLES, etc. Of our BLESSED LORD AND SAVIOR, JESUS CHRIST.
THE LIFE OF ST. MATTHEW, The EVANGELIST and APOSTLE.
THIS evangelist was also called Levi, and, though a Roman officer, was a true
Hebrew, and probably a Galilean. Kirsten, an Arabian author, tells us, that he
was born at Nazareth, a city in the tribe of Zebulon, famous for the habitation
of Joseph and Mary, and the place where our blessed Savior resided the whole
time of his private life. St. Matthew was the son of Alpheus and Mary, sister,
or kinswoman, to the blessed Virgin, both originally descended from the tribe
of Issachar.

THE occupation of Matthew was that of a publican, or tax-gatherer to the
Romans, an office detested by the generality of the Jews. Amongst the Romans,
indeed, it was accounted a place of power and credit, and, as such, rarely
conferred on any but Roman knights: and T. Fl. Sabimus, father of the emperor
Vespasian, was the publican of the Asian provinces, an office which he
discharged so greatly to the satisfaction of the public, that they erected
statues to him. These officers being sent into the provinces to gather the
tributes, generally employed the natives under them, as persons best skilled in
the affairs and customs of their own country.

ON two accounts, this office was odious to the Jews. First, because the
persons who managed it were generally covetous and great exactors; for having
themselves farmed the customs of the Romans, they used every method of
oppression, in order to pay their rents to the Romans and procure an advantage
to themselves. Of this Zaccheus, the chief of these farmers, was very sensible
after his conversion, when he offered to make a fourfold restitution to all
from whom he had taken any thing by fraud and extortion. And upon this account
they became infamous, even amongst the Gentiles themselves, who commonly
mention them as public robbers, and, though members of the community, were more
voracious and destructive in a city, than wild beasts in a forest. The other
particular which rendered them so hateful to the Jews, was the tribute they
demanded, which they considered not only as a burden, but also as an affront to
their nation; for they looked upon themselves as a free people, having received
that privilege immediately from God himself; and therefore they considered this
tribute as a daily and standing instance of their slavery, which they detested
above every thing; and it was this that betrayed them into so many rebellions
against the Romans. We may add, that these publicans were obliged by their
office to have frequent dealings and conversation with the Gentiles, which the
Jews considered as an abomination; and though they were themselves Jews, they
rigorously exacted the taxes of their brethren, and thereby seemed to conspire
with the Romans to entail perpetual slavery on their own countrymen.

THE Publicans, by these practices, became universally abhorred by the Jewish
nation, so that it was reckoned unlawful to assist them in the common offices
of humanity: nay, they asserted it was no crime to cheat and overreach a
publican, though they broke the solemnity of an oath: they might not eat or
drink, converse or travel with them; they were considered as common thieves and
robbers, and the money received of them was not permitted to be deposited with
others, considering it as gained by rapine and violence; they were not admitted
to give testimony in any court of justice; they were looked upon in so infamous
a light, that they were not only banished from all communication in matters of
divine worship, but shunned in all affairs of civil society and commerce, as
the pests of their country, as persons whose conversation was infectious, and
not at all better than the Heathens themselves. And hence they had a common
proverb amongst them, 'Take not a wife out of that family in which there is a
publican; for they are all publicans!' that is, they are all thieves, robbers,
and wicked sinners. And to this proverbial custom our blessed Savior alludes,
when speaking of a hardened sinner, on whom neither private reproofs, nor the
public censures and admonitions of the church, can prevail, Let him be to thee
as an Heathen man and publican; or, in other words, an incorrigible sinner.

ST. MATTHEW the evangelist was of this profession, and he seems to have been
more particularly employed in collecting the customs on commodities that came
by sea into Galilee, and the tribute which passengers were to pay who went by
water: and for this purpose the office or custom-house stood by the sea side,
that the officers might be always at hand: and here it was, as St. Mark
intimates, that Matthew sat at the receipt of custom, where the tribute-money
was collected.

AFTER having cured a person long afflicted with the palsy, our blessed Lord
retired out of Capernaum, to walk by the seaside, where he taught the people
that flocked after him. Here he saw Matthew sitting in his office, and called
him to follow him. The man was rich, had a large and profitable employment, was
a wise and prudent person, and doubtless understood what it would cost him to
comply with the call of JESUS: he was not ignorant that he must exchange wealth
for poverty, a custom-house for a prison, rich and powerful masters, for a
naked and despised Savior: but he overlooked all these considerations, left
all his interest and relations, to become our Lord's disciple, and to embrace a
more spiritual way of commerce and traffic, which might bring glory to God, and
peace of conscience to himself.

IT is not likely that he was before wholly unacquainted with our Savior's
person or doctrine, especially as he resided at Capernaum, where our Lord so
often preached, and wrought his miracles; so that he must in some measure, be
prepared to receive the impressions which our Savior's call made upon him, and
to show that he was not discontented at his change, he entertained both his
Master and his disciples at his house, calling together, his friends,
especially those of his own profession, hoping no doubt that they might also be
converted by the company and conversation of our blessed Redeemer.

AS the Pharisees had sought all opportunities of raising objections against
the doctrine of the blessed JESUS, so they took this opportunity of suggesting
to his disciples, that it was highly unbecoming so pure and holy a person, as
their Master pretended himself to be, to converse so familiarly with the worst
of men, with publicans and sinners, persons infamous to a proverb; but he
presently replied to them, that these were the sick, and therefore needed the
physician: that his company was of most consequence, where the souls of men
most required it: that God himself preferred works of mercy and charity,
especially in doing good to the souls of men, infinitely above all ritual
observances, and that the principal design of his coming into the world, was
not to call the righteous, or those who like themselves vainly pretended to be
so, but sinners, modest, humble, self-convinced sinners, to repentance, and to
reduce them to a better state and course of life than they had hitherto pursued.

ST. MATTHEW after his election to the apostleship, continued with the rest
till the ascension of his great and beloved Master, after which, for the first
eight years at least he preached in different parts of Judea, but afterward he
left the country of Palestine to convert the Gentile world before his
departure, he was entreated by the Jewish converts to write the history of the
life and actions of the blessed JESUS, and leave it amongst them as a standing
monument of what he had so often delivered to them in his sermons. This he
readily complied with, as we shall more particularly mention, in giving an
account of the gospel penned by him.

LEAVING Judea, he traveled into several parts, especially Ethiopia; but the
particular places he visited are not known with any certainty. Metaphrastus
tells us, that he first visited Parthia, and after planting Christianity in
those parts, he traveled into Ethiopia; where, by his preaching and miracles,
he triumphed over superstition and idolatry, convinced multitudes of the error
of their ways, and prevailed on them to obey the precepts of the gospel:
ordained them spiritual guides and pastors to confirm them in the faith, and
bringing over others to the religion of the son of God, which he had inculcated
both by his doctrine and example.

HAVING labored indefatigably in the vineyard of his Master, he afterward
suffered martyrdom at a city of Ethiopia, called Naddabar; but by what kind of
death, is not absolutely known, though the general opinion is that he was slain
with an halbert.

THIS apostle was a remarkable instance of the power of religion, in bringing
men to a better temper of mind. If we reflect upon his circumstances while he
continued a stranger to the great Redeemer of mankind, we shall find that the
love of the world had possessed his heart. He had acquired a plentiful estate,
was in possession of a very rich and profitable office, supported by the power
and favor of the Romans, prompted by covetous inclinations, and these
confirmed by long habits and customs: but notwithstanding all this, no sooner
did CHRIST call him, than he abandoned, without the least scruple or
hesitation, all his riches; nay, he not only renounced his lucrative office,
but ran the greatest hazard of displeasing the masters who employed him, for
quitting their service, without giving them the least notice and leaving his
accounts in confusion.

HAD our blessed Savior appeared as a secular prince clothed with temporal
power and authority, it would have been no wonder for St. Matthew to have gone
over to his service: but when he appeared under all the circumstances of
meanness and disgrace, when he seems to promise his followers nothing but
misery and sufferings in this life, and to propose no other rewards than the
invisible encouragements of another world, his change appears truly wonderful
and surprising. It was indeed so remarkable, that both Porphyry and Julian two
subtle adversaries of the Christian religion, took occasion from hence to
charge him either with falsehood or folly: with the former, if he did not give
a true account of things; and with the latter, if his case was fairly
represented, in so hastily following the person who called him: but these
detractors would have done well to have remembered, that the holy JESUS was no
common person; his commands were attended with something more than common.

ST. JEROME is of opinion, that besides the divinty which evidently appeared in
the miracles of the Lamb of God, there was a divine brightness and kind of
majesty in his looks, which was at first sight sufficient to draw persons after
him; but however that b^ his miraculous powers that reflected a luster from
every quarter, and the efficacy of his doctrine accompanied with the divine
grace made way for the summons sent to our apostle, and enabled him to conquer
all oppositions, and all the difficulties that opposed his obeying the commands
of his Savior, when he received the powerful call.

A still further evidence of this contempt of the world appeared in his
exemplary temperance and abstemiousness from all delights and pleasures; nay,
even from the ordinary convenience and accommodations of it: he was so far from
indulging his appetite with delicate rarities, that he refused to gratify it
with lawful and ordinary provisions; his usual diet being only herbs, roots,
seeds, and berries: but what appeared most remarkable in him, and which, though
the least virtue in itself, is the greatest in the esteem and value of a wise
man, was his humility: he was mean and modest in his own opinion, always
preferring others to himself: for whereas the other evangelists, in describing
the apostles by pairs, constantly place him before St. Thomas, he modestly
places him before himself.

THE rest of the evangelists are careful to mention the honor of his
apostleship, but speak of his former sordid, dishonest, and disgraceful course
of life, only under the name of Levi; while he himself sets it down, with all
its circumstances, under his own proper and common name; a conduct which at
once commends the prudence and candor of the apostle, and suggests to us this
useful reflection. That the greatest sinners are not excluded from divine
grace; nor can any, if penitent, have just reason to despair, when publicans
and sinners find mercy at the throne of grace. The conduct of the other
evangelists with regard to St. Matthew, should also teach us to use a penitent
brother with the greatest modesty and tenderness; it being contrary to the
rules of civility, as well as the laws of religion, to upbraid and reproach a
person, after his repentance, with the errors of his former life and practices.

WE shall conclude the life of this apostle with a remark concerning his
gospel, which was written at the entreaty of the Jewish converts, while he
abode in Palestine, but at what particular time, is uncertain; some will have
it to be written eight, some fifteen, and some thirty years after our Lord's
ascension: it was originally written in Hebrew, but soon after translated into
Greek by one of the disciples, probably by St. James the Less: but whoever the
translator was, it of no consequence, because the version was well known to the
apostles, and approved by them; and accordingly the church has from the
earliest ages received the Greek copy as authentic, and placed it in the sacred
canon of Scripture.

THE Greek translation having been entertained, the Hebrew copy was afterward
chiefly owned and used by the Nazaraei, a middle sect between Jews and
Christians; with the former, they adhered to the rites and ceremonies of the
Mosaic law; and with the latter, they believed in CHRIST, and embraced his
religion; and hence this gospel has been styled, 'The gospel according to the
Hebrews, and the gospel of the Nazarenes.' But after a time, it was
interpolated by these Christians, who inserted several passages of the
evangelical history; which they had heard from the apostles, or from those who
had familiarly conversed with them; and to these additions the ancient fathers
frequently refer in their writings. The Ebonites, on the contrary, struck out
many passages because they were not favorable to their tenets. A Hebrew copy
of St. Matthew's gospel (but whether exactly the same as that written by the
apostle, is uncertain) was found amongst the other books in the treasury of the
Jews at Tiberias, by one Joseph, a Jew, who, after his conversion, was a man of
great honor and esteem in the reign of Constantine. St. Jerome assures us that
another was kept in the library at Caesarea in his time, and another by the
Nazarenes at Berea, from whom he procured the liberty to transcribe it, and
which he afterward translated both into Greek and Latin, with this remarkable
observation, that in quoting the text of the Old Testament, the evangelist
immediately follows the Hebrew, without taking notice of the Septuagint
translation. A copy of this gospel was also dug up in the year 485, on opening
the grave of St. Barnabas, in Cyprus, transcribed with his own hand; but these
copies have long since perished: and with regard to those published since by
Tile and Munster, the barbarous and corrupt style sufficiently demonstrate that
they were not originals, but the translation of a more ignorant and corrupt
age, and therefore deservedly rejected by the more judicious and enlightened
part of mankind.

THE LIFE OF ST. MARK. The EVANGELIST and APOSTLE.
THOUGH the name of St. Mark seems to be of Roman original, he was nevertheless
descended from Jewish parents, and of the tribe of Levi: nor was it uncommon
amongst the Jews to change their names on some remarkable revolution or
incident of life, or when they intended to travel into any of the Roman
provinces in Europe.

ST. MARK was generally considered by the ancients, as one of the seventy
disciples; and Epiphanius expressly tells us, that 'he was one of those who,
taking exception at our Lord's discourse of eating his flesh and drinking his
blood, went back and walked no more with him.' But there appears no manner of
foundation for these opinions, nor for that of Nicephorus, who will have him to
be the son of St. Peter's sister: nay, Pepias, bishop of Hierapolis, who lived
near the apostolic times, positively affirms, that he was neither a hearer nor
follower of our Savior. It is therefore most probable, that he was converted
by some of the apostles, perhaps by St. Peter, whom he constantly attended in
his travels, supplying the place of an amanuensis and interpreter: for though,
the apostles were divinely inspired, and had, amongst other miraculous powers,
the gift of tongues conferred upon them, yet the interpretation of tongues was
a gift more peculiar to some than to others; and this probably was St. Mark's
talent, in expounding St. Peter's discourses whether by word or writing, to
those who were strangers to the language in which they were delivered: but
however this be, he accompanied him in his apostolical progress, preached the
gospel in Italy and at Rome, where, at the request of the Christians of those
parts, he composed and wrote the gospel, which is called after his name.

WE are told by Eusebius, that St. Mark was sent into Egypt by St. Peter to
preach the gospel, and accordingly planted a church in Alexandria, the
metropolis of it; and his success was so very remarkable, that he converted
multitudes both of men and women, persuading them not only to embrace the
Christian religion, but also a life of more than ordinary strictness. That
there was indeed a sect in Egypt remarkably strict in their discipline is
evident from Philo, who gives the following account of them.

'THERE is, says he, a sort of persons in many parts of the world, especially
near the Maroeotick lake in Egypt, who have formed themselves into religious
societies and lead a strict philosophical and contemplative course of life.
When they first enter on this manner of living, they renounce all secular
interests and employments, and leaving their estates to their relations, retire
into gardens, and places devoted to solitude and contemplation. Their houses,
or colleges, are not contiguous, that, being free from noise and tumult, they
might the better attend to the designs of a contemplative life; nor yet removed
at too great distance, that they may maintain mutual society, and be
conveniently capable of helping and assisting one another. In each of these
houses i^ an oratory, called Semnion and Monasterion, in which they discharged
the more secret and solemn rites of their religion, divided in the middle by a
partition wall three or four cubits high, one apartment being for the men, and
the other for the women. Here they publicly mee^ every seventh day, where,
being seated according to their seniority, and having composed themselves with
great decency and reverence, the most aged person amongst them and the best
skilled in the dogmata and principles of their institution, comes forth into
the midst, gravely and soberly discoursing on what may make the greatest
impression on their minds; the rest attending with the most profound silence,
and only testifying their assent with the motion of their eyes or head. Their
discourses are commonly mystical and allegorical, seeking hidden senses under
plain words; and of such an allegorical philosophy the books of their religion,
left them by their ancestors, consist: the law they compare to an animal, the
letters of it resembling the body, while the soul of it lies in these abstruse
and recondite notions, which the external veil and surface of the words conceal
from common understanding.

'WITH regard to their method of living, they take very little care of their
bodies, spending their whole time in perfecting their minds by precepts of
wisdom and religion; the day they wholly spend in pious and divine meditations,
in reading and expounding the law and the prophets, and the holy volumes of the
ancient founders of their sect, and in singing Psalms to the honor of their
Maker; absolutely temporate and abstemious, neither eating nor drinking till
night, the only time they think proper to refresh and regale the body: and some
of them out of an insatiable desire of growing in knowledge and virtue, fast
many days together. Their diet is plain and simple, sufficient only to satisfy
the calls of nature, a little bread, salt, and water, being their constant bill
of fare. Their clothes are as mean as their food, designed only as present
security against cold and nakedness. Nor is this the case only of the men, but
also of the pious and devout women that live amongst them; who religiously
observe every seventh day, and especially the preparatory week to the great
solemnity, which they keep with all expressions of sincere devotion, and also
with severe abstinence.'

EUSEBIUS affirms, that these excellent persons were Christians, converted and
brought under such admirable rules and institutions by St. Mark at his coming
hither, accommodating all passages to the manner and discipline of the
Christians: and is followed by Epiphanius, Jerome, and others. But whoever
seriously and impartially considers Philo's account, will plainly find, that he
intends it of the Jews, and professors of the Mosaic religion, though what
particular sect they were, I shall not pretend to determine; perhaps they were
Essenes: but however that be, it is plain they were not Christians; for Philo
speaks of them as an institution of some standing; whereas, the Christians had
but very lately appeared in the world, especially in Egypt: besides, many parts
of Philo's account does not in several parts agree with the state and manners
of the Christians at that time; as that they withdrew themselves from public
conversation, and all the affairs of civil life, which the Christians never
did, but when forced to it by violent persecutions; for at other times, as
Justin Martyr, and Tertullian tells us, they mixed themselves promiscuously
with the inhabitants of the country, dwelt in towns and cities, ploughed their
lands, and followed their respective trades and callings like other men. Nor
can the books which Philo tells us they had, besides those of Moses and the
prophets, be understood of those of the Christians; for the writings of the
evangelists had been very lately published, and consequently could not come
under the character of ancient authors. Not to mention that some of their
ceremonies were such as the Christians of those days were absolute strangers
to, not being introduced into the church till some ages after Philo wrote his
account: nay, some of them were never used by the primitive Christians,
especially their religious dances, which Philo particularly describes, as used
by them at their festival solemnities, especially that remarkable one which
they observed at the end of every seven weeks; when their entertainment being
ended, they all rose up, the men in one company, and the women in another,
dancing with various measures and motions, each company singing divine hymns
and songs, and having a precentor going before each division, singing
alternately; till, in the conclusion, they joined in one common chorus, in
imitation of the triumphant song sung by Moses and the Israelites, after their
great deliverance at the Red Sea, from the hostile attempts of Pharaoh and his
army.

FROM these, and several other particulars that might be mentioned, it will
appear, that these could not be Christians; it is not indeed to be doubted, but
that persons educated under such excellent rules and methods of life, were more
than ordinarily prepared for the reception of Christianity, and could not fail
of rendering St. Mark's success surprising in those parts, and open a path for
men to come in multitudes to embrace the doctrines of the gospel of JESUS
CHRIST.

THIS apostle did not confine himself to Alexandria, and the oriental parts of
Egypt, but removed westward to Lybia, passing through the countries of
Marmarcia, Pentapolis, and others adjacent, where, though the people were both
barbarous in their manners, and idolatrous in their worship, yet by his
preaching and miracles, he prevailed on them to embrace the tenets of the
gospel; nor did he leave them till he had confirmed them in the faith of his
divine Master.

HE returned, after his long tour, to Alexandria, where he preached with the
greatest freedom, ordered and disposed of the affairs of the church, and wisely
provided for a succession, by constituting governors and pastors of it. But the
restless enemy of the souls of men, would not suffer our apostle to continue in
peace and quietness: for while he was assiduously laboring in the vineyard of
his Master the idolatrous inhabitants about the time of Easter, when they were
celebrating the solemnities of Serapis, tumultuously entered the church, forced
St. Mark, then performing divine service, from thence, and binding his feet
with cords, draged him through the streets, and over the most craggy places to
the Bucelus, a precipice near the sea, leaving him there in a lonesome prison
for that night; but his great and beloved Master appeared to him in a vision,
comforting and encouragng his soul, under the ruins of his shattered body. The
next morning early, the tragedy began a fresh, dragging him about in the same
cruel and barbarous manner, till he expired: but their malice did not end with
his death, they burnt his mangled body, after they had so inhumanly deprived it
of life; but the Christians, after the hellish tragedy was over, gathered up
his bones and ashes, and decently interred them near the place where he used to
preach. His remains were afterward, with great pomp, removed from Alexandria
to Venice, where they are religiously honored, and he adopted as the titular
saint and pattern of that state and people. He suffered martyrdom on the 25th
of April, but the year is not absolutely known; the most probable opinion
however is, that it happened about the end of Nero's reign.

AS to his person, St. Mark was of a middle size and stature, his nose long,
his eyebrows turning back, his eyes graceful and amiable, his head bald, his
beard thick and gray, his gait quick, and the constitution of his body strong
and healthful.

THE only writing he left behind him, was his gospel, written, as we have
before observed, at the entreaty and earnest desire of the converts at Rome,
who not content to have heard St. Peter preach, pressed St. Mark his disciple,
to commit to writing, an historical account of what he had delivered to them,
which he performed with equal faithfulness and brevity, and being perused and
approved by St. Peter, and commanded to be publicly read in their assemblies.
It was frequently styled St. Peter's gospel, not because he dictated it to St.
Mark, but because the latter composed it from the accounts St. Peter usually
delivered in his discourses to the people: and this is probably the reason of
what St. Chrysostom observes, that in his style and manner of expression, he
delight^ to imitate St. Peter, representing a great deal in a few words. The
remarkable impartiality he observed in all his relations, is plain, from hence,
that he is so far from concealing the shameful lapse and denial of Peter, his
dear tutor and master, that he describes it with more aggravating circumstances
than any of the other evangelists. The Venetians pretend to have the original
Greek copy of St. Mark's gospel, written with his own hand: but this
manuscript, if written by St. Mark, is now useless, the very letters being
rendered illegible by length of time.

ST. LUKE THE EVANGELIST.
ST. LUKE was born at Antioch, the metropolis of Syria, a city celebrated for
the pleasantness of its situation, the fertility of its soil, the riches of its
commerce, the wisdom of its senate, and the civility and politeness of its
inhabitants, by the pens of some of the greatest orators of those times. It was
eminent for schools of learning, which produced the most renowned masters in
the arts and sciences; so that being born as it were, in the lap of the muses,
he could not well fail of acquiring an ingenious and liberal education: but he
was not contented with the learning of his own country, he traveled for
improvement into several parts of Greece and Egypt, and became particularly
skilled in physic, which he made his profession.

THEY who would, from this particular, infer the quality of his birth and
fortune, seem to forget that the healing art was, in these early times,
generally practiced by servants; and hence Grotius is of opinion, that St. Luke
was carried to Rome, and lived there a servant to some noble family, in quality
of physician: but after obtaining his freedom, he returned into his own
country, and probably continued his profession till his death, it being so
highly consistent with, and in many cases subservient to, the care of souls. He
is also famous for his skill in another art, namely, painting, and an ancient
inscription, was found in a vault near the church of St. Maria de Via Lata, at
Rome, supposed to have been the place where St. Paul dwelt, which mentions a
picture of the blessed Virgin, UNA EX vii. AB LUCA DEPICTIS, being one of the
seven painted by St. Luke.

IT is not certainly known when St. Luke became a Christian, after having been
a Jewish proselyte: those who understand him in the beginning of his gospel, to
say that he had the facts from the reports of others, who were eye witnesses,
suppose him to have been converted by St. Paul, and that he learned the history
of his gospel from the conversation of that apostle, and wrote it under his
direction; and that when St. Paul, in one of his epistles, says, according to
my gospel, he means this of St. Luke, which he style^ his, from the great share
he had in its composition.

THEY, on the other hand, who hold that he wrote his gospel from his own
personal knowledge, observe, that he could not receive it from St. Paul, as an
eyewitness of the matter contained in it, because all those matters were
transacted before his conversion; and that he never saw our Lord, before he
appeared to him in his journey to Damascus, which was some time after he
ascended into heaven. Consequently, when St. Paul says, according to my gospel,
he means no more than the gospel in general which he preached; the whole
preaching of the apostles, styled the gospel, all having an uniform tendency to
inculcate and establish the faith and practice of the Christian religion.

BUT they further observe, that it is not probable that St. Luke was converted
by St. Paul, because the latter would in that case have styled him his son, it
being the constant, practice of the apostles to call all eminent converts by
that appellation; but he mentions him by the name of Luke, the beloved
physician. They therefore suppose, that he studied the law in one of the
schools of Jerusalem, where he was converted by our Lord, and was one of the
seventy disciples mentioned in Scripture.

HOWEVER this be, St. Luke became the inseparable companion of St. Paul in all
his travels, and his constant fellow laborer in the work of the ministry: he
followed him in all his dangers, was with him at his several arraignments at
Jerusalem, accompanied him in his tedious and dangerous voyage to Rome, where
he still attended on him, to administer to him in his necessities, and supply
those ministerial offices, which the apostle's confinement would not suffer him
to undertake; and especially in carrying messages to other churches, where he
had planted the Christian religion. This infinitely endeared him to St. Paul,
who seemed delighted with owning him for his fellow laborer and in calling him
the beloved physician, and the brother whose praise is in the gospel, 2 Cor.
viii.13.

IT is very probable, he did not leave St. Paul till he had finished his
course, and received the crown of martyrdom; though some tells us, that he left
St. Paul at Rome, and returned back into the East, traveling into Egypt and
several parts of Libya, where he preached the gospel, wrought miracles,
converted multitudes, and constituted guides and ministers of religion; nay,
that he himself undertook the episcopal charge of the city of Thebais.
Epiphanius tells us, that he first preached in Dalmatia and Galatia, then in
Italy and Macedonia, where he spared no pains, and declined no dangers, that he
might faithfully discharge the trust committed to him by his great Master.

THE time or manner of his death are not very well agreed upon by the ancients:
some affirming him to die in Egypt, others in Greece, the Roman martyrology in
Bythinia, and Dorothaeus at Ephesus; some will have that he died a natural, and
others a violent death. Indeed, neither Eusebius nor St. Jerome take any notice
of it, but Gregory Nazianzen, Paulinus bishop of Nola, and several others,
expressly assert, that he suffered martyrdom; and Nicephorus gives us this
particular account of it: "That coming into Greece, he successfully preached
the gospel, and baptized many converts into the Christian faith, till, at last,
a party of infidels opposed his doctrines: but being unable to silence him by
r^ason and argument, they had recourse to cruelty, dragged him from the place
where he was teaching the gospel, and hung him on an olive tree, in the
eightieth, or according to St. Jerome, in the eighty-fourth year of his age."
Kirstenius thinks, he suffered martyrdom at Rome soon after St. Paul's first
imprisonment, because he did not continue his acts of the apostles any further,
which it is natural to think he would have done, had he lived any considerable
time after St. Paul's departure. His body was afterward, by the command of
Constantine, or his son Constantius, removed with great solemnity to
Constantinople, and buried in the great church, erected to the memory of the
apostles, in that city.

HIS gospel, and the acts of the apostles, were written by him for the use of
the church; both which he dedicated to Theophilus, which many of the ancients
supposed to be a feigned name, denoting a lover of God, a title common to all
sincere Christians: but others think it was a real person, because the title of
"most excellent," is attributed to him, the usual title and form of address in
those times to princes and great men. Probably he was some magistrate, whom St.
Luke had converted and baptized, and to whom he dedicated these books, not only
as a testimony of honorable respect, but also as a means of giving him further
certainty and assurance of those things wherein he had instructed him, and
which it was requisite he should be informed of.

THE principal transactions of our Lord's life are contained in his gospel; and
the particulars omitted by him, are, in general, of less importance than those
the other evangelists forbear to mention.

THE acts of the apostles written by St Luke, were no doubt penned at Rome,
about the time of St Paul's imprisonment there, with which he concludes his
history. It contains the actions, and sometimes the sufferings of the principal
apostles, especially St. Paul, whose activity in the cause of CHRIST made him
bear a greater p^^t in the labors of his ma^ter: and St. Luke being his
constant ^^^endant, an eyewitness of the whole carriage of his life, and privy
to his most intimates transactions was consequently capable of giving a more
full and satisfactory account of them. Amongst other things, he enumerates the
great ^^^^cles the apostles did in confirmation of the doctrine they advanced*

HIS manner of writing, in both these treatises, is exact and accurate; his
style noble and elegant, sublime and lofty, and yet clear and perspicuous,
flowing with an easy and natural grace and sweetness, admirabl^ adapted to an
historical design. In short, as an historian, he was faithful in his relations,
and elegant in his writing; as a minister, careful and diligent for the good of
souls; as a Christian, devout and pious; and to crown all the rest, laid down
his life in testimony of that gospel he had both preached and published to the
world, by the command of his Lord.

THE LIFE OF ST. JOHN, The APOSTLE and EVANGELIST; commonly called the DIVINE.
THIS beloved disciple of our Lord was a native of Galilee, the son of Zebedee
and Salome, one of those devout women that constantly attended on our Lord in
his ministry, and brother of James the Great. Before his becoming a disciple of
the blessed JESUS, he was, in all brobability, a follower of John the Baptist,
and is thought to be that other disciple, who, in the first chapter of his
gospel, is said to have been present with Andrew when John declared JESUS, to
be the Lamb of God, and thereupon to have followed him to the place of his
residence.

THOUGH St. John was by much the youngest of the apostles, he was nevertheless
admitted into as great a share of his Master's confidence as any of them. He
was one of those to whom he communicated the most private transactions of his
life: one of those whom he took with him when he raised the daughter of Jairus
from the dead; one of those to whom he exhibited a specimen of his divinity, in
his transfiguration on the mount; one of those who were present at his
conference with Moses and Elias, and heard that voice which declared him the
beloved Son of God; and one of those who were companions in his solitude, most
retired devotions, and bitter agonies in the garden. Thus of the three who were
made the witnesses of their Master's actions, which it was convenient to
conceal, St. John constantly enjoyed the privilege of being one: nay, even of
these three he seems to have had, in some respects, the preference; witness his
lying on his master's bosom at the paschal supper: and even when Peter was
desirous of knowing who was the person that should betray their Master, and
durst not himself ask the question, he made use of St. John, to propose it to
their Lord, as the person most likely to succeed in obtaining an answer.

OUR apostle endeavored, in some measure, to answer these instances of
particular favor, by returns of particular kindness and constancy; for though
he had at first deserted his Master on his apprehension, yet he soon recovered
himself, and came to seek his savior, confidently entered the high-priest's
hall, followed our Lord through the several particulars of his trial, and at
last waited on him at his execution, owning him, as well as being owned by him,
in the midst of armed soldiers, and in the thickest crowds of his most
inveterate enemies. Here it was that our great Redeemer committed to his care
his sorrowful and disconsolate mother, with his dying breath. And certainly The
ANGEL Presenting the Book

Revelation ^X.^0 (...) of the (...)

the holy JESUS could not have given a more honorable testimony of his
particular respect and kindness to St. John, than by leaving his own mother to
his trust and care, and substituting him to supply that duty he himself paid
her, while he resided in this vale of sorrow amongst men.

ST. JOHN no sooner heard of our Lord's being risen from the chambers of the
dust, than he, in company with Peter, hastened to the sepulcher. There seems
indeed to have been a peculiar intimacy between these two disciples; it was
Peter that St. John introduced into the palace of the high priest; it was Peter
to whom he gave notice of CHRIST's appearing when he came to them at the sea of
Tiberias, in the habit of a stranger; and it was for St. John that Peter was so
solicitously inquisitive to know what was determined concerning him when our
Savior expressed himself somewhat ambiguously respecting that disciple.

AFTER the ascension of the Savior of the world, when the apostles made a
division of the provinces amongst themselves, that of Asia fell to the share of
St. John, though he did not immediately enter upon his charge, but continued at
Jerusalem till the death of the blessed Virgin, which happened about fifteen
years after our Lord's ascension: being released from the trust committed to
his care by his dying Master, he retired into Asia, and industriously applied
himself to the propagating of Christianity, preaching where the gospel had not
yet been known, and confirming it where it was already planted. Many churches
of note and eminence were of his founding, particularly those of Smyrna,
Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodocea, and others; but his chief
place of residence was at Ephesus, where St. Paul had many years before founded
a church, and constituted Timothy bishop of it. Nor can we suppose that he
confined his ministry entirely to Asia Minor; it is highly reasonable to think
that he preached in other parts of the East, probably to the Parthians, his
first epistle being anciently directed to them; and the Jesuits assure us that
the inhabitants of the kingdom of Bassorain Indian affirm, that, according to a
tradition handed down from their ancestors, St. John planted the Christian
faith in their country, where the Christians are called by his name.

HAVING spent several years at Ephesus, he was accused to Domitian, who had
begun a persecution against the Christians as an eminent asserter of Atheism
and impiety, and a public subverter of the religion of the empire; so that by
his command, the proconsul sent him bound to Rome, where he met with the
treatment that might have been expected from so barbarous a prince, being
thrown into a chaldron of boiling oil: but the Almighty, who reserved him for
further services in the vineyard of his Son, restrained the heat, as he did in
the fiery furnace of old, and delivered him from this seeming unavoidable
destruction. And surely one would have thought that so miraculous a deliverance
would have been sufficient to have persuaded any rational man that the religion
he taught was from God, and that he was protected from danger by the hand of
Omnipotence; but miracles themselves were not sufficient to convince this cruel
emperor, or abate his fury: he ordered St. John to be transported to a
disconsolate island in the Archipelago, called Patmos, where he continued
several years instructing the poor inhabitants in the knowledge of the
Christian faith; and here, about the end of Domitian's reign, he wrote his book
of Revelation, exhibiting, by visions and prophetical representations, the
state and condition of Christianity in the future periods and ages of the
church, till the final consumation of all things.

AFTER the death of Domitian, and on the succession of Nerva, who repealed all
the odious acts of his predecessor, and by public edicts recalled those whom
the fury of Domitian had banished, St. John returned to Asia and fixed his seat
again at Ephesus; and rather, because the people of that city had lately
martyred Timothy their bishop. Here, with the assistance of seven other
bishops, he took upon himself the government of (...) large diocese of Asia
Minor, erected oratories, and disposed of the clergy in the best manner that
the circumstances of those times would permit, spending his time in an
ind^^^^^gable execution of his charge, traveling from East to West to instruct
the world in the principles of the holy religion he was sent to propagate. In
this manner St. John continued to labor in the vineyard of his great Master,
till death put a period to all his to^^^ and sufferings; which happened in the
beginning of Trajan's reign, in the ninety-eighth year of his age, and he was
buried near Ephesus, according to Eusebius.

THIS great evangelist and apostle seems always to have led a single life;
though some of the ancients tell us he was a married man. With regard to his
natural temper, he seems to have been of an eager and resolute disposition,
easily inflamed, but which age had reduced to a calmer temper. He was polished
by no study or arts of learning; but, what was wanting from human art, was
abundantly supplied by the excellent constitution of his mind, and that fullness
of divine grace with which he was adorned: his humility was admirable,
studiously concealing his own honor; for in his epistles, he never styles
himself either apostle or evangelist; the title of presbyter or elder, is all
he assumes, and probably in regard to his age as much as his office, in his
gospel, when he speaks of the disciple whom Jesus loved, he constantly conceals
his own name, leaving the reader to discover whom he meant: love and charity he
practiced himself, and affectionately pressed them upon others; the great love
of his Savior toward him, seems to have inspired his soul with a larger and
more generous charity than the rest. This is the great vein that runs through
all his writings, especially his epistles, where he urges it as the great and
peculiar law of Christianity, and without which all other pretenses to the
religion of the holy JESUS are vain and frivolous, useless and insignificant:
and this was his constant practice to the very hour of his dissolution; for
when age and the decays of nature had rendered him so weak that he was unable
to preach to the people any longer, he was constantly led, at every public
meeting, to the church of Ephesus, and always repeated to them the same
precept, Little children, love one another: and when his hearers wearied with
the constant repetition of the same thing, asked him why he never varied his
discourse, he answered, "Because to love one another was the command of our
blessed Savior, and if they did nothing more, this alone was sufficient to
denote whose they were, and whom they served."

THE largest measures of his charity were, however, displayed in the remarkable
care he took to promote the salvation of the souls of men; traveling from East
to West, in propagating the principles of that religion he was sent to teach,
patiently enduring every torment, surmounting every difficulty, and removing
every obstacle, to save the souls of the human race, free their minds from
error and idolatry, and turn them from the paths of vice and debauchery.
Amongst many other instances of this kind, Eusebius relates the following.

"ST. JOHN, during one of his visitations of the church at Ephesus, was greatly
pleased with the appearance and behavior of a young man, whom he called to
him, and, with a special charge, recommended to the bishop, who undertook the
trust, and promised to discharge it with the greatest fidelity: accordingly,
the bishop took him home with him to his house carefully instructed him in the
principles of the Christian religion, and at last baptized and confirmed him.
After he had proceeded thus far, he thought he might a little relax the reins
of discipline; but the youth made a bad use of his liberty, and being debauched
by evil company, became the captain of a gang of robbers, and committed the
most horrid outrages in the adjacent countries. St. John, being informed of
this at his return, sharply reproved the bishop, and determined to find the
young man out; never considering the dangers that would inevitably attend him,
by venturing himself amongst persons of desperate fortunes: accordingly, he
repaired to the mountains where they usually abode, and being taken by one of
the robbers placed as a watch, he desired to be carried to their captain, who,
on seeing St. John coming toward him, immediately fled. The apostle forgetting
his age, hastened after him; but being unable to overtake him, he passionately
cried out, 'Child, why do thou run from thy father, an old and defenseless
man? Spare me the pains of following thee, and let not terrors and despair
seize upon thee. Thy salvation is not irrecoverable. Stay, and be convinced
that CHRIST himself has sent me.' At these words, the young man stopped, fixed
his eyes upon the earth, trembled in every part, and burst into a flood of
tears. And when the aged apostle approached he embraced him, and implored
forgiveness with such weeping and lamentations, that he seemed to be
rebaptized, and to wash away his sins with his own tears. The apostle received
him with the greatest kindness, assured him that he had obtained pardon for his
sins at the hands of his great Redeemer, and returned him a true penitent and
convert to the church of which he was a member.

OUR apostle's care for the souls of men, is further evidenced by the writings
he left to posterity, The first of which in time, though placed last in the
sacred canon, is his Apocalypse, or book of Revelation, which he wrote during
his banishment at Patmos. After the preface and admonition given to the bishops
of the seven churches in Asia, it contains a prophetic view of the persecutions
the faithful were to suffer from the Jews, Heretics, and tyrannical princes,
together with the peaceable and flourishing state of the church, till disturbed
by other enemies; and the happiness of the church triumphant in heaven. And
hence St. John is, in the strictest sense, a prophet, and has thereby one
material addition to his titles, being not only an apostle and evangelist, but
also a prophet: an honor peculiar to himself. St. Peter was an apostle, but no
evangelist: St. Mark and St. Luke were evangelists, but no apostles: St.
Matthew, was an apostle and evangelist, but no prophet: but St. John was an
apostle, an evangelist, and a prophet likewise.

HIS three epistles take place, in order of time, next to the Apocalypse; the
first of which is catholic, being calculated for all times and places, and
containing the most excellent rules for the conduct of a Christian life,
pressing to holiness and pureness of manners, and not to be satisfied with a
naked and empty profession of religion; not to be led away with the crafty
insinuations of seducers; and cautioning men against the poisonous principles
and practices of the Gnostics. The apostle here, according to his usual
modesty, conceals his name, it being of more consequence to a wise man what is
said, than he who says it. It appears from St. Augustine, that this epistle was
anciently inscribed to the Parthians, because, in all probability, St. John
preached the gospel in Parthia. The other two epistles are but short, and
directed to particular persons; the one a lady of great quality, the other to
the charitable and hospitable Gaius, the kindest friend, and the most courteous
entertainer of all indigent Christians, in those primitive times.

WE are told by Eusebius and St. Jerome, that St. John, having perused the other
three gospels, approved and confirmed them by his authority; but observing, at
the same time, that these evangelists had omitted several of our blessed
Savior's transactions, particularly those which were performed before the
Baptist's imprisonment, he wrote his gospel to supply what was wanting in them;
and because several Heretics were at that time sprung up in the church, who
denied the divinity of our blessed Savior, he took care to guard against these
heresies, by proving that our great Redeemer was God from everlasting. He
largely records our Savior's discourses, but takes little notice of his
miracles, probably because the other evangelists had so fully and particularly
written concerning them.

PREVIOUS to his undertaking the task of writing his gospel, he caused a
general fast to be kept by all the Asian churches, to implore the blessing of
heaven on so great and momentous an undertaking. When this was done, he set
about the work, and completed it in so excellent and sublime a manner, that
the ancients generally compared him to an eagle's soaring aloft amongst the
clouds, whither the weak eye of man was not able to follow him. "Among all the
evangelical writers," says St. Basil, "none are like St. John, the son of
thunder, for the sublimity of his speech, and the height of his discourses,
which are beyond any man's capacity fully to reach and comprehend." "St. John,
as a true son of thunder," says Epiphanius, by a loftiness of speech peculiar
to himself, "acquaints us, as it were out of the clouds and dark recesses of
wisdom, with the divine doctrine of the Son of God, the glorious Savior of
mankind."

THUS have we given the character of the writings of this great apostle and
evangelist, who as we have hinted before, was honored with the endearing title
of being the beloved disciple of the Son of God; and was a writer so sublime as
to deserve, by way of eminence, the character of St. John the Divine.

THE LIFE OF ST. PAUL, The APOSTLE to the GENTILES.
THIS eminent and laborious apostle was a native of Tarsus, and a descendant
from the ancient stock of Abraham. He was born about two years before the
blessed JESUS, and belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, the youngest son of
Jacob, who thus prophesied of him. Benjamin shall raven as a wolf; in the
morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil; a
prophetical character which Tertullian and others will have to be accomplished
in this apostle: for, in his youth, or the morning of his days, he prosecuted
the churches, destroying the flock of the Almighty; devouring the prey: in his
declining age, or evening of his days, he became a physician of the nations,
feeding and distributing with the greatest care and assiduity, the sheep of
CHRIST, the great Shepherd of Israel.

THE place of this apostle's nativity, was Tarsus, the metropolis of Cilica,
situated about three hundred miles distant from Jerusalem; it was exceedingly
rich and populous, and a Roman municipium, or free corporation, invested with
the privileges of Rome by the two first emperors, as a reward for the citizens'
firm adherence to the Caesar's, in the rebellion of Crassus. St. Paul was
therefore born a Roman citizen, and he often pleads this privilege on his
trials.

THE inhabitants of Tarsus usually sent their children into other cities for
learning and improvement, especially to Jerusalem, where they were so numerous,
that they had a synagogue of their own, called the synagogue of the Cilic^^^s.
To this capital our apostle was also sent, and brought up at the feet of that
eminent rabbi Gamalia, in the most exact knowledge of the law of Moses: nor did
he fail to profit by the instructions of that great master; for he so
diligently conformed himself to his precepts, that, without boasting, he
asserts of himself, that touching the righteousness of the law, he was
blameless, and defied even his enemies to allege any thing to the contrary,
even in his youth. He joined himself to the sect of the Pharisees, the most
strict order of the Jewish religion; but, at ^he same time, the proudest, and
the greatest enemies to CHRIST and his holy religion, as evidently appears by
the character given of them by the evangelists, and our Lord's description of
that self-righteous sect.

RESPECTING his double capacity, of Jewish extraction and Roman freedom, he had
two names Saul and Paul, the former Hebrew, and the latter Latin. It was common
for the descendants of Benjamin to give the name of Saul to their children ever
since the time of the first king of Israel, who was chosen out of that tribe;
and Paul was a name as common amongst the Romans. We must also consider his
trade of tent-making as part of his education, it being the constant practice
of the Jews, to bring up their children to some honest calling, that, in case
of necessity, they might provide for themselves by the labor of their own
hands, without becoming burdensome to the public.

HAVING obtained a thorough knowledge of the sciences cultivated by the Jews,
and being naturally of a very hot and fiery temper, Saul became a great
champion for the law of Moses, and the tradition of the elders, which he
considered as a ^eal for God. This rendered him impatient of all opposition to
the doctrine and tenets he had imbibed, and a vehement blasphemer and
persecutor of Christians, who were commonly reputed the enemies and ^^stroyers
of the Jewish economy. We must not however consider our apostle as guilty of
the pride and hypocrisy of the Pharisees; for he declares, that he had ever
been careful to act in conformity to the dictates of his conscience, by which
he thought himself bound to do many things contrary to the name of JESUS of
Nazareth. It was therefore the prejudice of his education, and the natural
warmth of his temper, that excited him to those violent persecutions of the
Christians, for which he became so famous, in the infancy of the church.

WE find that the first action he engaged in, was the disputation he and his
countrymen had with the martyr Stephen, concerning the Messiah. The Christian
was too hard for them in the dispute; but they were too powerful for him in
their civil interests; for being enraged at his convincing arguments, they
carried him before the high priest, who, by false accusations condemned him to
death. How far Saul was concerned in this cruel action, is impossible to say;
all we know is, that he kept the raiment of them that ^^ew him, and,
consequently, was accessory to his death.

THE enemies of the church having thus raised a storm of persecution against
it, it increased prodigiously, and the poor Christians of Jerusalem were
miserably harrassed and dispersed. In this persecution, our apostle was
principal agent, searching all the adjacent parts for the afflicted saints,
beating some in the synagogue, compelling some to blaspheme, confining some in
prison, and procuring others to be put to death for their profession: nor could
Jerusalem and the adjacent parts confine his fiery zeal; he applied to the
Sanhedrim, and procured a commission from that court, to extend his persecution
to Damascus. How eternally insatiable is the fury of a misguided zeal! how
(...) and unwearied in its designs of cruelty? It had already sufficiently
harrassed the poor Christians at Jerusalem, but not content with that, it
persecuted them to strange cities; even to Damascus itself, whither many of
them had fled for shelter, resolving to being them back to Jerusalem, in order
to their punishment and execution there.

WE think it necessary to observe here, that the Jewish Sanhedrim had not only
the power of seizing and scourging offenders against their law within the
bounds of their own country, but, by the connivance and favor of the Romans,
might send into other countries, where there were any synagogues that
acknowledged a dependence in religious affairs upon the council of Jerusalem,
to apprehend them: and accordingly, Saul was sent to Damascus, to apprehend
what Christians he could find in that city, and bring them bound to Jerusalem,
to be tried and punished.

IT was however Readiness peculiar happiness, that the Almighty designed to employ
him in a work of a very different nature, and, accordingly stopped him in his
journey: for (...) he was traveling between Jerusalem and Damascus, to execute
the commission of the Jewish Sanhedrim, a refulgent light, far exceeding the
brightness of the sun, darted upon him; at which both he and his companions
were terribly amazed and confounded, falling together with their horses,
prostrate on the ground. Amidst this confusion, a voice was heard in the Hebrew
language, saying Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? To which Saul replied,
Who art thou, Lord? And was immediately answered, I am Jesus, of Nazareth, whom
thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. As if the
blessed JESUS had said, "All thy attempts to extirpate the faith in me, will
prove abortive, and, like kicking against the spikes wound and torment thyself
the more."

BEING now sufficiently convinced of his folly in acting against JESUS, whom he
was now assured to be the true Messiah, Saul asked, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? On which the blessed JESUS informed him of the true intention of his
appearance, 'Arise, said he, and stand upon thy feet; for I have appeared unto
thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness, both of these
things which thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear
unto thee; delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom
now I send thee, to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by faith that is in
me,' Acts xxvi.16, 17, 18. And for further instruction, the immaculate JESUS
referred him to one of his followers, named Ananias, commanding him to repair
immediately to the city, and receive further instruction from that disciple.

THE men who were with him heard the voice, but did not see the person who
spoke from heaven: in all probability they were ignorant of the Hebrew
language, and therefore only heard a confused sound; for the apostle himself
tells us, that they heard not the voice of him that spoke, that is, they did
not hear it with a proper degree of understanding.

SAUL now arose from the earth, but found himself deprived of sight, the
resplendent brightness of the vision being too intense for mortal eyes to
behold. His companions therefore led him by the hand to the city of Damascus,
where he entered the house of Judas, and remained there three days without
sight, nor did he either eat or drink but spent his time in prayer to the
Almighty, beseeching him to pardon the sins of his past life, and be gracious
to him.

OUR blessed Savior, in the mean time appeared in a vision to Ananias, a very
devout and religious man, highly esteemed by all the inhabitants of Damascus,
though he professed the religion of the crucified JESUS commanding him to go
into such a street of the city, and enquire in the house of Judas, for one Saul
of Tarsus, then offering up the most fervent prayers to the throne of grace.
Annias, who, was ever ready to obey the commands of the Most High, startled at
the name, having heard of his bloody practices at Jerusalem, and what
commission he was now come to execute in Damascus: he therefore suspected that
his pretended conversion was nothing more than a snare artfully laid for the
Christians. But our blessed Savior soon removed his apprehensions, by telling
him that his suspicions were entirely destitute of foundation; and that he had
now taken him as a chosen vessel to preach the gospel both to the Jews and
Gentiles, and even before the greatest monarchs of the earth; acquainting him,
at the same time, with the great things he should do and suffer for the sake of
the gospel, what chains and imprisonments, what racks and scourges, what hunger
and thirst, what shipwrecks, and that, at last, he should even suffer death
itself.

THE fears of Ananias being thus quieted, he immediately obeyed the heavenly
vision, repaired to the house of Judas, and laid hands upon Saul, saying, "That
JESUS who appeared to thee in the way, has sent me to restore thy sight, and,
by the infusion of his spirit, to give thee the knowledge of those truths which
thou have blindly and ignorantly persecuted; but who now is willing to receive
thee by baptism into his church, and make thee a member of his body."

THIS speech was no sooner pronounced, than there fell from his eyes thick
films resembling scales, and he received his sight, and after baptism conversed
freely with the Christians of Damascus. Nor did he only converse with them; he
also to the great astonishment of the whole church, preached the gospel to
those Christians he came down with an intention to destroy, boldly asserting,
that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God; and proving it to the Jews with such
demonstrative evidence, that they were confounded, and found it impossible to
answer him, or disprove his arguments.

ST. Paul did not stay long at Damascus after his conversion; nor did he return
to Jerusalem; but being commanded to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, he
retired into Arabia Petrae, where he received a full revelation of all the
mysteries of Christianity; for he himself declares, that he conversed not with
flesh and blood. And having preached in several parts of that country some
time, he returned again to Damascus, applying himself with the utmost assiduity
to the great work of the ministry, frequenting the synagogues there, powerfully
confuting the objections commonly made by the descendants of Jacob against
JESUS of Nazareth, and converting great numbers of Jews and Gentiles to the
faith.

THIS apostle was indeed remarkably zealous in his preaching, and blessed with
a very extraordinary method of reasoning, whereby he proved the fundamental
points of Christianity beyond exception. This irritated the Jews to the highest
degree: and, at length, after two or three years continuance in those parts,
they found means to prevail on the governor of Damascus to have him put to
death: but they knew it would be difficult to take him, as he had so many
friends in the city; they therefore kept themselves a continual watch, searched
all the houses where they supposed he might conceal himself, and also obtained
a guard from the governor to observe the gates, in order to prevent his
escaping from the place.

HIS Christian friends were far from deserting him in this distress; they tried
every method that offered to procure his escape: but finding it impossible for
him to pass through either of the gates of the city, they let him down from one
of their houses through a window in a basket, over the wall, by which means the
cruel designs of his enemies were rendered ineffectual. St. Paul having thus
escaped from his malicious persecutors, repaired to Jerusalem, and, on his
arrival, addressed himself to the church: but they knowing well the former
temper and principles of this great persecutor, shunned his company, till
Barnabas brought him to Peter, who was not yet cast into prison, and to James
our Lord's brother, bishop of Jerusalem, informing them of his miraculous
conversion, and that he had preached the gospel with the greatest boldness in
the synagogue of Damascus; upon which they gladly received him, and entertained
him fifteen days with the greatest hospitality and affection.

HE was remarkably assiduous during this interval, in preaching the gospel of
the Son of God, and confuting the Hellenistic Jews, with the greatest courage
and resolution. But snares were soon laid for him, as malice can as easily
cease to be, as to remain inactive; and being warned by God in a vision, that
his testimony would not be received at Jerusalem, and therefore it was
necessary for him to depart and preach the gospel to the Gentiles. Accordingly,
being conducted by the brethren to Caesarea Philippi, he set sail for Tarsus,
his native city; from whence he was soon after broug^^ by Barnabas to Antioch,
to assist him in propagating Christianity in that city. In this employment he
spent one whole year, and had the pleasure of seeing the gospel flourish in a
very remarkable manner in those parts.

HERE the disciples first acquired the name of Christians, for before they were
styled Nazareens; but this appellation soon prevailed all over the world, and
the former wa^ in a few ages, almost entirely laid aside.

A terrible famine, foretold by Hygabus, happened about this time, in several
parts of the Roman empire, particularly in Judea; which induced the Christians
at Antioch to compassionate the miseries of their brethren at Jerusalem; and,
accordingly raised considerable contributions for their relief, which they sent
to the capital of Judea by the hands of Barnabas and Saul who, immediately
after executing their commission, returned to Antioch. But while they were
performing the public exercises of religion, it was revealed to them by the
Holy Ghost, that they should set apart Barnabas and Saul to preach the gospel
in other places, which was accordingly done, and they were immediately deputed
for that service by prayer, fasting, and the imposition of hands.

THEY first of all visited Seleucia, where they did not continue long, but
sailed for Cyprus; and at Salamis, a great city in that island, they preached
in the synagogue of the Jews. From hence they removed to Paphos, the residence
of Sergius Paulus, the proconsul of the island, a man of great wisdom and
prudence, but miserably seduced by the wicked artifices of Bar-Jesus, a Jewish
imposter, who styled himself Elymas, or the magician, vehemently opposed the
apostles, and kept the proconsul from embracing the faith, as preached by them.

HOWEVER, the proconsul called for the apostles, who, after severely checking
Elymas for his malicious opposition to the truth, told him the divine vengeance
was no^ ready to seize upon him; and immediately he was deprived of his sight.
The vengeance of the Almighty, in depriving him of the use of his bodily eyes,
bore a remarkable analogy to the blindness of those of his mind, which were so
wilfully and maliciously shut against the light of the gospel, and also
endeavored to keep others in darkness and ignorance. This miracle convinced
the proconsul of the truth of the doctrine^ taught by the apostles and made him
a convert to Christianity.

AFTER this remarkable success in Cyprus, St. Paul repaired to Phrygia and
Pamphili^, and taking Titus with him in the room of Mark, who was gone to
Jerusalem, traveled to Antioch, the metropolis of Pisidia. Soon after their
arrival, they entered the synagogue of the Jews on the Sabbath Day, and after
the reading of the law, Paul being invited by the rulers of the Synagogue,
delivered himself in the following manner: "Hearken, all ye descendants of
Jacob, and ye that fear the Almighty, to the words of my mouth. The God of
Israel made choice of our fathers, and loved them, when they had no city of
their own to dwell in, but were strangers and slaves in Egypt, bringing them
from thence with a mighty hand and a strethed out arm; fed them in the
wilderness forty years, and would not suffer his anger to rise against them,
though they often provoked him in the desert. On their arrival in the land he
promised their fathers, he destroyed the nations that inhabited it, and placed
them in that fruitful country, dividing it to them by lot, for their
inheritance.

"AS soon as they were settled in the land, he gave them judges during four
hundred and fifty years, till Samuel the prophet: but on their desiring a king,
he placed over them Saul, the son of Kish, a Benjamite who reigned about forty
^^ars; and after his death he placed David on the throne of Israel, giving him
this testimony, 'I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own
heart, which shall fulfill all my will. And according to his promise, the
Almighty has raised up to the sons of David a Savior JESUS, which is CHRIST
the Lord. The baptism of repentance having been preached before his coming by
John: and as the forerunner executed his office, he asked his followers, Whom
think ye that I am? You must not mistake me for the Messiah; he will soon
follow me, but I am not worthy to perform the meanest office for him.

"THEREFORE, ye descendants of Abraham, and all others who fear the Almighty,
to you is the word of this salvation sent. For the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and rulers of Israel, being ignorant of him, and the voices of the prophets
though read every Sabbath in their synagygues, fulfilled their predictions by
condemning the immaculate Son of the Most High. They found indeed no fault in
him, though they earnestly desired Pilate that he might be crucified.

"EVERY thing that had been written by the prophets concerning him, being now
fulfilled, they took him from the tree, and deposited his body in the chambers
of the grave: but death had no power to detain him: his Almighty Father raised
him from the habitations of the dead. After which, he was seen during many days
by his disciples who attended him from Galilee, and who are the witnesses,
chosen by Omnipotence, of these great and miraculous works. And we now declare
unto you glad-tidings namely, That the promise made by the Almighty to our
forefathers, he has performed to us their children, by raising JESUS from the
dead. The prophet David also said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. He also foretold, that he should return from the chambers of the dust,
and no more be subject to corruption: I will give him, said he, the sure
mercies of David. And again, Thou shall not suffer thine Holy one to see
corruption. Now this prophecy must relate to the Messiah, for David himself,
after he had swayed the scepter of Israel a certain time, fell asleep, was
deposited in the chambers of the grave, and his flesh saw corruption: but the
great Son of David, whom the Almighty raised from the dead, never saw
corruption, as it was written of him.

"THEREFORE, be it known unto you, men and brethren, that through this Savior
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: it is by his merits we are
justified from all things, which was impossible by the law of Moses. Be
careful, therefore, le^t what was foretold by the prophets come upon you,
Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a
work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you."

THE apostle's speech had the desired effect; for several of the Jews, who were
convinced of the truth, desired to hear him on the next Sabbath, and the
apostles persuaded them to continue firm in the belief of these things. The
ensuing Sabbath, almost the whole city flocked to hear the apostles; at which
the Jews were filled with envy, and contradicted Paul, uttering many
blasphemous expressions against the name of JESUS of Nazareth: but their
opposition could not daunt the apostles, who boldly declared, that our blessed
Savior had charged them to preach the gospel first to the Jews; but as they so
obstinately rejected it, they were now to addr^^^ themselves to the Gentiles;
who, hearing this, rejoiced exceedingly, magnifying the word of the Almighty,
and many of them embraced the doctrines of the gospel. This increased the
malice and fury of the Jews, who, by false and artful insinuations, prevailed
on some of the more devout and honorable women to bring over their husbands to
the party; by which means, Paul and Barnabas were driven out of the city. At
which the apostles departed, shaking off the dust from their feet, as a
testimony of their ingratitude, infidelity, and rejection of the gospel.

THEY went from Antioch to Iconium, the metropolis of Lycaonia, a province of
the Lesser Asia, where they again entered into the synagogue of the Jews,
notwithstanding the ill-treatment they had met with from the Jews in other
places; for so great was their zeal for the gospel, that they were not to be
deterred from preaching it by ill usage, however great. Therefore, according to
their usual method, they began their preaching in the assembly of Israelites;
and the Almighty so far assisted their endeavors, that many, both Jews and
proselytes, believed. Their success encouraged them to continue a considerable
time in this city, to instruct the converts, and confirm their faith by
miracles. But, though they had gained a considerable part of the city to the
faith, yet many continued in their infidelity: the old leven of Jewish malice
began again to ferment, and the unbelieving Jews, having stirred up the
Gentiles against the apostles, at last prevailed on the multitude to stone
them: but the apostles having timely notice of their design, fled from the
city, and traveled to Lystra, where they preached the gospel to the
inhabitants, and those who dwelt in the country adjacent.

AT Lystra, there was a man amongst the converts, who had been lame from his
mother's womb, and never had walked: and Paul, perceiving that he had faith to
be saved, thought proper to add the cure of his body to that of his soul,
knowing that it would not only be beneficial to him, but to all the rest of the
believers, by confirming their faith: and, that the miracle might be wrought in
the most conspicuous manner, be, in the midst of the congregation, said in an
audible voice to the man, Stand upright on thy feet: and the words were no
sooner pronounced, than his strength was at once restored, and he leaped up and
walked, praising God.

THEY who were eyewitnesses to this miracle well knew, that it was not wrought
by any human power; but having been initiated into the superstitious customs of
the Heathens, cried out, in the speech of Lycoania, The Gods are come down to
us in the likeness of men. And accordingly they called Barnabas Jupiter,
because of his venerable gravity, and Paul Mercury, from his oloquence. Nor was
it long before the whole city resounded with acclamations; so that almost all
the inhabitants gathered themselves together, and, preceded by the priest of
Jupiter, and oxen dressed in garlands, they came to the house where the
apostles were, intending to do sacrifice to them: But as soon as Barnabas and
Paul understood their intentions, they were greatly affected at this
superstitious attempt; and rending their clothes to express their grief and
abhorrance of the action, ran to them, crying out, "Ye men of Lystra, ye are
mistaken in the object of your worship; for though we have done many miracles
in the name, and by the power of CHRIST, yet we are no more than men, and
subject to the same passions as yourselves, and preach unto you the
glad-tidings of salvation, that ye may forsake the vanities of this world, and
turn to the living God, who created the heaven and the earth, the sea, and all
the creatures they contain. This Omnipotent being suffered all nations formerly
to walk in their own ways, though he never left himself without a witness,
doing the greatest good to the children of men; it is he that sends rain from
heaven, and crowns the year with fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
joy and gladness."

THE apostle's argument had the desired effect; and the people were at last,
though with difficulty, persuaded to lay aside their intended idolatrous
sacrifice; and surely no argument could be more proper to affect the minds of
the audience. Is it possible to survey the several parts of the creation, and
not discover in every place, evident traces of an infinite wisdom, power* and
goodness? Who can contemplate the heavens, and not discern the wisdom of
Omnipotence, adorning in the most beautiful manner those lofty regions? Behold
the sun, how justly is that source of light and heat, placed in the center of
the planetary choir, that each may enjoy its destined share of his prolific
beams; so that the earth is not burnt by a too near approach, nor chilled by
the northern blasts from too great a recess; but impregnated with fruits and
flowers, by the happy influence of a vital heat, and crowned with luxurient
plenty by the benign influences of the seasons. Who but an Infinite Being could
launch these massive globes through the immense regions of space, and confine
their motions to their respective orbits? Who poizes the balancings of the
clouds, that divides a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, and a way
for the lightning of thunder? Who can bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion? Or who can bring forth Mazaroth in his season, or
guide Arcturus with his sons? Do these happen by chance, or by the secret
appointment of Infinite Wisdom? Who can contemplate the wonderful properties of
the air, the great treasury of vital breath, and not reflect on the Divine
Wisdom that formed it? If we survey the earth, we there discover the footsteps
of an Almighty Being, who stretchest the North over the empty place, and
hangs the earth upon nothing; filling it with a great variety of admirable
and useful creatures, and m^intaining them all by the bounty of his hand. It is
he that clothes the grass with delightful verdure, that crowns the year with
his loving kindness, and causes the v^^^eys to stand thick with corn. It is he
that makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the service of
man: he adorns the lilies of the field, that neither toil nor spin, with a
glory that excels the pomp and grandeur of Solomon's court: He shut up the sea
with doors, and said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall
thy proud waves be stayed. It is this Almighty Being that arrests the storm,
and smooths the tempestuous billows of the deep; that delivers the mariner
from all his troubles, and brings his ship into the desired haven of safety.
How reasonable, therefore, is it that we should worship and adore this
Omnipotent, this kind Creator, and not transfer the honors due to him alone,
to frail mortals, much less to dumb idols, the works of mens^ hands, which
cannot profit.

THUS having persuaded the people to desist from the idolatrous worship they
would have paid them, the apostles continued their labors in instructing the
people, and planting in this city the gospel of the Son of God: but the malice
of the Jews still pursued them; for some of these bigoted Israelites coming
from Antioch and Iconium, exasperated and stirred up the multitude; so that
those very persons who could hardly be restrained from offering sacrifice to
them, now used them like slaves, stoning them, in so cruel a manner, that Paul
was thought to be dead, and as such they dragged him out of the city; but while
the Christians of Lystra were attending on his corpse, probably in order to
carry him to his grave, he arose and returned with them into the city; and the
next day departed with Barnabas to Derbe where they preached the gospel, and
converted many; no danger being able to terrify them from the work of the
ministry, and publishing the glad-tidings of salvation in every place they came
to.

HOWEVER, they did not long continue at Derbe, but returned to Lystra, Iconium,
and Antioch of Pisidia, confirming the Christians of those places in the faith,
earnestly persuading them to persevere, and not be discouraged with those
troubles and persecutions which they must expect would attend the profession of
the gospel. And that the affairs of the church might be conducted with more
regularity, they ordained elders and pastors, to teach, to instruct, and to
watch over them; and then left them to the protection of the Almighty to whose
care they recommended them by fasting and prayer.

THE Apostles, after leaving Antioch, passed through Pisidia, and came to
Pamphylia; and after preaching the gospel at Perga, they went down to Attalia.
Having thus finished the circuit of their ministry, they returned back to
Antioch in Syria, from whence they at first departed. Here they summoned the
church, and gave them an account of their ministry, the success it had met with
in these different parts, and how great a door had thus been opened for the
conversion of the Heathens.

DURING St. Paul's stay at Antioch, that famous controversy, relating to the
observation of the Jewish ceremonies in the Christian dispensation, was set on
foot by certain Jewish converts, to the great disturbance of the whole church.
And it was determined to send Paul and Barnabas to consult with the Apostles
and church at Jerusalem, that this affair might be settled on the most solid
foundation. On their arrival at Jerusalem, they first addressed themselves to
Peter, James, and John, the pillars of that church, by whom they were kindly
entertained, and kindly admitted to the right hand of fellowship. And
perceiving by the account given them by St. Paul, that the gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed to him, as that of the circumcision was to Peter,
they agreed that Peter should preach to the Jews, and Paul to the Gentiles.
This being determined, a council was summoned, wherein Peter declared his
opinion, and Paul and Barnabas acquainted them with the great things God by
their ministry, had done amongst the Gentiles. A plain evidence, that they were
accepted by the Almighty, though uncircumcised, as well as the Jews with all
their legal rights and privileges. Accordingly, it was unanimously determined,
that the Gentiles were not under the obligation of the law of Moses, and
therefore, for their fuller satisfaction in this matter, it was agreed, that
some persons of their own church should be joined with Paul and Barnabas, to
carry the decrees of the council to Antioch.

ST. PAUL and his companions, having received the decretal epistle, returned
back to Antioch; and soon after Peter himself came down. On reading this
epistle in the church the converts conversed freely and inoffensively with the
Gentiles, till some of the Jews coming thither from Jerusalem, Peter withdrew
his conversation, as if it had been a thing unwarrantable and unlawful. By such
a strange method of proceeding, the minds of many were dissatisfied, and their
consciences very uneasy. St. Paul, with the greatest concern, observed it, and
publicly rebuked Peter with that sharpness and severity his unwarrantable
practice called for on such an important occasion.

PAUL and Barnabas, soon after this dispute, resolved to visit the churches
they had planted amongst the Gentiles, and Barnabas was desirous of taking with
them his cousin Mark: but this Paul strenuously opposed, as he had left them in
their former journey. This trifling dispute arose to such a height, that these
two great apostles and fellow laborers in the gospel parted asunder; Barnabas,
taking Mark with him repaired to Cyprus his native country; and Paul, having
made choice of Silas, and recommended the success of his undertaking to the
care of Divine Providence, set forward on his intended journey.

ST. PAUL and Silas first visited the churches of Syria and Cilicia, confirming
them in the faith, by their instructions and exhortations. Hence they sailed to
Crete, where Paul preached the gospel, and constituted Titus to be the first
bishop and pastor of that island, leaving him to settle those affairs of the
church which time would not permit the apostle to settle himself. From hence
Paul and Silas returned back into Cilicia, and came to Lystra, where they found
Timothy, whose father was a Greek but his mother a Jewish convert, and by her
he had been brought up under all the advantages of a pious and religious
education, especially with regard to the Holy Scriptures, which he had studied
with the greatest assiduity and success. This person St. Paul designed for the
companion of his travels, and a special instrument in the ministry of the
gospel: but knowing that his being uncircumcised would prove a stumbling block
to the Jews, caused him to be circumcised; being willing in lawful and
indifferent matters, in order to save the souls of men, to conform himself to
their tempers, apprehensions, and prejudices.

ST. PAUL and his companions now departed from Lystra, passing through Phrygia
and the country of Galatia, where the apostle was entertained with the greatest
kindness and veneration, the people looking upon him as an angel sent
immediately from heaven; and being by revelation forbidden to go into Asia, he
was commanded by a second vision to repair to Macedonia, to preach the gospel.

ACCORDINGLY, our apostle prepared to pass from Asia into Europe. Here St. Luke
joined them, and became ever after the inseparable companion of St. Paul, who
being desirous of finding the speediest passage into Macedonia, took ship with
his companions Silas, Luke and Timothy, and came to Samothracia, an island in
the Aegean sea, not far from Thrace; and the next day to Neapolis, a port of
Macedonia. Leaving Neapolis they repaired to Philippi, the metropolis of that
part of Macedonia, and Roman colony, where, for some days, they resided.

PAUL, according to his constant practice, preached in a Proseucha or oratory
of the Jews, which stood by the river side, at some distance from this city,
and was much frequented by the devout women of their religion, who met there to
pray and hear the law. To these St. Paul preached the glad-tidings of the
gospel; and, by the influence of the Holy Spirit, converted many, especially a
certain woman named Lydia, a Jewish proselyte, a seller of purple in that city,
but a native of Thyatira. This woman being baptized with her whole family, was
so importunate with St. Paul and his companions to abide at her house, that
they were constrained to accept of her invitation.

WHILE the apostles resided at Philippi, they continued their daily course of
worshipping at the same oratory. And after several days, as they were repairing
to the same place of devotion, there met them a damsel who had a prophetic
spirit of divination, by whom her masters acquired very great advantage. This
woman followed Paul and his companions, crying out, These men are the servants
of the Most High God, which show unto us the way to salvation. Paul, at first,
took no notice of her, not being willing to multiply miracles without
necessity: but when he saw her following them several days together, he began
to be troubled; and in imitation of his great Master, who would not suffer the
devil to acknowledge him, lest his false and lying tongue should prejudice the
truth in the minds of men, commanded the spirit, in the name of JESUS, to come
out of her. The devil with reluctance obeyed, and left the damsel immediately.

AS this miraculous cure proved a great loss to her masters, who acquired large
gains from her soothsaying, they were filled with malice and envy against the
apostles; and, by their instigation, the multitude arose, and, seizing upon
Paul and his companions, hurried them before the magistrates and governors of
the colony; accusing them of introducing many innovations which were
prejudicial to the state, and unlawful for them to comply with, as being
Romans. The magistrates being concerned for the tranquillity of the state, and
jealous of all disturbances, were very forward to punish the offenders, against
whom the multitude testified; and therefore commanded the officers to strip
them and scourge them severely, as persons who stirred up seditions.

THE sentence was accordingly executed; after which the apostles were committed
to close custody, the jailer receiving more than ordinary charge to keep them
safely; and he accordingly thrust them into the inner prison, and made their
feet fast in the stocks: but the most obscure dungeon, or the pitchy mantle of
the night, cannot intercept the beams of divine joy and comfort from the souls
of such pious men. Their minds were all serenity, and at midnight they prayed
and sung praises so loud, that they were heard in every part of the prison: nor
were their prayers offered to the throne of grace in vain; an earthquake shook
the foundations of the prison, opened the doors, loosed the chains, and set the
prisoners at liberty. This convulsion of nature roused the jailer from his
sleep; and concluding from what he saw, that all his prisoners were escaped,
was going to put a period to his life; but Paul, observing him, hastily cried
out, Do thyself no harm, for we are all here. The keeper was now as greatly
surprised at the goodness of the apostles, as he was before terrified at the
thoughts of their escape; and calling for a light, he came immediately into the
presence of the apostles, fell down at their feet, took them from the dungeon,
brought them into his own house, washed their stripes, and begged of them to
instruct him in the knowledge of that God who was mighty to save and deliver.

THE goaler's request was readily granted by St. Paul, who replied, That, if he
believed in JESUS CHRIST, he might be saved, with his whole house. Accordingly,
the jailer, with all his family, were, after a competent instruction, baptized,
and received as members of the church of CHRIST. How happy a change does the
doctrine of the gospel make in the minds of men! How does it smooth the
roughest tempers, and instill the sweetest principles of civility and
goodnature into the minds of men! He who but a few moments before, tyrannized
over the apostles, now treated them with the greatest respect, and the highest
marks of kindness he was capable of showing.

WHEN it was day, the magistrates, either hearing what had happened, or
reflecting on what they had done, as too harsh and unjustifiable, sent their
sergeant to the jailer with orders to discharge the apostles. The jailer
joyfully delivered the message, and bid them depart in peace: but Paul, that he
might make the magistrates sensible what injury they had done them, and how
unjustly they had punished them without examination or trial, sent them word,
that as they had thought proper to scourge and imprison Romans, contrary to the
laws of the empire, he expected they should come themselves, and make them some
satisfaction for the illegal treatment they had received.

THIS message terrified the magistrates, who well knew how dangerous it was to
provoke the formidable power of the Romans, who never suffered any freeman to
be beaten uncondemned; they came therefore to the prison, and very submissively
entreated the apostles to depart without any further disturbance. This small
recompense for the cruel usage they had received was accepted by the meek
followers of the blessed JESUS; they left the prison, and retired to the house
of Lydia, where they comforted their brethren with an account of their
deliverance, and departed; having laid the foundation of a very eminent church,
as appears from St. Paul's epistle to the church at Philippi.

PAUL and his companions leaving this city, continued their journey toward the
west, till they came to Thessalonica, the capital of Macedonia, about an
hundred and twenty miles from Philippi. On their arrival at Thessalonica, Paul,
according to his custom, went into the synagogue of the Jews, and preached unto
his countrymen; the ungrateful usage he had met with in other places, not
discouraging him from persevering in so glorious a work. His doctrine however
was strenuously opposed by the Jews, who would not allow JESUS to be the
Messiah, because of the ignominious death which he had suffered.

THE apostles during their stay at Thessalonica, lodged in a house of a certain
Christian, named Jason, who entertained them very courteously. But the Jews
would not suffer the apostles to continue at rest; they refused to embrace the
gospel themselves, and therefore envied its success, and determined to oppose
its progress; accordingly, they gathered together a great number of lewd and
wicked wretches, who beset the house of Jason, intending to take Paul, and
deliver him up to an incensed multitude; but in this they were disappointed,
Paul and Silas being removed from thence by the Christians, and concealed in
some other part of the city. Their fury however was rather exasperated than
lessened at losing their prey; and, as they could not find the apostles of the
blessed JESUS, they determined to be revenged on Jason, who had concealed them.
Accordingly they seized on him and some others of the brethren, and carried
them before the magistrates of the city, accusing them, as they had before done
the apostles themselves at Philippi, of disturbing the peace of the empire, and
setting up JESUS as a king, in degradation of the emperor's dignity and
authority. This accusation induced both people and magistrates to be their
enemies; and though Jason was only accused of harboring those innovators, yet
the magistrate could not be prevailed upon to dismiss him and his companions,
till they had given security for their appearance when called upon.

WHEN the tumult was over, the Thessalonians, who had been converted by them,
sent away Paul and Silas by night to Beroea, a city about fifty miles south of
Thessalonica, but out of the power of their enemies. Here also Paul's great
love for his countrymen the Jews, and his earnest desire for their salvation,
excited him to preach to them in particular: accordingly, he entered into their
synagogue, and explained the gospel unto them, proving out of the Old
Testament, the truth of the doctrines he advanced. These Jews were of a more
candid and ingenious temper than those of Thessalonica; and as they heard him
with great reverence and attention expound and apply the Scriptures, so they
searched diligently, whether his proofs were proper and pertinent, and
consonant to the sense of the texts he referred to: and having found every
thing to be agreeable to what Paul had advanced, many of them believed; and
several Gentiles, followed their example, became obedient to the faith, amongst
whom were several women of quality. The news of this remarkable success was
carried to Thessalonica, and greatly incensed the inveterate enemies of the
gospel there; who accordingly repaired to Beroea, and raised tumults against
the apostles; so that Paul, to avoid their fury, was forced to leave the town;
but Silas and Timothy, either less known, or less envied, continued still in
the place.

LEAVING Beroea under the conduct of certain guides, it was pretended that Paul
designed to retire by sea out of Greece, that his restless enemies might cease
their persecution: but the guides, according to his desire, brought him to
Athens, and left him there, after receiving from him an order for Silas and
Timothy to repair to him as soon as they conveniently could.

AT this time Athens was the most famous academy of all Greece, and abounding
with philosophers illustrious for their learning. Amongst the several sects
that now flourished at Athens, the Stoics and Epicureans were the most
remarkable for their opposition to Christianity. The Epicureans because they
found their pleasant and jovial humor, and their loose and exorbitant course
of life, so greatly checked and controlled by the strict and severe precepts of
the gospel; and because the doctrines of it so plainly and positively asserted
a Divine Providence governing the world, and which at the last day will reward
or punish every man according to his works. The Stoics, on the other hand,
though pretending to principles of great and uncommon severity, and such as had
the nearest affinity to the doctrines of the gospel, yet they found them very
different in pactice. That meek and humble temper of mind, that modesty and
self-denial, which the gospel so earnestly recommends, and so strictly
requires, were directly opposite to the immoderate pride and ambition of that
sect, who were not ashamed to affirm, that their sages and philosophers were
not inferior to God himself in wisdom.

DURING Paul's abode at Athens, expecting the arrival of Silas and Timothy, he
walked up and down, to take a more accurate survey of the city, which he found
miserably overrun with superstition and idolatry. The inhabitants were
remarkably religious and devout: they had a great number of gods, whom they
adored; false, indeed, they were, but such as they, being destitute of
revelation, accounted true: and so very careful were they, that no deity should
want due honor from them, that they had an altar inscribed, TO THE UNKNOWN
GOD. A great variety of reasons are given for this inscription: some affirm,
that it was the name which the Pagans generally gave to the God of the Jews;
but others think that, besides the unknown God, it included all the gods of
Asia, Europe, and Africa.

THE spirit of the apostle was grieved at these superstitious practices: he
lamented to see so much zeal and devotion misplaced; and flattered himself, if
he could but direct it to its proper object, it would be of eminent service to
the church of CHRIST. Accordingly, he exerted all his strength for their
conversion; disputing on the sabbath days in the synagogues of the Jews; and at
other times took all opportunities of preaching to the Athenians the coming of
the Messiah to save the world from sin and misery.

THE apostle's doctrine was equally new and strange to the Athenians; and
though they did not persecute him as the Jews did, yet his preaching JESUS was
considered by the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers as a fabulous legend; and by
the more sober part, as a discovery of some new gods, which they had not yet
placed in their temples: and though they were not unwilling to receive any new
deities, yet as Areopagus, the supreme court of the city, was to judge of all
gods, to whom public worship might be allowed, they brought him before those
judges, to give an account of his doctrine in their hearing.

BEING placed before the judges of this high assembly, St. Paul readily gave
them an account of his doctrine, in a grave and elegant speech; wherein he did
not tell them they were horrible and gross idolators, lest he should offend
them, and thereby prevent them from listening to his reasons; but, having
commended them for their religious dispositions, he took occasion from the
altar inscribed to the unknown God, to make a proper defense of his doctrine.
"I endeavor, said he, only to explain that altar to you, and manifest the
nature of that God whom ye ignorantly worship; which is the God that made the
world, and all things therein: and who being Lord of all, dwells not in temples
made with hands, nor is to be worshipped in lifeless idols. As he is the
Creator of all things, he cannot be confined to the workmanship of man, whether
temples or statues; nor stands in need of sacrifices, since he is the fountain
of life to all things. He made from one common original, the whole race of
mankind, and has wisely determined their dependence on him, that they might be
obliged to seek after him and serve him. A truth perceivable in the darkest
state of ignorance, and acknowledged by one of your own poets. If this be the
nature of God, it is surely the highest absurdity to represent him by any image
or similitude. The divine patience has been too much exercised already with
such gross abuses in religion; but now expects a thorough reformation, having
sent his son JESUS CHRIST to make him known to the world, and at the same time
to inform them that he has appointed a day of general judgment, when the
religion of mankind shall be tried by the test of the gospel, before his only
begotten Son, who is appointed sole Judge of quick and dead, and whose
commission to that high office has been ratified by the Almighty, in raising
him from the dead by his almighty power."

HE had no sooner mentioned the resurrection, than some of the philosophers
mocked and derided him; others, more modest, but not satisfied with the proofs
he had given, gravely answered, We would hear thee again of this matter, After
which Paul departed from the court; but not without some success: for a few of
his auditors believed and attended his instructions; amongst whom were
Dionysius one of the judges, and Damaris, thought by some to have been his
wife. And it is generally believed that Dionysius was afterward constituted
the first bishop of Athens by this Apostle.

WHILE St. Paul remained at Athens, Timothy, according to the order he had
received, came to him out of Macedonia, and brought an account that the
Christians at Thessalonica were under prosecution from their fellow citizens,
ever since his departure, at which St. Paul was greatly concerned, and at first
inclined to visit them in person, to confirm them in the faith they had
embraced; but being hindered by the enemies to the gospel, he sent Timothy to
comfort them, and put them in mind of what they had at first heard, namely,
that persecution would be the constant attendant on their profession.

ST. PAUL left Athens on Timothy's departure, and traveled to Corinth, a very
populous place, and famous for its trade. Here he found Aquila, and Priscilla
his wife, lately come from Italy, after having been banished from Rome by a
decree of Claudius; and they being of the same trade he himself had learned in
his youth, he wrought with them, that he might not be burdensome to the new
converts in that city.

THE apostle after some stay in Corinth, was joined by Silas and Timothy, and
disputed frequently in the synagogue, reasoning and proving that JESUS was the
true Messiah. This exasperated the Jews to the greatest degree, and what they
could not conquer by argument and force of reason, they endeavored to carry by
noise and clamor, blended with blasphemies and revilings; the last refuge of
an impotent and baffled cause. But St. Paul, to testify his resentment, shook
his garment, and told them, that since they were determined to pull down the
vengeance of heaven upon their own heads, he was absolutely guiltless and
innocent, and would henceforth address himself to the Gentiles: accordingly he
left them, and repaired to the house of Justus, a religious proselyte, where by
his preaching and miracles, he converted great numbers to the faith; amongst
which were Crispus the chief ruler of the synagogue, Gaius, and Stephanus, who
with their families were baptized, and admitted members of the church of CHRIST.

INASMUCH as the constant returns of malice and ingratitude are sufficient to
tire the largest charity, and cool the most generous resolution; our dear
Redeemer, therefore, that the apostle might not be discouraged by the restless
attempts and machinations of his enemies, appeared to him in a vision, and told
him, that notwithstanding the bad success he had hitherto met with, there was a
large harvest to be gathered in that place, that he should not be afraid of his
enemies, but preach the gospel boldly and faithfully, for that he himself would
protect and preserve him from every danger.

ST. PAUL seems about this time to have written his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Silas and Timothy being lately returned from thence, and
delivered the message for which he had sent them thither. The principal design
of this epistle is, to confirm them in the belief of the Christian religion,
and excite them to persevere in it, notwithstanding al^ the malice of their
enemies, and the persecutions they must expect to suffer; and to instruct them
in the duties of their high vocation.

DURING these transactions, the malicious Jews were plotting his destruction:
but being for some time disappointed, their malice changed into fury, and they
hurried the apostle before the tribunal of Gallio, elder brother to the famous
Seneca, and proconsul of the province, accusing him of being an innovator in
religion, and of endeavoring to introduce a method of worshipping God contrary
to the law. Paul was ready to have made his defense; but Gallio prevented him
by telling his accusers, that if he had been guilty of any injustice he would
have heard their complaint and redressed their grievance; but as it was nothing
but a controversy about words and names, he would have nothing to do with it.
But the Jews continuing their clamor, he commanded his officers to drive them
from the tribunal; which was accordingly done, and some of the townsmen seized
upon Softhens one of the rulers of the synagogue, and beat him before the
judgment seat, the proconsul giving himself no concern about it. Thus were the
designs of the apostle's enemies rendered abortive; and Paul continued, without
any further opposition, to preach the doctrine of the gospel during a year and
a half, when he left the church at Corinth, to visit others he had planted in
different parts of the east.

WHILE the apostle continued at Corinth he wrote his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, to supply his absence. In this Epistle he again endeavors to
confirm their minds in the truth of the gospel, and prevent their being shaken
with those troubles which the wicked and unbelieving Jews would be continually
raising against them. And because some passages in his former Epistle relating
to the destruction of the Jews had been misunderstood, as if the day of the
Lord was near at hand, he rectifies these mistakes, and shows the sign that
must precede our Lord's coming to judgment in the latter days.

LEAVING the church at Corinth, St. Paul took ship at Cenchrea, the port of
Corinth, for Syria, taking with him Aquila and Priscilla; and on his arrival at
Ephesus, he preached a while in the synagogue of the Jews, promising to return
to them, after keeping the passover at Jerusalem. Accordingly, he again took
ship, and landed at Caesarea, and from thence traveled to Jerusalem, where he
kept the feast, visited the church, and then repaired to Antioch: here he
stayed some time, and then traversed the countries of Gallatia and Phrygia,
till he came to Ephesus, confirming the new-converted Christians.

WHILE the apostle was taking this large circuit, Providence took care of the
churches of Ephesus and Corinth, by means of one Apollos, an eloquent Jew of
Alexandria, and well acquainted with the law and writings of the prophets. This
man coming to Ephesus, though he was only instructed in the rudiments of
Christianity, and John's baptism; yet he taught with great courage, and a most
powerful zeal. After being fully instructed in the faith by Aquila and
Priscilla, he passed over into Achaia, being furnished with recommendatory
letters, by the churches of Ephesus and Corinth. He was of the greatest service
in Achaia, in watering what Paul had planted, confirming the disciples, and
powerfully convincing the Jews, that JESUS was the true Messiah promised in the
scriptures of the Old Testament.

LEAVING Apollos thus usefully employed, St. Paul returned to Ephesus, where he
fixed his abode for three years, bringing with him Gaius of Derbe, Aristarchus
a native of Thessalonica, Timotheus and Erastus of Corinth, and Titus. The
first thing he did after his arrival was to examine certain disciples, whether
they had received the Holy Ghost since they believed? To which they answered,
'That the doctrine they had received, promised nothing of that nature; nor had
they ever heard that such an extraordinary spirit had of late been bestowed
upon the church.' This answer surprised the apostle, who asked them in what
name they had been baptized; since, in the Chri^^^an form, the name of the Holy
Ghost was always expressed? They replied, that they had only received John's
baptism; which, though it enjoined men to repent, yet mentioned nothing
expressly concerning the Holy Ghost, or its gifts or powers. Upon which the
apostle informed them, that though John's babtism commanded nothing but
repentance, yet it tacitly implied the whole doctrine of CHRIST and the Holy
Ghost. When they heard this, they were baptized according to the form
prescribed by CHRIST himself, that is, in the name of the blessed Trinity; and
after the apostle had prayed and laid his hands upon them, they received the
gifts of tongues and other miraculous powers.

ST. PAUL, after this, entered into the Jewish synagogues, where for the first
three months, he contende^ and disputed with the Jews, endeavoring with great
earnestness and resolution to convince them of the truth of the Christian
religion. But when instead of success he met with nothing but obstinacy and
infidelity, he left the synagogue, and taking those with him whom he had
converted, instructed them and others who resorted to him, in the school of one
Tyrannus, a place where scholars used to be instructed. In this manner he
continued to preach the gospel two whole years; by which means the Jews and
proselytes of the whole proconsular of Asia had an opportunity of hearing the
glad-tidings of salvation. And because miracles are the clearest evidence of a
divine commission, the Almighty was pleased to ratify the doctrine which St.
Paul delivered by amazing and miraculous operations, many of which were of a
peculiar and extraordinary nature; for he did not only heal those that come to
him, but if napkins or handkerchiefs were only touched by him, and applied to
the sick, their diseases immediately vanished, and the evil spirits departed
out of those whom they had possessed.

THE apostle about this time wrote his Epistle to the Galatians; for he had
heard that since his departure, corrupt opinions had crept in amongst them,
with regard to the necessity of observing the legal rites; and that several
impostors had found admittance into that church, who knew no better method of
undermining the doctrine he had planted there, than by vilifying his person,
slighting him only as an apostle at second hand, not to be compared with Peter,
James, and John, who had familiarly conversed with CHRIST in the days of his
flesh, and been immediately deputed by him.

IN this epistle he reproves them with some necessary severity, for their being
so soon led out of the right way, wherein he had placed them, and so easily
suffered themselves to be imposed upon by the crafty artifices of seducers. He
vindicates the honor of his apostleship, and the immediate receiving his
commission from CHRIST, wherein he shows, that he was not inferior to the very
best of his apostles. He largely refutes those Judaical opinions that had
tainted and infected them; and in the conclusion, instructs them in the rules
and duties of a holy life.

WHILE St. Paul resided at Ephesus, an accident happened which was attended
with great trouble and danger. In this city was the celebrated temple of Diana,
a structure so magnificent for beauty, riches, and magnitude, that it was
reckoned one of the seven wonders of the world: but what increased its fame and
reputation was an image of Diana kept there, which the idolatrous priests
persuaded the people was made by Jupiter himself, and dropped down from heaven;
for which reason it was held in great veneration, not only at Ephesus, but
throughout all Asia: so that people procured silver shrines, or figures of this
temple; of such a size as to carry in their pockets, either for curiosity, or
to stir up their devotion. This proved the source of a great deal of business
to the silversmiths of Ephesus, of whom one Demetrius was the chief: this man
plainly perceiving, that Christianity tended to the subversion of idolatry,
and, consequently, to the ruin of their gainful employment, called all the
artists together, and pathetically represented to them, "How inevitably they
must be reduced to a state of poverty, if they suffered Paul to bring their
temple and goddess into contempt, by persuading people, as he did, that they
were no gods which were made by the hands of men."

ON hearing this speech of Demetrius, the people were fired with a zeal which
they could no longer contain; so that they cried out with one voice, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. They should, indeed, have considered, that if their
goddess was able to defend herself against the doctrines preached by Paul,
neither she nor the temple were in danger; whereas, if Paul was able to destroy
their gods, it was in vain for them to resist him: but interest and
superstition meeting in the minds of a biggotted multitude, admitted of no
reason; they were all fired with zeal for their goddess, and determined, if
they could find Paul, to expose him to the beasts in the theater. The whole
city was filled with the tumult; and the crowd, missing Paul, laid hold on
Gaius and Aristarchus, two Macedonians of Paul's company, and hurried them into
the theater, with a design to throw them to the wild beasts: Paul who was at
present in a place of security, hearing of the danger to which his brethren
were exposed, was very desirous of venturing after them, in order to speak in
their behalf; but was at last dissuaded from it, not only by the Christians,
but also by the Gentile governors of the theatrical games, who were his
friends, and assured him, that he would only endanger himself, without rescuing
his friends, or affording them any assistance.

THE multitude were now prodigiously clamorous and confused, most of them not
knowing the reason for which they were come together; and, therefore, some
cried one thing, and some another. In this distraction, Alexander, a Jewish
convert, was singled out by the multitude, and by the instigation of the Jews
was going to make his defense, in which doubtless, he would have laid the whole
blame upon Paul: but the multitude perceiving him to be a Jew, and therefore
suspecting he was one of Paul's associates, raised another outcry for near two
hours together, wherein nothing could be heard but Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. This confusion brought the town clerk, who kept the register of the
games, into the theater, to suppress, if possible, so uncommon a tumult; and
having with great difficulty, obtained silence, calmly and discretely told
them, "That the world was sufficiently acquainted with the devotion paid by the
Ephesians to the great goddess Diana, and the image which fell down from
Jupiter; and therefore it was absolutely needless for them to publish it at
that time; that if Demetrius and his fraternity had any thing to allege
against Paul and his companions, the court were open, and they might bring
their accusation against them; or, if they were questioned with regard to the
breach of any of their laws, the cause ought to be heard in a regular assembly.
That they would do well to consider this, and be quiet; having already rendered
themselves obnoxious to the displeasure of the magistrates, if they did think
proper to call them to an account for the tumult which they had that day
occasioned.

THE multitude, on hearing this discourse, were convinced that they had acted
very improperly, and therefore repaired to their respective habitations; and
Gaius, Aristarchus, and Alexander, were released without any hurt: but the
escape of Paul was so very remarkable, that he mentions it as a miraculous
deliverance. We had, says he, the sentence of death in ourselves, that we
should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raises the dead, who delivered
us from so great a death. And in another place he tells us, he fought with
beasts at Ephesus; alluding, either to the design of the enraged multitude, of
throwing him to the wild beasts in the theater, though their intention was not
executed; or to the manners of the people, who sufficiently deserved the
character of being savage and brutal in the strictest sense of the words.

PAUL about this time, was informed of some disturbances in the church of
Corinth, hatched and fomented by a company of false teachers, crept in amongst
them, who endeavored to draw them into parties and factions, by persuading one
company to be for Peter, another for Paul, and a third for Apollos; as if the
principal part of religion consisted in being of this or that denomination, or
in a warm active zeal to depreciate and oppose whoever is not for our own
narrow sect. It is a very weak and slender claim, when a man holds his religion
by no better title than his having joined himself to such or such a sect or
congregation, and is remarkably zealous to promote it; to be childishly and
passionately clamorous for some person's particular mode of administration, or
some particular opinion; as if religion rather consisted in curious disputes,
or in separating from our brethren, than in righteousness, peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost. By these means, schisms and factions broke into the Corinthian
church, whereby many wild and extravagant opinions, and some of them such as
tended to undermine the fundamenta^ articles of Christianity, were planted, and
had taken root there. To cure these distempers, St. Paul wrote his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, wherein he smartly reproves them for their schisms
and parties, conjures them to follow after peace and unity, corrects those
gross corruptions that had been introduced amongst them, and particularly
resolves those many cases and controversies, wherein they had requested his
advice.

APOLLOS soon after determining to go to Crete together with Zenos, St. Paul
sent by them his Epistle to Titus, whom he had made bishop of that island, and
had left there for propagating the gospel. In this Epistle, he instructs him
fully in the execution of his office, how to behave himself, and what
directions he should give to others, in the several relations and ranks of men,
especially those who were to be advanced to places of office and authority in
the church, amongst the Gentiles.

THE tumult at Athens had not long subsided, before Paul called the Christians
together, and took his leave of them with the most tender expressions of love
and affection. He had now spent almost three years at Ephesus, and founded
there a very considerable church, of which he had ordained Timothy the first
bishop. He first traveled about two hundred miles northward to Troas, before
he took ship, expecting to meet Titus there: but missing him, he pursued his
voyage to Macedonia, where on his arrival, he preached the gospel in several
places, even, as far as Illyricum, now called Sclavonia. During this journey,
he met with many troubles and dangers, without were fightings, and within were
fears: but God, who comfort those that are cast down, revived his spirits by
the arrival of Titus, who gave him a pleasing account of the good effects his
Epistle had produced at Corinth. This worthy bishop came thither with large
contributions from that church, and from the example of those liberal
Christians, St. Paul stirred up the Macedonians to imitate their charity,
intending to assist the distressed Christians at Jerusalem, who were then in an
indigent and persecuted state.

WHILE Titus continued in Macedonia, Paul wrote his second Epistle to
Corinthians, and sent it to them by Titus and Luke. In this, he endeavors to
rectify what his former Epistle had not effected, to vindicate his apostleship
from that contempt and scorn, and himself from those slanders and aspersions
which the seducers, who found themselves lashed by his former letter, had cast
upon him; together with several other particular cases relating to the church.
About this time also, he wrote his first Epistle to Timothy, whom he had left
at Ephesus, wherein he gives him large directions how to carry himself in the
discharge of that great office and authority in the church, committed to his
care; and instructs him in the particular qualifications of those he should
make choice of as bishops and ministers in the church. He likewise gives him
instructions with regard to his giving orders to deaconesses, and instructing
servants; warning him at the same time against that pestilent generation of
heretics and seducers that would arise in the church, after his departure.

WHILE Paul remained in Greece, he went to Corinth, where he wrote his
excellent Epistle to the Romans, which he sent by Phoebe, a deaconess of the
church of Cenchrea, near Corinth. His principle intention in this Epistle is,
fully to state and determine the great controversy between the Jews and
Gentiles, with regard to the obligations of the rites and ceremonies of the
Jewish law, and those principal and material points of doctrine depending upon
it; namely, Christian liberty, the use of indifferent things, and the like;
and, which is the chief intention of all religion, instructs them, and presses
them to perform the duties of a holy and pious life, such as the Christian
doctrine naturally recommends and enforces.

BEING now determined to return into Syria, in order to convey the
contributions to the brethren at Jerusalem, he set out on his journey; but
being informed, that the Jews had formed a design of killing and robbing him by
the way, he returned back into Macedonia, and came to Philippi, from whence he
went to Troas, where he stayed seven days: here he preached to them on the
Lord's day, and continued his discourse till midnight, being himself to depart
in the morning. The length of his discourse and time of the night caused some
of his audience to be overtaken with sleep, and amongst them a young man, named
Eutychus, who fell from the third story, and was taken up dead; but the
apostle, by his prayer to the throne of grace, presently restored him to life,
and health. How indefatigable was the industry of this great apostle! How
closely did he tread in (...) step^ of his great Master, who went about doing
good! He preached and wrought ^^^racles in the name and by the power of CHRIST,
wherever he came! As a master-build^^ he either laid a foundation, or raised
the superstructure! He was instant in season (...) out of season, and spared no
pains to assist the souls of men by warning and persuadi^^ some, and confuting
and establishing others.

AFTER having spent the night in holy exercises, St. Paul took his leave of
(...) brethren in the morning, traveling on foot to Assos, a seaport town,
whither he h^^ before sent his companions by sea: from thence they sailed to
Mytilene, a city in the isle of Lesbos: the next day they sailed from thence,
and came over against Chios, and the day following landed at Trogyllium,
promontory of Ionia, near Samos: the ne^^ day they came to Miletus, not putting
in at Ephesus, because the apostle was resolved (...) be at Jerusalem on the
day of Pentecost, if possible.

ARRIVING at Miletus, he sent to Ephesus, to summon the elders of the church,
and o^ their coming, reminded them of the manner in which he had conversed
amongst them* how faithfully and affectionately he had discharged the offices
of his ministry, and ho^ incessantly he had labored for the good of the souls
of men: adding, that he had never failed to acquaint them, both in public and
private, with whatever might be useful and profitable to them; urging both the
Jews and Gentiles to repentance, and reformation of life, and a hearty
entertainment of the faith of CHRIST: that now he was going up to Jerusalem,
where he was ignorant of what might befall him, except what had been foretold
him by those who were endued with the prophetical gifts of the Holy Ghost;
namel^ that afflictions and imprisonment would attend him; but this gave him no
concer^, being willing to lay down his life whenever the gospel required it,
and fully determine^ to serve faithfully his Lord and Master. "I well know,
continued he, that ye will see my face no more: but for my encouragement and
satisfaction, ye yourselves can bear me witness, that I have not, by concealing
any part of the Christian doctrine, betrayed yo^^ souls: and as for yourselves,
whom God has made bishops and pastors of his church* you should be careful to
feed, guide, and direct those Christians under your inspection* and be
infinitely tender of the welfare of the souls, for whose redemption the blessed
JESUS laid down his own life. All the care, therefore, possible for you to use,
is no mo^^ than necessary; for after my departure, heretical teachers will
appear in the church, to the great danger of the souls of men, seeking by every
crafty method, and pernicio^^ doctrine, to gain proselytes to their party, and
by that means fill the church of CHRIST with schisms and factions. Watch ye,
therefore, and remember, with what tears and sorrow I have, during three years,
warned you of these things: and now I recommend you to the divine favor and
protection, and to the rules and instructions of the gospel, which, if adhered
to, will undoubtedly dispose and perfect you for that state of happiness which
the Almighty has prepared for the good men in the mansions of eternity. You
well know that I have from the beginning dealt faithfully and uprightly with
you* that I have had no covetous designs, or ever desired the riches of other
men; nay, I have labored with mine own hands, to support me and my companions;
you ought therefore to support the weak, and relieve the poor, rather than be
yourselves chargeable to others, according to that incomparable saying of the
great Redeemer of mankind, It is more blessed to give than to receive.

AFTER having finished his discourse, St. Paul kneeled down, and joined with
them in prayer; when they all melted into tears, and, with the greatest
expressions of sorrow, attended him to the ship; grieving in the most
passionate manner for what he had tol^ them, that they should see his face no
more.

DEPARTING from Myletus, Paul and his companions arrived at Coos, from whence
they sailed the next day to Rhodes, two islands in the Aegean sea. From whence
they came to Patra, the metropolis of Lycia, where they went on board another
vessel bound for Tire in Phoenicia. On his arrival he visited the brethren
there, and continued with them a week, and was advised by some of them, who had
the gift of prophecy, not to go up to Jerusalem; but the apostle would by no
means abandon his design, or refuse to suffer any thing, provided he might
spread the gospel of his Savior. Finding all persuasions were in vain, they
all accompanied him to the shore, where he kneeled down and prayed with them;
and after embracing them with the utmost affection, he went on board, and came
to Ptolemais, and the next day to Cesarea. Here Paul and his companions lodged
in the house of Philip, the Evangelist, one of the seven deacons set apart by
the apostles, and who had before converted the Samaritans. Philip had four
daughters, all virgins, each of whom had a prophetic spirit.

WHILE they were in this place, Agabus, a Christian prophet, came thither from
Judea, who taking Paul's girdle, bound his own hands and feet with it;
signifying by this external symbol, that the Jews would bind Paul in that
manner, and deliver him to the Gentiles. Whereupon, both his own companions and
the Christians of Cesarea, earnestly besought him, that he would not go up to
Jerusalem; but the apostle asked them, if they intended by these passionate
dissuasives to add more affliction to his sorrow? For I am ready, continued he,
not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord
Jesus. When the disciples found that his resolution was not to be shaken they
importuned him no further, leaving the event to be determined according to the
pleasure of the Most High. And all things being ready, Paul and his companions
set forwards on their journey, and were kindly and joyfully received by the
Christians at Jerusalem, on their arrival.

PAUL and his companions, the next day after their arrival, went to the house
of St. James the apostle, where the rest of the bishops and governors of the
church were met together. After mutual salutation, the apostle gave them a
particular account of the success with which God had blessed his endeavors in
propagating Christianity amongst the Gentiles; for which they all joined in
thanksgiving to God; but withal told him, that he was now come to a place where
there were many thousands of Jewish converts, who were all zealous for the law
of Moses, and who had been informed, that he taught the Jews whom he had
converted, to renounce circumcision, and the ceremonies of the law; that as
soon as the multitude heard of his arrival, they would all assemble to see how
he behaved himself in this matter: and therefore, to prevent disturbance, they
thought it advisable for him to join himself with four persons, who were at
that time to accomplish a vow, and perform the usual rites and ceremonies with
them, and provide such sacrifices for them, as the law, in that case, required;
and that as a symbol of their discharging their vow, they might shave their
heads; whereby it would appear, that the reports that were spread concerning
him, were false and groundless, and that he himself still observed the rites
and orders of the Mosaical institutions. But, with regard to the Gentile
converts, they required no such observances at their hands, nor expected any
thing more from them in these indifferent matters, than what had been before
determined in the synod formerly held at Jerusalem. St. Paul, who in such cases
was willing to become all things to all men, that he might gain the more,
consented to their counsel; and, taking the persons with him to the temple,
told the priests that the time of a vow they had made being now expired, and
having purified themselves as the nature of their case required, they were come
to make the offerings which the law enjoined.

WHEN the seven days, which those sacrifices were to be offered, were almost
ended, certain Jews from Asia, finding him in the temple, began to raise a
tumult, and laying hold on Paul, called to their brethren the Jews to assist
them, declaring that this was the person who every where preached doctrines
detrimental to the Jewish nation, and destructive to the institutions of the
law, and the purity of that sacred place which he had now defiled, by bringing
Greeks into the temple: positively concluding, that because they had seen
Trophimus, a Gentile convert, with him in the city, that he had also brought
him into the temple: so apt is malice to make any supposition in order to draw
from thence its own conclusion. This accusation, though absolutely false, set
the whole city in an uproar, and seizing on the apostle, they dragged him out
of the temple, when the doors were immediately shut, to prevent his returning
into that holy place: nor had they failed of soon putting a period to all his
sufferings and troubles, had n^^ Claudius Lysias, commander of the Roman
garrison, in the castle of Antonio, arrived with a band of soldiers to his
rescue, and supposing, from the great tumult of the Jews, that he was a more
than ordinary malefactor, loaded him with a double chain, though he was as yet
altogether ignorant, either of his country, or the crime he was accused of; it
being impossible to obtain any satisfactory answer from the multitude, who
called for nothing but his death, following the soldiers in such a riotous
manner, that they were forced to carry the apostle in their arms, to secure him
from the rage and violence of the people, who were ready to tear him in pieces.

WHILE they were going in this manner toward the castle, Paul asked the
governor whether he might have the liberty of speaking to him; who, finding he
understood the Greek language, inquired of him whether he was not an Egyptian,
who, a few years before, had raised a sedition in Judea, and headed a party of
four thousand vile and profligate wretches. To which the apostle replied, that
he was a Jew of Tarsus, a freeman of a rich and honorable city, and therefore
begged of him, that he might have leave to speak unto the people. This the
Roman officer readily granted, and Paul, standing near the door of the castle,
made signs that they should hold their peace, and began to address them in the
Hebrew language; which engaged them to listen with more attention to the
following extraordinary narrative.

"YE descendants of Jacob, listen to a person of your own religion, and, like
yourselves, a child of Abraham; born in Tarsus, and brought up in this city, at
the feet of Gamaliel, and fully instructed in the law delivered by Moses to our
forefathers, and formerly as zealous for the temple-worship as ye are at
present.

"YEA, more, I persecuted unto death all who believed in JESUS, seizing on all
I could find both men and women, and cast them into prison. This the
high priest, and all our elders well know; for from them I received a
commission, and repaired to Damascus, to bring from thence to Jerusalem all the
Christians, in order to their undergoing an exemplary punishment. But as I was
pursuing my journey, to execute this commission, and being arrived near
Damascus, there appeared, about midday, a light from heaven, shining around me
with great brightness.

"BEING terrified at so awful an appearance I fell to the ground, and heard a
voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me. To which I answered,
Who art thou Lord? And the voice replied, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou
persecutest.

"MY companions, during this interval, were greatly terrified at the great
light which surrounded me; but they did not understand the words that were
spoken from above.

"AS soon as I had recovered from the terror with which my mind was filled, on
seeing JESUS so highly advanced above all earthly power, I answered, What shall
I do Lord? And he replied, Arise, and go into Damascus: and there it shall be
told thee of all things, which are appointed for thee to do.

"I was immediately deprived of sight by the brilliance of the glory that shone
around me; so that my companions led me by the hand to Damascus, where one
Ananias, a person well respected by all the Jews of that city, visited me, and
said, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And in a moment my eyes were opened, and
I saw him standing before me.

"PERCEIVING that my sight was restored he said to me, The Almighty God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, has appointed thee to know his will, to see the
great Messiah the Holy One of God, and hear the voice of his mouth; for thou
art chosen to be a witness, to all the nations of the earth, of those
surprising things which thou have seen and heard. Why therefore tarriest thou
here any longer? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord.

"IN a short time after this glorious vision, and miraculous power of the Most
High, when I was returned from Damascus to Jerusalem, and offering up my
prayers in the temple, I fell into a trance, and again saw the great Son of
David, who said unto me Depart quickly from Jerusalem; for the sons of Jacob
will refuse to believe thy testimony concerning me. And I answered, Lord, they
know how cruelly I used thy saints and followers; that I imprisoned and beat
them in every city, and in every synagogue. Nay, when they shed the blood of
thy holy martyr Stephen, I was also one of the spectators; I consented to his
death; I even kept the raiment of those that slew him. But he replied, Depart:
I will send thee to countries far remote; even to the Gentiles, that thou
may there speak in my name and publish to them my salvation.

TILL now the Jews had listened with some attention to his speech; but, on his
mentioning the commission he had received to preach the gospel to the Gentiles,
their fury knew no bounds; crying out, with one accord, Away with such a fellow
from the earth: he is unworthy to be ranked amongst the race of mortals, or
even to breathe the vital air. And as they thought words too weak to express
their fury, they threw off their clothes, and filled the air with dust,
indicating their great desire of stoning him to death.

AT this instant a captain of the guard commanded him to be brought within the
castle, and that he should be examined by scourging, till he confessed the
reason of the uncommon rage shown against him by the people. Accordingly, the
lictor bound him, and was going to put the orders he had received into
execution, when Paul asked the centurion that stood by, whether it was lawful
to scourge a citizen of Rome, before any sentence had been passed upon him? The
centurion, instead of answering the question, repaired immediately to the
governor, desiring him to take care how he proceeded against the prisoner,
because he was a Roman.

ON this information, the governor himself came into the prison, and asked
Paul, whether he was really a free citizen of Rome? And being told he was, he
answered, that he himself procured the great privilege by a large sum of money;
but Paul answered I was free born. On receiving this account, the governor
commanded the centurion not to scourge him, being terrified at what he had
already done; in chaining a free denizen of Rome. The next day therefore he
ordered his chains to be taken off; and that he might thoroughly satisfy
himself of the cause of so unusual a tumult the preceding day, summoned the
Sanhedrim to meet, and brought down Paul before them, that they might hear his
defense.

BEING thus placed before the high council of the Jews, Paul told them, that in
all the passages of his life, he had taken care to govern his actions by the
severest rules of duty and conscience: Men and brethren I have lived in all
good conscience before God until this day. How great is the security of a truly
good man? How strong, though invisible, a support does innocence become in the
greatest danger! With how generous a confidence does virtue and honesty guard
the breast of a true professor of Christianity! Nothing else indeed can lay a
solid foundation for satisfaction and tranquillity. When any calamity overtakes
us, religion and a good conscience fill the breast with a heavenly serenity,
which all the little accidents of this world can neither ruffle or discompose.
And, accordingly, Seneca compares the mind of a wise and good man to the state
of the upper region, which is always calm and serene, though all around is
tumult and confusion.

HOWEVER this expression of the apostle might tend to show the true state of
his mind; the high priest Ananias was so offended at it, that he commanded
those who stood next to him, to strike him on the face; at which the apostle
smartly replied, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall. Thou art placed on the
seat of judgment to determine according to the law, and command me to be
smitten in direct opposition to its precepts. On which some of the spectators
replied, it is not lawful to revile the high priest of the Almighty. And Paul
answered, I did not know that Ananias was appointed by God to be an
high priest; but as he is invested with authority, it is unjust to revile him,
God himself having commanded, that no man should speak evil of the ruler of the
people. St. Paul, now perceiving the council consisted partly of Sadducees and
partly of Pharisees, cried aloud, " Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, a son of
a Pharisee, and am now brought before this tribunal, for asserting the
resurrection from the dead." This declaration threw the whole court into
confusion; the Pharisees, being zealous patrons of that tenet, declared the
prisoner innocent, and that in all probability he had received some intimation
from heaven by an angel, or the silent whispers of the Holy Spirit; and if so,
they really fought against the Omnipotence himself, by opposing his doctrine.
While the Sadducees, who denied the resurrection, together with the existence
of either angel or spirit, strenuously insisted that the apostle was a
turbulent person, and ought to be punished for his misconduct.

HEREUPON the council was greatly divided, and their dissentions increased to
that degree, that the captain feared Paul would have been pulled in pieces by
them, and therefore took him from the bar, and carried him back to the castle.
But during the silence of the night, the great Redeemer of mankind, to comfort
his faithful servant under all the terrors he had suffered the two preceding
days, appeared to him in a vision, encouraging him to constancy and resolution,
assuring him, that as he had borne witness of him at Jerusalem, he should,
notwithstanding all the malice and wicked designs of his enemies, live to bear
his testimony even in Rome itself before the Gentiles.

THE Jews, whose envy and malice were increased by the dilatory proceedings,
determined, the next morning, to use a quicker method of putting a period to
his life. In order to this, above forty of the most turbulent entered into a
shocking confederacy of killing him; ratifying it by an oath, and the most
bitter execration, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had put
their inhuman design in execution: but such vile monsters would do well to
remember, that a Being, from whose eye nothing can be concealed, and whose
power nothing can resist, is privy to all their actions, often renders their
designs abortive, and will surely punish them for their base attempts.
Accordingly, this design, though probably concluded under the pitchy mantle of
the night, was discovered to St. Paul, by his sister's son, and, at the request
of the apostle, told to the governor himself, who immediately commanded two
parties of horse and foot to be ready by nine o'clock that night, in order to
conduct St. Paul to Felix, the Roman governor of that province, to whom also he
sent an account of the whole proceedings of the Jews against the prisoner; and,
at the same time, ordered his accusers also to appear before the Roman
magistrate: accordingly St. Paul was conducted to Antipatris, and afterward to
Cesarea, where the letters being delivered to Felix, the apostle was also
presented to him; and finding that he belonged to the province of Cilicia, he
told him, that as soon as his ^^cusers were come down, he would determine the
affair, and commanded him to be secured in the place called Herod's Hall, till
they should appear against him.

ANANIAS the high priest, with some others of the Sanhedrim, came to Cesarea, a
few days after St. Paul's arrival, accompanied by Tertullus their advocate,
who, in a short, but eloquent speech, adorned with all the flattering and
insinuating arts of oratory, began to accuse the apostle, charging him with
sedition, heresy, and the profanation of the temple; that they would have saved
him the trouble of this hearing, by judging him according to their own law, had
not Lysias, the chief captain, violently taken him from them, and sent both the
prisoner and them to Cesarea, by a guard of soldiers.

THE charge of the orator against the apostle being finished, Felix told St.
Paul, that he was now at liberty to make his defense: accordingly he distinctly
answered every part of the charge, in the following manner. "I answer this
charge of the Jews with greater satisfaction before thee, because thou have for
many years been a judge of this nation. About twelve days since, I repaired to
Jerusalem, to worship the God of Jacob: but I neither disputed with any man, or
endeavored to stir up the people in the synagogues or the city; nor can they
prove the charge they have brought against me at this time.

"HOWEVER, I readily confess, that after the way which they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my fathers, firmly believing every part of the writings of
Moses and the prophets; and, at the same time, believe as they themselves also
do, that the Almighty will raise at the last day, both the just and unjust from
the dead; and I am careful to maintain a clear and quiet conscience, both
toward God and man, agreeable to this faith*

"HAVING spent some years in distant countries, I repaired to Jerusalem, with
the alm* I had collected in other provinces, for the poor of mine own nation,
and offerings for the God of Jacob. And while I was performing the duties of
religion, certain Asiatic Jews found me in the temple, purified according to
the law; but neither attended with a multitude of followers, or the least
tumultuous assembly. It was therefore necessary that these Jews should have
been here, if they had any thing to allege against me: nay, I appeal to those
of the Sanhedrim here present, if any thing has been laid to my charge, except
the objections of the Sadducees, who violently opposed me for asserting the
doctrine of the resurrection from the grave at the last day."

HAVING thus heard both parties, Felix refused to pass any final sentence, till
he had more fully advised about it, and consulted Lysias the governor of the
castle, who was the most proper person to give an account of the sedition and
tumult; commanding, in the mean time, that St. Paul should be kept under a
guard, but at the same time enjoy the liberty of being visited by his friends,
and receive from them any office of friendship and kindness they thought proper
to bestow.

DRUSILLA, a Jewess, and daughter of the elder Herod, who was also the wife of
Felix, soon after this came down to him at Cesarea, in whose presence the
governor sent for Paul, and gave him leave to explain the doctrines of
Christianity. In this discourse, the apostle took occasion particularly to
insist upon the great obligation which the laws of CHRIST lay upon men to
judgment and righteousness, to sobriety and chastity; urging, at the same time,
the true and impartial account that must be given at the judgment of the great
day, when all men shall be arraigned before the awful tribunal of Omnipotence,
for the actions of their past lives, and be eternally punished or rewarded,
according to their works done in the body.

THIS reasoning was wisely adopted to the state and temper of Felix; but
corrosives are very uneasy to a guilty mind: men naturally hate whatever brings
their sins to remmebrance, and sharpens the sting of a violated conscience. But
however disagreeable these truths may be, they cannot be heard without
confusion; and, accordingly, when St. Paul pathetically described the terrors
of the last judgment, Felix trembled on his throne; and was so greatly
affected, that he caused the apostle to break off abruptly, telling him that he
would hear the remainder of his discourse at a season more convenient than the
present.

CERTAINLY Felix had sufficient reason to tremble, and his conscience to be
sensibly alarmed at these reflections; for he was a man notoriously infamous
for rapine and violence. Tacitus tells us, that he made his will the law of the
government, practicing all manner of cruelty and injustice: his incontinence,
luxury, and debauchery, was remarkable; nor did he scruple to violate all the
laws of God and man, to satisfy his unruly passions: to these qualities he
added bribery and covetousness; and, therefore, often sent for our apostle to
discourse with him, expecting he would have given him a considerable sum for
his release; having in all probability, heard that St. Paul had brought a large
quantity of money to Jerusalem: but finding no offers were made him, either by
the apostle himself or his friends, he kept him prisoner two years; when he
himself being discharged from his office by Nero, he left Paul in prison, in
order to gratify the malice of the Jews, and engage them, after his departure
from Judea, to speak the better of his government.

AFTER the displacing of Felix, the government of the province was conferred on
Portius Festus, before whom, at his first coming to Jerusalem, the high priest
and Sanhedrim preferred an indictment against Paul, desiring that he might be
sent for up to Jerusalem, in order to his trial, intending to assassinate him
by the way: but Festus told them, that he was shortly going himself to Cesarea;
and that, if they had any complaint against Paul, they might come down thither
and accuse him. Accordingly, as soon as he was come to Cesarea, he ascended the
tribunal, where the Jews renewed the charge they had before brought against
Paul; but the apostle soon cleared himself of every part of the charge, they
not being able to prove any thing against him. Festus, however, being willing
to procure the favor of the Jews at his entrance on the government, asked him
whether he would go up and be tried before him at Jerusalem? But the apostle
well knowing the consequences of such a proposal, answered, "I am a Roman, and
therefore ought to be judged by the Roman law; and now stand before the
judgment seat of Caesar. I have done nothing against the Jews, a fact thou
thyself very well know to be true. If I have committed any thing that
deserves death, I am ready to die; but if not, no person has a power to
deliver me into the hands of mine enemies. I appeal unto Caesar.

APPEALS of this nature were common amongst the Romans, and introduced to
defend and secure the lives and fortunes of the people from the unjust
encroachment and and over-rigorous severities of the magistrates, whereby it
was lawful in cases of oppression to appeal to the emperor for redress; a thing
more than once setteled by the function of the Valerian law, and now fully
established.

KING Agrippa, who succeeded Herod in the tetrarchate of Galilee, and his
sister Bernice, came to Cesarea, some time after St. Paul had appealed to
Caesar, to visit the new governor. Festus embraced this opportunity of
mentioning the case of our apostle to king Agrippa, together with the
remarkable tumult this affair had occasioned amongst the Jews and the appeal he
had made to Caesar. This account excited the the curiosity of king Agrippa, and
he was desirous of hearing himself what St. Paul had to say in his own
vindication. Accordingly the next day the king and his sister, accompanied with
Festus the governor, and several other persons of distinction, came into the
court with a pompous and splendid retinue, where the prisoner was brought
before them. On his appearing, Festus informed the court how greatly he had
been importuned by the Jews, both at Cesarea and Jerusalem, to put the prisoner
to death as a malefactor; but having, on examination, found him guilty of no
capital crime, and the prisoner himself having appealed unto Caesar, he was
determined to send him to Rome; but was willing to have his cause debated
before Agrippa, that he might be furnished with some material particulars to
send with him; it being highly absurd to send thither a prisoner without
signifying the crimes laid to his charge.

AFTER Festus had finished his speech, Agrippa told Paul, he was now at liberty
to make his own defense: and silence being made, he addressed his speech
particularly to Agrippa, in the following manner.

"I esteem it a particular happiness, king Agrippa, that I am to make my
defense against the accusations of the Jews, before thee; because thou art well
accquainted with all their customs, and the questions commonly debated amongst
them: I therefore beseech thee to hear me patiently and impartially.

"THE Jews in general are well acquainted with my manner of life from my youth,
the greatest part of it having been spent with mine own countrymen at
Jerusalem, They also know that I was educated under the institutions of the
Pharisees, the strictest sect of our religion, and am now arrainged for a tenet
believed by all their fathers, a tenet sufficiently credible in itself, and
plainly revealed in the Scripture, I mean, the resurrection of the dead. Why
should any mortal think it either incredible or impossible, that God should
raise the dead to life?

"I once though myself indispensably obliged to oppose the religion of JESUS of
Nazareth: nor was I satisfied with imprisoning, and punishing with death
itself, the saints I found at Jerusalem; I even persecuted them in strange
cities, whither my implacable zeal persued them having procured authority from
the chief priests and elders for that purpose.

"I departed accordingly for Damascus with a commission from the Sanhedrim; but
as I was traveling toward that city, I saw at midday, O king, a light from
heaven, far exceeding the brightness of the sun, encompassing me and my
companions. On seeing this awful appearance, we all fell to the earth; and I
heard a voice, which said to me in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? It is hard for the to kick against the pricks? To which I
answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he replied, I am Jesus, whom thou
persecutest: but be not terrified, arise from the earth; for I have appeared
unto thee, that thou might be both witness of the things thou have seen, and
also of others which I will hereafter reveal unto thee: my power shall deliver
thee from the Jews and the Gentiles, to whom now I send thee to preach the
gospel; to withdraw the veil of darkness and ignorance, to turn them from
falsehood unto truth, and from the power of satan unto God.

"HEREUPON, king Agrippa, I readily obeyed the heavenly vision; I preached the
gospel first to the inhabitants of Damascus, then to those of Jerusalem and
Judea, and afterward to the Gentiles; persuading them to forsake their
iniquities, and turn to the living God, by sincere repentance.

"THE Jews, being exasperated at these endeavors to save the souls of sinful
mortals, caught me in the temple, and entered into a conspiracy to destroy me;
but by the help of Omnipotence, I still remain a witness to all the human race,
preaching nothing but what Moses and all the prophets foretold, namely, that
the Messiah should suffer, be the first that should rise from the chambers of
the grave, and publish, both to the Jews and Gentiles, the glad-tidings of
salvation."

AFTER the apostle had thus pleaded for himself Festus cried out, "Paul, thou
art mad; too much study has deprived thee of thy reason." But Paul answered,
"I am far, most noble Festus, from being transported with idle and distracted
ideas; the words I speak are dictated by truth and sobriety: and I am persuaded
that king Agrippa himself is not ignorant of these things: for they were
transacted openly before the world. I am confident, king Agrippa, that thou
believe the prophets; and therefore, must know that all their predictions
were fulfilled in CHRIST." To which Agrippa answered, "Thou have almost
persuaded me to embrace the Christian faith." And Paul, replied, "I sincerely
wish, that not only thou, but also all that hear me, were not almost, but
altogether the same as I myself, except being prisoners."

AFTER Paul had thus spoken, the king and the governor, with the rest of the
council, withdrew to confer privately together; and finding, by the accusations
brought against him, that he was not guilty by the Roman law of any capital
offense, nor even of such as deserved imprisonment, Agrippa told Festus, that
he might have been set at liberty if he had not appealed unto Caesar; but an
appeal being once made, the judge had no longer any power either to absolve or
condemn, the cause being entirely reserved to the cognizance of that superior,
to whom the prisoner had appealed, for his own justification.

AS it was now finally determined Paul should be sent to Rome, he, with several
others, prisoners of consequence, were committed to the care of Julius,
commander of a company belonging to the legion of Augustus; and was accompanied
in this voyage by St. Luke, Aristarchus, Trophimus, and some others not
mentioned by the sacred penman.

IN the month of September 56, or according to others, 57, they embarked on
board a ship of Adramyttium, and sailed to Sidon, where the centurion
courteously gave the apostle leave to go on shore to visit his friends, and
refresh himself. After a short stay they sailed for Cyprus, and arrived
opposite the Fair Havens, a place near Myra, a city of Lycia. Here the season
being far advanced, and Paul foreseeing it would be a dangerous voyage,
persuaded them to put in and winter there; but the Roman centurion preferring
the opinion of the master of the ship, and the harbor being at the same time
incommodious, resolved, if possible, to reach Phoenice, a port of Crete, and
winter there. But they soon found themselves disappointed; for the fine
southerly gale, which had favored them for some time, suddenly changed into a
stormy and tempestuous wind at north-east, which blew with such violence that
the ship was obliged to sail before it; and to prevent her foundering, they
threw overboard the principal part of her lading, to lighten the vessel.

THEY continued fourteen days in this desperate and uncomfortable condition,
neither sun nor star appearing for great part of the time. During this
confusion, the apostle put them in mind how preposterously they had acted in
not listening to his advice; but, at the same time told them, that the God whom
he served and worshipped, had the last night sent an angel to him, with
assurance that, notwithstanding the present danger, not one of their lives
should be lost, though the ship should be wrecked.

WHEN the fourteenth night arrived, the sailors, upon sounding, found they were
near some coast; and, therefore, to avoid the rocks, thought proper to come to
an anchor, till the morning might give them better information. In the mean
time, the seamen, how best understood the danger, were preparing to get into
the boat to save themselves; which Paul perceiving, told the captain, that
unless they all stayed in the ship, not one of them could be saved: whereupon
the soldiers cut the ropes, and let the boat fall into the sea, from the ship.

WHILE they continued at anchor, waiting for the light of the morning, St. Paul
prevailed upon them to eat, and refresh themselves, having fasted a long time,
assuring them they should all escape. When they had finished their repast, they
lightened the ship of those goods which still remained on board, and
endeavored to put into a small creek they had discovered at a little distance;
but falling into a place where two seas met, the ship ran aground, the forepart
remaining immovable, but the after part was demolished by the waves: awakened
with the danger they were in, the soldiers were desirous of killing the
prisoners, lest any of them should make their escape: but the centurion,
willing to save Paul, refused his consent, commanding that every one should
shift for himself in the best method he could. Accordingly, some by swimming,
and others by broken pieces of the ship, they all, to the number of two hundred
threescore and sixteen, got to shore in safety.

AGREEABLE to St. Paul's prediction, the country on which they were cast, was
an island called Melita, now Malta, situated in the Lybian sea, between
Syracuse and Africa. Here they met with great civility from a barbarous people,
and the plain acknowledgments of a divine justice written on the naked and
uninstructed minds of men; they treated them with great humanity, entertaining
them with all the necessary accomodations: but while St. Paul was laying a few
sticks on the fire, a viper enlivened by the heat, came from amongst the wood
and fastened on his hand. On seeing this, the inhabitants of the island
concluded, that he was certainly some notorious murderer, whom the divine
vengeance, though it suffered him to escape the sea, had reserved for a more
public and solemn execution: but when they saw him shake off the venomous
creature into the fire, and no manner of harm ensue, they changed their
sentiments, and cried out, that he was a God: so easily are light and credulous
minds transported from one extreme to another, according to the difference of
occurrences.

THE residence of Publius, the governor of the island, was not far from the
place where they were shipwrecked: he entertained this unfortunate company with
great hospitality for three days; in acknowledgment of which St. Paul by his
prayers, and the imposition of his hands, recovered his father from a fever and
bloody flux; and restored several others of the inhabitants, afflicted with
different diseases, to their former health and strength; in consequence of
which, they not only showed him the greatest marks of their esteem, but
furnished both him and his company with all the necessaries proper for the rest
of their voyage.

AFTER three months stay in this island, the centurion with his charge went on
board the Castor and Pollux, a ship of Alexandria, bound to Italy. They put in
at Syracuse, where they tarried three days, sailed from thence to Regium, and
so to Puteoli, where they landed; and finding some Christians there, staid at
their request a week with them, and th^n set forward on their journey to Rome.
The Christians of this city, hearing of the apostle's coming, went to meet him
as far as the Three Taverns, about thirty miles from Rome, and others as far as
the Apii Forum, fifty-one miles distant from the capital: they kindly embraced
each other, and the liberty he saw the Christians enjoy at Rome, greatly tended
to enliven the spirits of the apostle. By these Christians he was conducted in
a kind of triumph into the city, where, at their arrival, the rest of the
prisoners were delivered to the captain of the guard, and by him disposed in
the common prison; but St. Paul, probably by the intercession of Julius, was
permitted to reside in a private house, with only one soldier to guard him.

ST. PAUL arriving at Rome, he sent, after he had been there three days, for
the heads of the Jewish consistory in that city, and related to them the cause
of his coming, in the following manner: "Though I have been guilty of no
violence of the laws of our religion, yet I was delivered by the Jews at
Jerusalem to the Roman governors, who more than once would have acquitted me as
innocent of any capital offense; but by the perverseness of my persecutors, I
was obliged to appeal unto Caesar; not that I had any thing to accuse my nation
of: I had therefore recourse to this method, merely to prove mine own
innocence, and confute the allegations of my enemies."

A popular prejudice being thus removed he added, "That the true cause of his
sufferings was what their own religion had taught him, the belief and
expectation of a future resurrection." This speech gained greatly on their
affections, and they answered, That they had received no advice concerning him,
nor had any of the Jews that came from Judea brought any charge against him;
but, at the same time, they desired to know what he had to say in support of
the religion he embraced, it being every where decried both by Jew and Gentile.
Accordingly, upon a day appointed, he discoursed with them from morning to
night concerning the religion and doctrine of the holy JESUS; proving, from the
promises and predictions of the Old Testament, that he was the true Messiah;
but his discourse had different effects on different hearers, some being
convinced, and others persisting in their infidelity; and as they were
departing in some discontent at each other, the apostle told them, it was too
plain that God had accomplished upon them the prophetical curse, of being left
to their own wilful hardiness and impenitency to be blind at noonday, and to
run themselves headlong into irrecoverable ruin. That since this was the case,
they must expect, that he would henceforth preach to the Gentiles, who would
very readily embrace the glad-tidings of the gospel, which they so scornfully
rejected.

DURING two whole years, Paul dwelt at Rome, in a house he had hired for his
own use; wherein he constantly employed himself in preaching and writing for
the good of the church. He preached daily without interruption, and with
rem^^kable success; so that his imprisonment contributed greatly to the
propagation of the gospel, and rendered him famous even in the emperor's court,
where he converted several to the faith of CHRIST.

BESIDES others of the apostle's converts at Rome, there was one Onesimus, who
had formerly been a servant to Philemon, a person of distinction in Colosse,
but had run away from his master, and taken with him some things of value.
Having rambled as far as Rome, he was now converted by St. Paul, and by him
returned to his master, with a short recommendatory letter, earnestly desiring
him to pardon him; and, notwithstanding his former faults, to treat him kindly,
and use him as a brother, promising withal, that if he had wronged or owed him
any thing, he himself would repay it for him.

ST. Paul's Epistle on this subject may be considered as a masterpiece of
eloquence, in the persuasive way; for the apostle has herein had recourse to
all the considerations, which friendship, religion, piety and tenderness, can
inspire, to reconcile a master to his servant; and yet some of the ancients
were of opinion, that it did not deserve a place in the canon of Scripture
because it was written on a particular occasion, and with a design not so much
to instruct Christians in general, as to recommend a poor fugitive servant: but
though the subject of this Epistle be a private affair, yet it contains,
amongst others, the following general instruction: First, that no Christian,
though of the meanest condition, is to be contemned. Secondly, That
Christianity does not impair the power of masters over their servants. Thirdly,
That servants ought to make satisfaction for any wrong or injury done to their
masters. Fourthly, That masters ought to be reconciled to their servants, upon
their repentance and acknowledgement of their faults, And. Fifthly, That there
is at all times, a love and affection due from a master to a servant. Who,
therefore, would refuse to number an Epistle so profitable, and so instructive,
with the rest of the works of this learned apostle?

THE Philippians hearing of St. Paul's imprisonment at Rome, and not knowing
what straits he might be reduced to, raised a contribution for him, and sent it
by Epaphroditus their bishop, by whom he returned an Epistle to them, wherein
he gives some account of the state of his affairs at Rome; gratefully
acknowledges their kindness to him; warnes them against the dangerous opinions
which the Judaizing teachers began to vent amongst them; and advises them to
live in continual obedience to CHRIST; to avoid disputations, delight in
prayer, be courageous under affliction, united in love, and clothed with
humility, in imitation of the blessed JESUS, who so far humbled himself, as to
become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, for the sins of men.

THE apostle had lived three years at Ephesus, preaching the gospel to the
numerous inhabitants of that city, and was therefore well acquainted with the
state and condition of the place; so that taking the opportunity of Tychicus's
going thither he wrote his Epistle to the Ephesians, wherein he endeavors to
countermine the principles and practices both of the Jews and Gentiles; to
confirm them in the belief and practice of the Christian doctrine; and to
instruct them fully in the great mysteries of the gospel; that redemption and
justification by the death of CHRIST; their gratuitous election; their union
with the Jews in the body, of which CHRIST is the head, and the glorious
exaltation of that head above all creatures both spiritual and temporal;
together with many excellent moral precepts, both as to the general duties of
religion, and the duties of their particular relations in life.

THOUGH St. Paul, himself had never been at Colosse, yet Epaphras, who was then
at Rome a prisoner with him, had preached the gospel there with good success;
and from him might learn, that certain false teachers had endeavored to
persuade the people, that they ought not to apply to God by JESUS CHRIST, who,
since his ascension, was so far exalted above them, that angels were now become
the proper mediators between God and man; and, therefore, in opposition to
this, as well as other seductions of the same nature, he wrote his Epistle to
the Collossians; wherein he magnificently displays the Messiah, and all the
benefits flowing from him, as being the image of his Father, the Redeemer of
all mankind, the reconciler of all things to God, and the head of the church,
which gives life and vigor to all its members: he commends the doctrine
preached to them by Epaphras, and exhorts them not to be led away by the
reasonings of human philosophy, by the superstitious practices of making
differences of meats and drinks, or by a pretended humility in worshipping
angels; and gives them an abstract of many principal duties of the Christian
life, especially such as respect the relations between husbands and wives,
parents and children, masters and servants, and other social and relative
duties.

WE have no account in history, by what means St. Paul was delivered from his
imprisonment, and discharged from the accusation the Jews brought against him;
but it is natural to suppose, that not having sufficient proof of what they
alleged, or being informed that the crimes they accused him of, were no
violations of the Roman law, they durst not implead him before the emperor, and
so permitted him to be discharged of course: but by whatever means he procured
his liberty, he wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews before he left Italy, from
whence he dates his salutations to the Jewish churches.

IT is necessary to observe, that the principal design of this admirable
Epistle is, to magnify CHRIST and the religion of the gospel, above Moses and
the Jewish economy, in order to establish and confirm the converted Jews in the
firm belief and profession of Christianity, notwithstanding the trouble and
persecutions that would certainly attend them. He therefore represents our
Savior in his divine nature, as far superior to all angels, and all created
being; and in his mediatorial capacity as a greater priest than Aaron, and a
greater king and priest than Melchisedec: he shows that the ceremonies, the
sacrifices, and the observances of the law could have no virtue in themselves,
but only as they were the types of JESUS CHRIST; and being now accomplished in
his person, were finally and totally abolished: he insists on the necessity of
faith; and by the examples of the patriarchs, and prophets, proves that
justification can be procured no other way, than by the merits of a dying
Savior: and, lastly, he mingles many excellent precepts for the regulation of
their lives; exhortations to put trust and confidence in CHRIST, in all their
sufferings; and strict cautions against apostasy from his religion in the
hottest persecutions from their enemies.

ST. PAUL, having thus discharged his ministry, both by preaching and writing
in ^^aly, prosecuted his long intended journey into Spain, accompanied by
Timothy; and, according to the testimony of several writers, crossed the sea,
and preached the gospel in Britain. What success he had in these western parts,
is not known; he however continued there eight or nine months, and then
returned again to the East, visited Sicily, Greece, and Crete, and then
repaired into Judea.

HOW long he continued in his native country, is unknown, no further mention
being made of him, till his return to Rome, which was probably about the eighth
or ninth year of Nero's reign. Here he met with Peter, and was, together with
him, thrown into prison, doubtless in the general prosecution raised against
the Christians, under pretense that they had set fire to the city: but besides
this general, there were particular reasons for his imprisonment. Some of the
ancients say, he was engaged with St. Peter in detecting the impositions of
Simon Magus.

ST. CHRYSOSTOM tells us, that Nero was highly enraged against St. Paul, for
his having converted one of his favorite concubines; and the apostle, after he
was thrown into prison, persisting to persuade that lady to continue in her
chaste and pious resolutions, Nero commanded him to be put to death. How long
he continued in prison, is uncertain; nor do we know whether he was scourged
before his execution: he was however allowed the privilege of a Roman citizen,
and therefore beheaded.

AS he was led to the place of execution, he is said to have converted three of
the soldiers sent to guard and conduct him, and who soon after became martyrs
to the faith. Being come to the place, which was the Aquae Salviae, three miles
from Rome, he cheerfully, after a solemn preparation, gave his neck to the
fatal stroke; and from this vale of misery, his spirit passed to the blissful
regions of immortality to the kingdom of his beloved Master, the great redeemer
of the human race, in the propagation of whose gospel, he had so long and
faithfully labored.

HIS mortal part was buried in the Via Ostiensis, about two miles from Rome;
and about the year 317, Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope
Sylvester, built a stately church over his grave, adorned it with an hundred
marble columns and beautified it with the most exquisite workmanship: but this
church being thought too small for the honor of so great an apostle,
Valentinian, by a rescript to Saustius, perfect of the city, caused it to be
taken down, and a much larger structure to be erected, which was finished after
his death by Theodosius; and further beautified, at the persuasion of Leo,
bishop of Rome, by the empress Placida.

ACCORDING to Nicephorus, St. Paul was of a low and small stature, somewhat
stooping; his complexion was fair, his countenance grave, his head small, his
eyes sparkling, his nose high and bending, and his hair thick and dark, but
mixed with gray. His constitution was weak, and often subject to distempers:
but how mean soever the cabinet might be, there was a treasure within precious
and valuable, as will sufficiently appear, if we view the accomplishments of
his mind.

HIS judgment was clear and solid, his understanding quick and his memory was
strong and clear; all which were greatly improved by art, and the advantages of
a liberal education. The schools of Tarsus and Jerusalem had sharpened his
discursive faculty by logic and the arts of reasoning, instructed him in the
institutions of philosophy, and adorned his mind with every kind of human
learning. A sufficient proof, that it is not unlawful to bring the spoils of
Egypt into the service of the sanctuary; and to make use of the advantages of
foreign studies and human literature to divine and excellent purposes. He seems
indeed to have been educated purposely to qualify him for being the apostle of
the Gentiles, to contend with and confute the grave and the wise, the acute and
the subtle, the sage and the learned of the heathen world, and to wound them
with arrows from their own quivers. He seldom made use of learning and
philosophy; it being more agreeable to the designs of the gospel, to confound,
by the plain doctrine of the cross, the wisdom and learning of the world.

THOUGH these were great accomplishments, yet they were only a shadow of that
divine temper of mind he enjoyed, and which discovered itself through the whole
course of his life. He was humble to the lowest step of abasement and
condescension, none ever thinking better of others, or more meanly of himself.
And though when he had to deal with envious and malicious adversaries, who
endeavored, by vilifying his person, to obstruct his ministry, he knew how to
magnify his office, and to let them know that he was not inferior to the
chiefest of the apostles; yet, at other times, he always declared to the world,
that he considered himself as an abortive, or an untimely birth, as the least
of the apostles, not meet to be called an apostle; and, as if this were not
enough, he formed a word on purpose to express his humility, styling himself
Elachistoteron, less than the least of the saints; nay, the very chief of
sinners.

HOW freely and frequently does he confess, that, before his conversion, he was
a blasphemer, a persecutor, a person that injured both God and man: though
honored with the highest grace and favor, taken up to an immediate converse
with God in heaven yet he never showed the least loftiness over his brethren;
he was entrusted with the greatest power and authority in the church, but never
affected to govern the faith of men; he only endeavored to be an helper to
their joy. How studiously did he decline all the honors and commendations that
were heaped upon him: when some in the church of Corinth magnified him, and,
under the patronage of his name, began to set up for a party, he severely
rebuked them, told them that it was CHRIST, not he that was crucified for them;
that they had not been baptized in his name, nor did he remember to have
baptized above three or four of them, and was heartily glad he had no oftener
performed the ceremony, lest a foundation might have been laid, from that
circumstance, for charging him with Judaizing.

ST. PAUL's temperance and sobriety were remarkable, for he often abridged
himself of the convenience of lawful and necessary accommodations: his
hungerings and thirstings were frequent: by which means he reduced the
extravagancy of the sensual appetites to a perfect subjection of the law of
reason. Hence he easily got above the world, with all its charms and frowns,
and his mind was continually conversant in heaven, where his thoughts were
fixed, and whither his desires always ascended. What he taught to others, he
practiced himself; his conversation was in heaven, and his desires were to
depart, and to be with CHRIST. This world neither arrested his affection nor
disturbed his fears: he was neither pleased with its applauses, nor terrified
with its threatenings: he studied not to please men, nor valued the censures
they passed upon him: he was not greedy of a great estate, titles of honor, or
rich presents from men; food and raiment was his bill of fare, and more than
this he never cared for; accounting, that the less he was clogged with these
things the lighter he should pass to heaven, especially as he was traveling
through a world overrun with trouble and persecutions. And hence it is very
probable, that he always led a single life, though some of the ancients rank
him amongst those apostles that were married.

NO less exemplary was his kindness and charity; for he had a compassionate
tenderness for the poor and a quick sense of the wants of others. To which
church soever he came, it was always one of his first cares to make provision
for the poor and to stir up the bounty of the rich and wealthy; nay, he himself
worked often with his own hands, not only to maintain himself, but also to help
and relieve them; but his charity to the souls of men was infinitely greater,
fearing no angers, refusing no labors, going through good and evil report,
that he might gain men over to the knowledge of the truth, bring them out of
the crooked paths of vice and idolatry and place them in the straight way that
leads to life eternal: nay, so insatiable was his thirst for the good of
souls, that he affirms that he would sooner himself be accursed from CHRIST,
than that his countrymen should miscarry. And as he was infinitely solicitous
to gain them over to the religion of the Son of God, so he was equally careful
to keep them from being seduced from it; ready to suspect every thing that
might corrupt their minds from the simplicity that is in CHRIST: I am jealous
over you, says he to the church of Corinth, with a Godly jealousy: an affection
of all others the most active and vigilant, and which inspires men with the
most passionate care and concern for the good of those for whom they have the
highest degree of love and kindness.

NOR was his charity to men greater than his zeal for God, laboring with all
his might to promote the honor of his master. How remarkable zealous was he
while he continued a member of the Jewish religion, of the tradition of the
father! How earnest to vindicate and a^^ert the divinity of the Mosaic
dispensation, and to persecute all who were of a contrary faith, even to rage
and madness? And when his zeal was afterward turned into a right channel, it
ran with swift current, carrying him out against all opposition, to vanquish
the kingdom and the powers of darkness, to beat down idolatry, and plant the
world with the right apprehensions of God, and the true knowledge of religion.
When at Athens he saw them involved in the grossest superstition and idolatry,
and giving the honor that was due to God alone to statues and images, this
fired his zeal, and he could not but let them know the resentment of his mind,
and how greatly they dishonored God, the great maker and preserver of the
world. This zeal must have rendered him remarkably diligent and industrious in
the execution of his office, warning, reproving, entreating, persuading,
preaching in season and out of season, by night and by day, by sea and by land:
he thought no pains too much to be taken, no dangers too great to be overcome.

FOR thirty-five years after his conversion he seldom staid long in one place,
traveling from Jerusalem through Arabia, Asia, and Greece, to Illyricum, to
Rome, and to the utmost bounds of the western world, preaching the gospel of
CHRIST. Running, says St. Jerome, from ocean to ocean, like the sun in the
heavens, of which it is said, his circuit is from the one end of the heavens to
the other, sooner wanting ground to tread on, than a desire to propagate the
faith of CHRIST. Nicephorus compares him to a bird in the air, which, in a few
years flew round the world: Isidore, to a winged husbandman, who flew from
place to place, to cultivate the world with the most exact rules and
institutions of life. And while the other apostles confined themselves, as it
were, to one foot, choosing this or that particular province and place for
their ministry, St. Paul overran the whole world to its utmost bounds and
corners, planting all places where he came with the divine doctrines of the
gospel. Nor in this course was he tired with the dangers and difficulties he
met with, the troubles and oppositions that were raised against him: but all
these served only to reflect a greater luster on his patience; of which he was
a most eminent pattern, enduring the greatest troubles and persecutions, with a
patience triumphant and unconquerable.

THIS will easily appear if we take a survey of what trials and sufferings he
underwent; some part whereof are thus briefly summed up by himself: In labors
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths often; thrince
beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice suffered shipwreck, a night and a day in
the deep: in journeyings often, in perils of water, in perils by his
countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils amongst false brethren: in
weariness, in painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst; in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness; and besides those things that were
without, which daily came upon him, the care of all the churches. An account,
though very great, yet far short of what he endured. All which he cheerfully
underwent with a soul as calm and serene as the morning sun; no malice or rage,
nor fury or storms, could ruffle or discompose his spirit: nay, they animated
him to rise up with the greater eagerness and resolution to perform his duty.
Could all the powers of men and devils, spite and opposition, torments and
threatenings, have been able to baffle him out of that religion he had
embraced, he must have deserted his station: but his soul was steeled with a
courage and resolution that was impenetrable; and on which no temptation,
either from hopes or fears, could make any more impression, than an arrow shot
against a wall of adamant.

HE did not want solicitations both from Jews and Gentiles; and might,
doubtless, in some measure, have made his own terms, would he have been false
to his trust, and quitted that way which was then every where spoken against.
But, alas! these things weighed little with our apostle, who counted not his
life dear unto him, so that he might finish his course with joy, and the
ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus; and therefore, when he
thought himself under the sentence of death, could triumphantly say, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. In
short, he was a man in whom the divine life eminently displayed itself; he
lived piously and devoutly, soberly and temperately, justly and righteously;
careful always to keep a conscience void of offense both toward God and man.
This, he tells us, was his support under all his sufferings; this the
foundation of his confidence toward God, and his firm hopes of happiness in
another world. This is our rejoicing the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. In
short, as the love of this great apostle to his divine Master knew no bounds,
so the beauty and energy of his writings, as well as his sufferings in support
of the truth he espoused and inculcated, are beyond example.

THE LIFE of ST. JAMES the APOSTLE, surnamed the GREAT.
THIS apostle was a native of Galilee, born in all probability either at
Capernaum or Bethsaida, as he was a partner with Simon Peter in the fishing
trade. The epithet of Great was given him, to distinguish him from another
apostle of the same name.

HE was the son of Zebedee, a fisherman, who kept several servants to carry on
his trade, and therefore must have been a person of consequence in his way. His
mother's name was Mary, surnamed Salome, the daughter of Cleophas, and sister,
or rather cousin-german to Mary the mother of our Lord; so that he had the
honor of being a near relation to CHRIST himself. He was brought up to the
trade of his father; a mean occupation, indeed, in the eye of the world, but no
employment is mean that is honest and industrious; and it should be remembered
that the Son of God himself stooped so low, as to become the reputed son of a
carpenter, and during the retirement of his private life, labored himself at
his father's trade; not merely devoting himself to contemplations, nor
withdrawing from all useful society with the world, and hiding himself in the
solitudes of an anchoret, but busying himself in an active course of life, as
he continually went about doing good to the souls and bodies of mankind.

NOT in the least discouraged at the meanness of his father's trade, St. James
applied himself to it with remarkable assiduity, and was exercising his
employment when the Savior of the world passing by the sea of Galilee, saw him
with his brother in the ship, and called them both to be his disciples. Nor was
the call in vain; they cheerfully complied with it, and immediately left all to
follow him: they did not stay to dispute his commands, or solicitously inquire
into the minute consequences of the undertaking, the troubles and dangers that
might attend this new employment; but readily delivered themselves up to
perform whatever service he should call them to.

HE was called soon after this from the station of an ordinary disciple, to the
apostolical office, and even honored with some particular favors beyond most
of the apostles, being one of the three whom our Lord made choice of, as his
companion in the more intimate transactions of his life, from which the rest
were excluded. Thus, with Peter and his brother John, he attended his Master
when he raised the daughter of Jairus from the dead; he was admitted to
CHRIST's glorious transfiguration on the mount, and heard the discourses that
passed between him and the great ministers from the courts of heaven: and when
the holy JESUS was to undergo his bitter agony in the garden, as preparatory
sufferings to his passion, James was one of the three taken to be a spectator
of them.

IT is not easy to determine what reasons induced the Redeemer of mankind to
admit those three apostles to peculiar acts of favor; though he doubtless did
it for wise and proper ends. Whether he designed these three to be more solemn
and peculiar witnesses of some remarkable transactions of his life than the
other apostles; or that they would be more eminently useful and serviceable in
some parts of the apostolic office; or to encourage them thereby to prepare for
the sufferings that would attend them in the ministry; or whether he designed
them for some more eminent kinds of matyrdom than the rest of his disciples.

IT was not the least instance of particular honor that our Lord conferred on
these apostles, when he called them to the apostolate, that he gave them a new
name and title. A thing not uncommon of old, for the Almighty often imposed new
names on persons, when he intended them for some great and peculiar services
and employments; instances of this we have in Abraham and Jacob. Accordingly
our Lord, at the election of these three apostles, gave them new names: Simon
he called Peter, or a rock, and James and John, Boanerges, or the sons of
thunder. What our Lord intended by their surnames is much easier to conjecture
than determine; some think it was given them on account of their being present
in the mount, when a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved
son, etc. for when the people heared the same voice at another time, they said
"It thundered." But this observation is in itself very inconsiderable, because
it was equally applicable to Peter as to them. Others think that it was given
them on account of their loud and bold speaking the gospel to the world,
fearing no threatenings, dispising all opposition, and going on thundering in
the ears of a drowsy and sleepy world; rousing and awakening the consciences of
men with the earnestness and vehemence of their preaching, which resembled
thunder, as the voice of God powerfully shakes the natural world, and breaks in
pieces the cedars of Lebanon. Others think it relates to the doctrines they
delivered, teaching the great mysteries of the gospel in a more profound and
loftier strain than the rest.

HOW far the latter opinion might be true with regard to St. James, the
scriptures are wholly silent; but it was certainly verified in his brother
John, whose gospel is so full of the more sublime notions and mysteries of the
gospel concerning the divinity, preexistence, etc. of CHRIST, that he is
generally affirmed by the ancients to thunder rather than speak. Perhaps the
expressions may denote no more than that in general they were to be prime and
eminent ministers, in this new state of things; the introducing the gospel or
evangelical dispensation, being called "a voice shaking the heaven and the
earth," and therefore exactly correspondent to the native importance of the
word, signifying an earthquake, or a vehement commotion, that like thunder,
makes an alarming noise.

HOWEVER this be, our blessed Savior doubtless by this term alluded to the
furious and resolute dispositions of these two brothers, who seem to have been
of a more fiery temper than the rest of the apostles, of which we have this
memorable instance. When our Lord was determined on his journey to Jerusalem,
he sent some of his disciples before him to make preparation for his coming;
but, on their entering a village of Samaria, were rudely rejected, from the old
grudge that subsisted between the Samaritans and the Jews, and because our
Savior, by going up to Jerusalem, seemed to flight their place of worship on
mount Garizim.

THIS piece of rudeness and inhumanity was so highly resented by St. James and
his brother John, that they came to JESUS, desiring to know if he would not
imitate Elias, by calling down fire from heaven to consume this barbarous,
inhospitable people. So apt are men for every tri^^ing provocation to call upon
heaven to revenge them on the aggressors, according to the extravagances of
their own unreasonable passions! But the holy JESUS soon convinced them of
their mistake, by telling them, that he was come to save the lives of the
children of men, and not to destroy them.

WE have no account from sacred history, what became of St. James after the
ascension of his great and beloved Master. Sophronius tells us, that he
preached to the dispersed Jews, that is, to those converts who were dispersed
after the death of Stephen. The Spanish writers will have it, that after
preaching the gospel in several parts of Judea and Samaria, he visited Spain,
where he planted Christianity, and appointed some select disciples to perfect
what he had begun; but if we consider the shortness of St. James's life, and
that the apostles continued in a body at Jerusalem, even after the dispersion
of the other Christians, we shall find it difficult to allow time sufficient
for so tedious and difficult a voyage as that was in those early ages; and
therefore it is safest to confine his ministry to Judea and the countries
bordering upon it.

WE learn from profane history, that Herod Agrippa, son of Aristobulus and
grandson of Herod the Great, had been a great favorite both with the emperor
Caligula and his successor Claudius, who conferred on his grandfather's
kingdoms, and sent him into Judea. Herod was noble and generous, prudent and
politic, thoroughly versed in all the arts and intrigues of a court; he knew
how to oblige his enemies, and molify or avert the displeasure of the emperor.
He was of a courteous and affable disposition; but at the same time a great
zealot of the Jewish religion, and a very accurate observer of the Mosaic law.
This prince, at his arrival in his new kingdom, though there was no surer way
of ingratiating himself into the favor of the populace, tha^ by persecuting
the Christians, whom he knew the Jews detested. Accordingly, he began a violent
persecution; but the commonalty being too mean a sacrifice to satisfy his own
zeal, and favor his popular designs, he laid hands on St. James, whose active
temper and vigorous manner of contending for the truth and excellency of the
Christian religion, rendered him a proper victim at this time.

THE same zeal which animated Herod to lay hands on St. James, also prompted
him to pass sentence of death on him immediately. As he was led to the place of
execution, the officer that guarded him to the tribunal, or rather his accuser,
having been converted by that remarkable courage and constancy shown by the
apostle at the time of his trial, repented of what he had done, came and fell
down at the apostle's feet, and heartily begged pardon for what he had said
against him. The holy man, after recovering from the surprise, tenderly
embraced him. "Peace," said he, "my son peace be to thee, and the pardon of the
faults." Upon which the officer publicly declared himself a Christian, and both
were beheaded at the same time. Thus fell the great apostle James, the first
protomartyr of the apostles, the first of that number that gained the crown,
taking cheerfully that cup of which he had long since told his Lord he was
ready to drink.

HOWEVER, the divine vengeance, that never sleeps, would not suffer the death
of this innocent and righteous man to pass long unrevenged; for shortly after
the martyrdom of St. James, Herod removed to Cesarea, in order to make war on
the neighboring Tyrians and Sidonians; and while he continued in this city, he
proclaimed solemn fights and festival entertainments to be held in honor of
Caesar to which there flocked a prodigious confluence of the principal
inhabitants of the ajacent parts. Early in the morning of the second day, he
came with great state into the theater, to make as oration to the people; and
being clothed in a robe curiously wrought with silver, the beams of the sun
were reflected from it with such luster, that the people cried out, that it was
some deity they beheld; and that he who spoke to them must be something above
the common standard of humanity.

THIS impious applause Herod received without the least token of dislike, or
sense of the injury that was done by it to the Supreme Being. But a sudden
accident changed the scene, and turned their mirth and rejoicing into
melancholy and mourning; for Herod looking up, saw an owl perched upon a rope
over his head, which he considered as the fatal minister of his death; on which
an incurable melancholy seized his mind, and the most exquisite torments his
bowels, occasioned by those worms St. Luke mentions; so that turning to the
people, he cried out, "Behold the deity you admired, and yourselves evidently
convinced of flattery and falsehood; see me this moment condemned by the laws
of fate to die, whom just now you styled immortal." He was removed into the
palace, but his pains still increased upon him; and though the people fasted,
and offered prayers for his life and health, yet his accute torments prevailed,
and after five days put a period to his life.

THE LIFE of ST. JAMES the APOSTLE, surnamed the LESS.
BEFORE we enter upon the life of this apostle, it will be necessary to remove
some difficulties relating to his person. It has been doubted by some whether
this was the same with that St. James, who was afterward bishop of Jerusalem,
two of this name being mentioned in the sacred writings, namely, St. James the
Great and St. James the Less, both apostles; the ancients mention a third,
surnamed the Just, which they will have to be distinct from the former, and
bishop of Jerusalem; but this opinion i^ built on a sandy foundation; for
nothing is plainer, than that St. James the apostle* whom St. Paul calls our
Lord's brother, and reckons with Peter and John* one of the pillars of the
church, was the same who presided among the apostles, doubtless by virtue of
his episcopal office, and determined the causes in the synod of Jerusalem. Nor
do either Clemens, Alexandrinus, or Eusebius, mention any more than two, St.
James slain by Herod, and St. James the Just, bishop of Jerusalem, whom they
expressly affirm to be the same with him who is called the brother of our Lord
by St. Paul.

THE difficulties with regard to his person being thus removed, we shall
proceed to the history of his life. It is reasonable to think that he was the
son of Joseph, afterward the husband of Mary, by his first wife, whom St.
Jerome styles Escha, and adds, that she was the daughter of Aggi, brother to
Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist* hence he was reputed our Lord's
brother. We find indeed several mentioned as the brethren of our Savior, in
the evangelical history; but in what sense, was greatly controverted by the
ancients. St. Jerome, St. Chrysostom, and some others, will have them to have
been so called from their being the sons of Mary, cousin-german, or according
to the Hebrew idiom, sister to the Virgin Mary: but Eusebius, Epiphanius, and
many others tell us, they were the children of Joseph by a former wife; and
this seems most natural, and best agrees with what the evangelist says of them,
when he enumerates the questions of the Jews: Is not this the carpenter's son?
Is not his mother called Mary? And his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simeon
and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this man
these things? By which it is plain that the Jews understood these persons not
to be CHRIST's kinsman only, but his brethren; the same carpenter's sons having
the same relation to him, that JESUS himself had: indeed they had more, CHRIST
being only his reputed, they his natural sons. Upon this account, the blessed
Virgin is sometimes called the mother of James and Joses; and by this name we
frequently find her mentioned by the evangelists in relating our Lord's
crucifixion: and though she was only mother-in-law to St. James, yet the
evangelists might choose to style her so, because she was commonly called his
mother after the death of Joseph: perhaps she herself chose that title, that
the Son of God, whom as a virgin she had brought into the world, might be the
better concealed, and less exposed to the envious malice of the Jews. To this
it may be added, that Josephus, who was eminently skilled in matters of
genealogy and descent, expressly says, that St. James was the brother of JESUS
CHRIST. There is indeed one objection against this, namely, that he is called
the son of Alpheus: but this may mean no more, than either that Joseph was
called by another name, a thing very common among the Jews, or that James
himself was a disciple of some particular sect or synagogue called Alpheans,
there being many such sects about this time amongst the Jews.

THE sacred history is silent with regard to the place of his birth: the Jews
in their Talmud, calls him a man of the town of Sechania: but where that place
was situated is uncertain: nor is it known what his particular way or course of
life was before he was called to the apostleship: the sacred writers having
been silent with regard to this particular, mentioning nothing concerning him
during the life of our Savior.

ST. JAMES was honored, after the resurrection, with a particular appearance
of our Lord to him, which, though passed over in silence by the evangelists, is
recorded by St. Paul, St. Jerome, from the Hebrew gospel of the Nazarenes, which
contain several particulars omitted by the evangelical historians, gives the
following relation of his appearan^e to this apostle. St. James had solemnly
sworn, that from the time he had drank of the cup at the institution of the
supper, he would eat bread no more, till he saw the Lord risen from the dead;
our Lord, therefore, being returned from the grave, came and appeared to him,
and commanded bread to be set before him, which he took, blessed, and brake,
and gave to St. James; saying, "Eat thy bread, my brother, for the Son of man
is truly risen from amongst them that sleep."

AFTER the resurrection of our Savior, he was chosen bishop of Jerusalem,
being preferred before all the rest for his near relation to CHRIST; and for
the same reason, we find Simeon chosen to be his immediate successor in that
see, because, after St. James, he was our Lord's next kinsman; a consideration
that made Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, though they had been peculiarly
honored by our Savior, not to contend for this high and honorable station,
but freely chose James the Just, bishop of Jerusalem. This dignity is indeed
said by some of the ancients to have been conferred on him by CHRIST, who
constituted him bishop at the time of his appearing to him: but it is safest to
follow the general opinion, that this dignity was conferred upon him by the
apostles; though possibly they might receive some intimations from our Lord
concerning it.

ST. PAUL, when he came to Jerusalem, after his conversion, applied to St.
James and was by him honored with the righthand of fellowship: and Peter sent
to St. James the news of his miraculous deliverance out of prison, Go, said he,
show these things unto James, and to the brethern; that is, to the whole
church, especially to St. James the pastor of it at that time.

THIS apostle was remarkable active in the synod of Jerusalem, when the great
cause relating to the Mosaic rites was debated; for the cause being opened by
Peter, and further debated by Paul and Barnabas, St. James stood up to pass the
final decretory sentence, -- That the Gentile converts were not to be loaded
with the Jewish yoke; a few indifferent rites only being ordered to be observed
in order to produce an accommodation between the Jews and Gentiles, ushering in
the expedient with this positive conclusion, "This is my sentence and
determination:" a circumstance the more considerable, because spoken at a time
when Peter was in council, and produced not the least intimation of the
authority afterward ascribed to him.

ST. JAMES performed every part of his charge with all possible care and
industry, omitting no particular necessary to be observed by a diligent and
faithful guide of souls; strengthening the weak, instructing the ignorant,
reducing the erroneous, reproving the obstinate; and, by the constancy of his
sermons, conquering the stubbornness of that perverse and refractory generation
he had to deal with, many of the nobler and better sort being persuaded to
embrace the Christian faith: but a person so careful, so successful in his
charge, could not fail of awakening the spite and malice of his enemies; a sort
of men of whom the apostle has given too true a character, that they please not
God, and are contrary to all men.

THE Jews being vexed to see St. Paul had escaped their hands by appealing unto
Caesar, their malice became as great and insatiable as hell itself, so that as
they could not have their revenge on St. Paul, they turned their fury against
St. James; but being unable to effect their design under the government of
Festus, they determined to attempt it under the procuratorship of Albinus his
successor, Ananus the younger, of the sect of the Sadducees, being high priest.
They were however fearful that Albinus would oppose their design, and therefore
thought it the surest method to dispatch him, if possible, before the new
governor arrived. In order to this, a council was summoned, and the apostle,
with others, arraigned and condemned as violat^rs of the law: but that the
action might appear more plausible and popular, the Scribes and Pharisees,
masters in the art of dissimulation, endeavored to ensnare him, that they had
placed the greatest confidence in him; that the whole nation, as well as they,
gave him the title of a just man, and one that was no respecter of persons;
that they therefore desired he would correct the error and false opinion the
people had conceived of JESUS, whom they considered as the Messiah, and take
this opportunity of the universal confluence to the paschal solemnity, to set
them right in their opinions in this particular, and would go with them to the
top of the temple, where he might be seen and heard by all the people.

TO this the apostle readily consented, and being advantageously placed on a
pinnacle of the temple, they addressed him in the following manner: "Tell us O
Justus! whom we have all the reason in the world to believe, that the people
are thus generally led away with the doctrine of JESUS, who was crucified; tell
us, what is this institution of the crucified JESUS?" To which the apostle
answered, with an audible voice: "Why do you enquire of JESUS, the Son of man?
He sits in heaven at the right hand of the Majesty on high, and will come again
in the clouds of heaven." The people below hearing this, glorified the blessed
JESUS, and openly proclaimed, "Hosanna to the Son of David."

HEREUPON the Scribes and Pharisees perceived that they had acted foolishly;
that, instead of reclaiming, they had confirmed the people in their error; and
that there was no way left but to dispatch him immediately, in order to warn
others, by his sufferings, not to believe in JESUS of Nazareth: accordingly
they suddenly cried out, That Justus himself was seduced and become an
impostor; and immediately threw him from the pinnacle or which he stood, into
the court below; but not being killed on the spot, he recovered himself so far
as to rise on his knees, and pray fervently to heaven for his murderers: but
malice is too diabolical to be pacified with kindness, or satisfied with
cruelty: little portions of revenge serve only to inflame it, and rouse it up
to greater acts of cruelty. Accordingly, his enemies, vexed that they had not
fully accomplished their work, they poured a shower of stones upon him, while
he was imploring their forgiveness at the throne of grace; and one of them, more
merciful than the rest, with a ^u^^er's club put an end to his misery.

THIS great and good man thus finished his course in the ninety-sixth year of
his age, and about twenty-four years after our blessed Savior's ascension into
heaven. His death was lamented by all good men, even by the sober and just
persons amongst the Jews themselves, as Josephus himself confesses. He was
buried, according to Gregory of Tours, on Mount Olivet, in a tomb he had built
for himself, and in which he had buried Zacharias and old Simeon. Hejesippus
says, he was buried in the court of the temple, where he suffered martyrdom,
and that a monument was there erected to his memory: but the former seems more
agreeable to reason; for the Jews very rarely buried any person in the city,
much less in the courts of the temple; and therefore, it is not natural to
think they would permit that honor to be paid to him they so lately put to
death as an impostor and deceiver.

ST. JAMES was a man of exemplary piety and devotion, educated under the
strictest rules and institutions of religion, a priest of the ancient order of
the Rechabites, or rather as Epiphanius conjectures, according to the most
ancient order and form of priesthood, when the sacerdotal office was the
prerogative of the firstborn; but whether this kind of priesthood was at any
time observed under the Mosaic dispensation, we are no where told in Sacred
Writ; but however that be, it is certain that he had the privilege of entering
the sanctuary, or holy place, when he pleased, though none but priests of the
order of Aaron were permitted to enter there besides himself. Prayer was his
constant business and delight; he seemed to live upon it, and to have
continually his conversation in heaven; and, therefore, used constantly to
repair into the temple to pray, which he always performed kneeling, and with
the greatest reverence, till by his daily devotions, his knees were become hard
and callous like those of a camel. And he who has told us, that the prayer of a
righteous man avails much, found it so by his own experience, heaven lending
a more immediate ear to his petitions; so that in a time of remarkable drought,
on his praying for rain, the clouds melted into fruitful showers, and relived
the necessities of the people.

HIS charity toward men was not less singular than his piety toward God; he
did good to all, watched over the souls of men, and studied to advance their
eternal welfare; his daily errand into the temple was to pray for the happiness
of the people, and that God would not severely reckon with them; he could
forgive his most inveterate enemies, and overcome evil with good: when thrown
from the top of the temple, he made use of his latest breath in sending up
petitions to heaven for the pardon of his murderers, "I beseech thee, O
Almighty Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."

THIS apostle was of a remarkable meek and humble temper, honoring what was
excellent in others, concealing what was valuable in himself: neither the
eminency of his relation to the blessed JESUS, nor the dignity of the place he
so worthily filled, could induce him to entertain lofty thoughts of himself
above the rest of his brethren; on the contrary, he strove to conceal whatever
might place him in a higher rank than the other disciples of the Lord of glory.
Though he was brother to the Redeemer of mankind, he styles himself only the
servant of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; not so much as mentioning his being an
apostle of his divine Master.

HE was a person of extraordinary temperance, wholly abstaining from flesh,
drinking neither wine nor strong drink, and never using the bath. His holy and
mortified mind was contented with the meanest accommodations; he went
barefoot, and never wore any other than linen garments. He lived indeed after
the strictest rules of the Nazarite order; and as the mitre he wore on his head
evinced his priesthood, which was rather from Malchizedek than Aaron; so his
never shaving his head, or using any ointments, his habit and diet, and the
great severity of his life, showed him to belong to the Nazarite institution,
to which he was consecrated, even from his mother's womb. A man of so divine a
temper, that he was at once the love and wonder of his age; and from the
reputation of his holy and religious life, was styled James the Just. He was
indeed the safety and happiness of the nation, which was reckoned to depend
upon his prayers and interest with heaven, and hence he acquired the title of
Oblias, or Ozliam, the defense and fortress of the people; indicating, that
when he was no more, their castles would be dismantled and their strength laid
level with the ground: and so indeed it proved; for a few years after his
death, the Roman army broke in upon them, and filled the country with blood and
slaughter. It is indeed no wonder that the judgments of the Almighty, like a
flood, should come rolling in upon a nation, when the sluices are plucked up,
and Moses taken away that stood in the gap to oppose them. In short, St. James
was the delight of all good men, and in so great favor and estimation with the
people, that they used to flock after him, and strive who should touch, if it
were only the border of his garment; his very episcopal chair, as Eusebius
informs us, wherein he used to sit, was carefully preserved, and had a kind of
veneration paid it, even in his time. He was beloved not only by his friends,
but also by his enemies, and the Jews themelsves mention St. James in their
Talmud, as a person who wrought miracles in the name of JESUS his Master; and
the wisest of them considered his martyrdom as the principal cause of all those
calamities that soon after flowed in upon them. Josephus in particular reckons
the death of St. James, as the action that more immediately roused the divine
vengeance, and hastened the universal ruin of that nation by the Roman armies.

THIS apostle wrote only one epistle, probably not long before his martyrdom,
as appears from some passages in it relating to the near approach of the
destruction of the Jews: he directed it to the Jewish converts dispersed up and
down those eastern countries, to comfort them under their sufferings, and
confirm them against error: he saw a great degeneracy of manners coming on, and
that the purity of the Christian faith began to be undermined by the doctrines
and practices of the Gnostics, who, under pretense of zeal for the legal rites,
generally mixed themselves with the Jews: He beheld libertinism flowing in
apace, and the way to heaven made soft and easy, men declaiming against good
works as useless and unnecessary, and asserting that a naked belief was
sufficient to salvation. These doctrines the apostle opposes, presses the
purity, patience, charity, and all the virtues of a good life; and by
undeniable arguments proves, that such a faith alone, which has CHRIST for its
object, and works by love and holiness, can justify us before God* and procure
our admittance into the celestial kingdom of eternal glory.

The LIFE of ST. PETER, the APOSTLE to the JEWS.
THIS remarkable apostle and disciple of our blessed Lord and Savior was born
at Bethsaida, a city of Galilee, situate on the banks of the lake of
Genesareth, called also the sea of Galilee, from its being situated in that
country; and the lake of Tiberias, from that city being built on its banks: but
the particular time of this great apostle's birth cannot be known; the
evangelists, and other writers among the primitive Christians, having been
silent with regard to this particular. It is, however, pretty certain, that ^e
was at least ten years older than his Master; the circumstances of his being
married, and in a settled course of life, when he became a follower of the
great Messiah, and that authority and respect the gravity of his person
procured him among the rest of the apostles, sufficiently declare this
conjecture to be very far from being improbable.

ST. PETER being a descendant of Abraham, was circumcised according to the
rites of the Mosaic law, and called by his parents, Simon or Simeon, a name at
that time common among the Jews: but after his becoming a disciple of the
blessed JESUS, the additional title of Cephas was conferred upon him by his
Master, to denote the firmness of his faith; the word Cephas in the Syriac, the
common language of the Jews at that time, signifying stone or rock: and hence
he is called in Greek Petros, and by us Peter, which appellation bears the same
meaning.

THE evangelists have also been silent with regard to the parents of St. Peter,
except in telling us, that his father's name was Jonah, probably a fisherman of
Bethsaida: but whatever was his trade, he was highly honored by our blessed
Savior, who chose two of his sons, Andrew and Peter, to be his apostles, and
preachers of the glad-tidings of salvation to mankind.

WHILE young, St. Peter was brought up to the trade of fishing on the lake of
Bethsaida, famous for different kinds of fish, which excelled all others in the
fineness of the taste. Here he closely followed this trade: but afterward
removed to Capernaum, probably on his being married, where he settled; for we
find he had a house there when our Savior began his public ministry, and there
he paid tribute. Nicephorus tells us, that Helen, the mother Constantine,
erected a beautiful church over the ruins of St. Peter's house, in honor of
him.

THE town of Capernaum was as well situated as Bethsaida, for the carrying on
his ^^ade, standing at the influx of the river Jordan into the sea of Galilee,
and where he might, with equal advantage, reap the fruits of an honest and
industrious diligence. The business of St. Peter was, we confess, both mean and
servile: it exposed him to all the injuries of the weather, the tempestuousness
of the sea, and the darkness and horror of the night, and all to acquire a mean
livelihood for himself and his family; but meanness is no exception to the
Almighty; the poor, if virtuous, are as dear to heaven as the wealthy, the
great and the powerful: the beggar and the monarch are equally regarded by the
great Parent of the human race, with whom there is no respect of persons; and
who is the rewarder of all that diligently seek him.

HERE we cannot help observing the wise and admirable methods made use of by
Divine Providence, in making choice of such mean and unlikely instruments in
planting and propagating the Christian religion in the world: men who were
destitute of every advantage of education, and brought up to the meanest
employments, were chosen to confound the wise, and overturn the learning of the
prudent. Such were the persons whom the Almighty sent to propagate the religion
of his Son; to silence the wise, the scribe, and the disputer of this world,
and to make foolish the wisdom of the earth: for though the Jews required a
sign, and the Greeks sought after wisdom; though the preaching of a crucified
Savior was a scandal to the former, and foolishness to the learned latter; yet
by this foolishness of preaching God was pleased to save them that believed;
and, in the event, made it appear, that the foolishness of God is wiser than
men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men; that so the honor of all
may redound to himself, that no flesh should glory in his presence, but he that
glories, should glory in the Lord, to whom alone all honor is due.

WE are told of what sect St. Peter was before he became a follower of the
blessed JESUS; but i^ is highly probable that he was a disciple of John the
Baptist. We know that his brother Andrew was a follower of that preacher of
repentance; and it is very unlikely that he, who was so ready to carry his
brother the early tidings of the Messiah, that the Son of Righteousness was
already risen in these parts, should not be equally solicitous to bring him
under the discipline and influence of John the Baptist, the daystar which
appeared to usher in the appearance of the Son of God: besides, Peter's great
readiness and curiosity at the first news of CHRIST's appearing, to come to him
and converse with him, shows that his expectations had been awakened, and some
glimmering ^ays of hope conveyed to him by the preaching and ministry of John,
who was the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.

WHETHER Peter was or was not a disciple of John the Baptist, he became
acquainted with the immaculate Lamb of God in the following manner: The blessed
JESUS, having spent thirty years in the solitude of a private life, had lately
been baptized by John in Jordan, and there owned by the solemn attestation of
heaven to be the Son of God; whereupon he was immediately hurried into the
wilderness, and there for forty days maintained a personal contest with the
Devil, but having conquered this great enemy of mankind, he returned to
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptising his proselytes, and
endeavoring to answer the Jews, who had sent a deputation to him to enquire
concerning the new Messiah that appeared among them. To satisfy these curious
inquires of Israel, John faithfully related every thing he knew concerning him,
gave him the greatest character, and soon after pointed him out to his
disciples; upon which two of them presently followed the great Redeemer of
mankind, one of which was Andrew, Simon's brother. They came to him toward
evening, and in all probability stayed with him the whole night, during which
time Andrew had an opportunity of informing himself, and of satisfying his most
anxious scruples.

HE did not long conceal the joyful discovery he had made; for early in the
morning he hastened to acquaint his brother Simon that he had found the
Messiah. It is not enough to be happy alone; religion is a communicative
principle, that like the circles in the water, delights to multiply itself, and
to diffuse its influences all around, especially on those whom nature has
placed nearest to us. "I have (said he with rapture to his brother) found that
eminent person so long and signally foretold by the prophets, and whom all the
devout and pious amongst the sons of Jacob so earnestly expected to appear."

ST. PETER, who was one of those who waited for Redemption in Israel, ravished
with joyful news, and impatient of delay, presently followed his brother to the
place; and, on his arrival, our blessed Savior immediately gave him a proof of
his divinity, saluting him at first sight by his name, and telling him both who
he was, his name and kindred, and what title should soon be conferred upon him
by the authority of his Master.

WHETHER these two sons of Jonah constantly attended in person from that time
on the great Redeemer of mankind, and became his disciples, the sacred history
does not mention. It is however probable, that they stayed with him some time,
till they were instructed in the first rudiments of his doctrine, and then, by
the leave of their great and benevolent Master, returned to their families and
to their callings; for it is reasonable to suppose, that the blessed JESUS was
not at this time willing to awaken the jealously of the rulers of Israel, and
the suspicion of the Romans, by a numerous retinue, and therefore dismissed his
disciples, amongst the rest Andrew and Peter, who returned to their trade of
fishing on the lake, where they were afterward found by our blessed Redeemer.

OUR Lord had now more than a year entered on his public ministry, going into
every part of the country, to seek opportunities of doing good to the children
of men; so that by the constancy of his preaching, and the reputation of his
miracles, his fa^^ was spread throughout all Judea, and multitudes of people
flocked to him from all parts to hear his doctrine, and be spectators of his
mighty works. And surely it is no wonder that the parched and barren earth
thirsted for the kindly dews and showers of heaven, to refresh it.

IN order to avoid this prodigious throng of people, our great Redeemer often
retired to some solitary place, to indulge the privacies of contemplation: in
one of these retreats on the banks of the sea of Galilee, the multitude found
him out, and ran to him from the city. Our Savior, therefore to avoid the
crowd, stepped into a fishing-boat which lay near the shore, and belonged to
Simon Peter, who, together with his companions were on shore drying their nets,
after an unsuccessful night spent in toil and labor. The blessed JESUS, who
might have commanded, was pleased to entreat Peter, who now returned to his
boat, to thrust off a little from the land, that he might instruct the people,
who were gathered in prodigious crowds on the borders of the lake, to hear him.

ST. PETER gladly complied with the request of his Master, who delivered his
heavenly doctrine to the people on the shore. As soon as he had ended his
discourse, he resolved to seal his miracles, that the people might be persuaded
he was a teacher come from God; accordingly, he ordered Simon to row further
from the shore, and cast his net into the sea. To which Simon answered, that
they had labored the whole preceding night, and had taken nothing; and if they
could not then succeed, there was little hopes of it now, as the day was far
less proper for fishing than the night: but as his Master was pleased to
command, he would readily obey; and, accordingly, he let down his net, when, to
the astonishment both of him and his companions, so great a multitude of fishes
were enclosed, that they were obliged to call their partners to their
assistance.

AMAZED at this miraculous draught of fishes, Simon Peter, in an extacy of
admiration, blended with awe and humility, fell prostrate it his Master's feet,
acknowledging himself a vile and sinful person, and thinking himself unworthy
of being admitted into the presence of a person so immediately sent from God:
but the compassionate Son of the Most High kindly removed his fears, telling
him that this miracle was wrought to confirm his faith, and to indicate to him,
that the Almighty had appointed a more noble employment for him, that of saving
the souls of the children of men. From this time Peter and his companions
became the inseparable and constant disciples of the great Messiah, living
under the rules of his institutions and discipline.

OUR blessed Savior returned soon after to Capernaum with his disciples, where
they found the mother-in-law of Peter dangerously ill of a fever: but the
compassionate JESUS, who never omitted an opportunity of doing good to the
human race, rebuked the disease, and taking her by the hand, restored her in a
moment to her former health; demonstrating at once his power and willingness to
relieve and comfort the sons and daughters of affliction and sorrow.

THE adorable Redeemer, having for some time entered on his public ministry,
thought proper to elect some peculiar persons from amongst his followers, to be
constant witnesses of his miracles and doctrines, and who after his departure,
might be entrusted with the care of building his church, and planting that
religion in the world, for which he himself left the mansions of heaven, and
put on the veil of mortality. In order to this, he withdrew privately in the
evening to a solitary mountain, where he spent the night in solemn addresses to
his Almighty Father, for rendering the great work he was going to undertake
prosperous and beneficial to mankind.

THE disciples came to him early the next morning, out of whom he made choice
of twelve to be his apostles, and the constant attendants on his person. These
he afterward invested with the power of working miracles, and sent them into
different parts of Judea, in order to carry on with more rapidity the great
work which he himself had so happily begun among the people.

THE evangelists in general, in their enumeration of the apostles, constantly
place St. Peter first. Indeed, the age and gravity of his person, together with
his being first called to be an apostle, particularly qualified him for being
president of this sacred college: but we must not suppose that St. Peter was
invested with any personal prerogative above his brethren; none of them ever
intimated any such thing; and St. Paul says expressly, that he himself was not
inferior to the very chiefest apostle; for he was not less eminent for
usefulness than success in his ministry.

THIS election had not long taken place, when the blessed JESUS, attended by
Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, followed Jairus, a ruler of the synagogue,
to his house, in order to restore his daughter, an only child, who lay on the
point of death; but before their arrival, a messenger arrived with the news
that the damsel was dead, and therefore unnecessary for our Savior to give
himself any further trouble: but our Lord bid the ruler not despair; for, if he
believed, his daughter should yet be restored to her former health: and
accordingly, on his arrival he took the maid by the hand, and with the power of
his word recalled her fleeting spirit, which had quitted its earthly
tabernacle, and restored her again to life and health, in the presence of her
astonished friends.

NO further account of St. Peter, in particular, occurs till the night after
our Savior's miraculously feeding the multitude in the wilderness. JESUS had
ordered his disciples to take ship, and pass over to the other side, while he
sent the multitude away; but a violent storm arising, they were in great danger
of their lives, when their great Master came to them, walking on the surface of
the boisterous billows, with the same ease as if it had been dry ground. At his
approach, the disciples were greatly terrified, supposing they had seen a
spirit: but their compassionate Master soon dispelled their fears, by telling
them it was he himself, and therefore they had no reason to be terrified.

ST. PETER, who was always remarkable for bold resolutions and precipitate
zeal, desired his Master to give him leave to come to him on the water; and on
obtaining permission, he left the ship, and walked on the sea to meet his
Savior; but when he heard the deep roar about him, and the waves increase, he
began to be afraid; and as his faith declined, his body sunk into the water; so
that, in the greatest agony, he called for assistance to him who was able to
save: nor was his cry in vain: the compassionate Redeemer of mankind stretched
out his hand, and again placed him on the surface of the water, with this
gentle reproof, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? And no
sooner was the blessed JESUS and his disciple entered into the ship, than the
winds ceased, the waves subsided, and the ship was at the land whither they
were going. A miracle of this kind could not fail of astonishing the disciples,
and convincing them of the divinity of his person; accordingly, they drew near,
and worshipped him with this confession, of a truth thou art the Son of God

OUR blessed Savior, the next day, entered the synagogue of Capernaum; and,
from the miracle of the loaves, took occasion to discourse concerning himself,
as the true manna, and the bread which came down from heaven: opening to them
the more sublime and spiritual mysteries, and the necessary and important
duties of the gospel. On which, great part of the audience, who expected he was
going to erect a temporal kingdom, and re-establish the throne of David in
Jerusalem, offended at his representing his dominions as entirely spiritual,
departed from him, and came no more to hear (...) discourses. JESUS, on
beholding this defection, turned himself toward his disciples, (...) asked
them whether they also would go away? To which Peter replied, Lord, whither
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: thy doctrine alone can
instruct us in the paths that lead to happiness; and thou art the true Messiah,
the great Prophet so fully foretold and so long expected by our nation.

OUR great Redeemer being willing to hear what account his disciples would give
him of the various opinions of the people, asked them what the world said
concerning him? To which they replied, that some took him for John the Baptist
risen from the dead; some thought him to be Elias, and others Jeremiah, or one
of the old prophets. This account not satisfying our blessed Savior, he told
them that it was no wonder that the people, who had seldom seen him, should
form various conjectures concerning him and the doctrine he preached; but as
they had been constantly with him, heard his sermons, and been spectators of
his miracles, it was natural to think they might form a truer idea of him; and,
therefore, asked them what they themselves thought of him? To which Peter in
the name of the rest, answered, Thou art Christ, Son of the living God,
anointed and set apart by the Most High, to be the great King, Priest, and
Prophet of Israel.

THIS full and comprehensive declaration of Peter, satisfied the enquiry of our
blessed Savior, who answered, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jonah; for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven: that
is, this faith which thou have now confessed, is not human, or built upon the
testimony of man, but upon those evidences and principles which I was sent from
God to reveal unto the world, and those great and solemn attestations he has
given from heaven to the truth both of my person and doctrine: therefore, I say
unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. As thy name signifies a rock,
so shall thou prove firm, solid, and immovable, in building my church, which
shall be so firmly established by thy care and diligence to that faith thou
have now professed, and all the assaults of men and devils shall not be able to
destroy, by their utmost efforts.

AT this time the disciples had no idea that their Master was to suffer death
for the sins of the world; on the contrary, they considered him as immortal,
having imbibed the opinion of the Scribes and Pharisees, That Christ abides
forever: so that when the blessed JESUS told them of the sufferings he must
undergo at Jerusalem, what affronts and indignities he must suffer, and be at
last put to death with all the effects of torture and disgrace, by a sentence
of the Jewish Sanhedrim, St. Peter, who could not endure the thought of his
Master's suffering even the least punishment, much less those cruelties he had
mentioned, and at last death itself, interrupted him very unseasonably, and
said, Be it far from (...), Lord; this shall not be unto thee. He considered
these sufferings as inconsistent with the character of the great Messiah, whom
he expected would restore the splendor of the throne of David his father, and
reduce all the kingdoms of the earth to his obedience.

OUR blessed Savior, who came down from heaven to give his life a ransom for
the sins of the world, and who valued the redemption of mankind infinitely more
than his own ease and safety, highly resented this speech of St. Peter, and
accordingly returned this sharp reproof, Get thee behind me, Satan; thou art an
offense to me; thou favourest not the things of God, but those that be of men.

AFTER these transactions, the great Redeemer of the sons of men, being about
to receive a specimen of his future glorification, took with him three of the
most intimate of his apostles, Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and went up
into a very high mountain, and while they were employed in earnest addresses to
the Almighty, he was transfigured b^^^re them* such luster beaming from his
face, as exceeded the brightness of the mer^^^an sun; and such rays of light
issued from his garments, as exceeded the light of the clearest day; an evident
and sensible representation of that state, when the just (...) walk in white
ro^es, and shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father. During this
heavenly scene, the great prophets Moses and Elias appeared in all the
brightness and majesty of a glorified state, familiarly conversing with him,
and discoursing of the death and sufferings he was shortly to undergo, and his
ascension to the heavenly regions of happiness and glory.

ST. PETER and the two apostles were in the mean time fallen asleep, being
either weary for want of natural rest; or, overpowered with these extraordinary
appearances, which the frailty and weakness of their nature could not support,
were fallen into a trance: but on their awaking, were strangely surprised to
see their Lord surrounded with so much glory, and those two great persons
conversing wi^h him. They however, remained silent till those visitants from
the courts of heaven were going to depart, when Peter, in a rapture and extacy
of mind, addressed himself to his Master, declaring their infinite pleasure and
delight in being favored with this glorious spectacle; and desired his leave
to erect three tabernacles, one for him, one for Moses, and one for Elias; but
while he was speaking, a bright cloud suddenly overshaded those two great
prophets, and a voice came from it, uttering these remarkable words, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. On which the apostles were
seized with the utmost consternation, and fell upon their faces to the ground;
but JESUS touching them, bid them dismiss their fears and look up with
confidence. They immediately obeyed, but saw their Master only; the others
having vanished, together with the cloud of light they had lately beheld.

THIS heavenly scene being ended, our blessed Savior traveled through Galilee
with his apostles, and at his return to Capernaum, the tax-gatherers came to
Peter, and asked him, whether his Master was not obliged to pay tribute. To
which Peter readily declared he did. On his entering the house to give his
Master an account of this demand, JESUS prevented him, by asking, What think
thou, Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their
own children, or of strangers? To which Peter answered, not from their servants
and family, but from strangers. Then, replied our Lord, are the children free.
I myself as being the Son of God, and you as my servants, are free from this
tax, yearly paid to God, for repairing his temple at Jerusalem. But rather than
give offense, by seeming to despise the house of God, and undervalue that
authority which had settled this tribute, he determined to pay it, though at
the expense of a miracle. Accordingly, he ordered Peter to repair to the sea
with a hook, and take the first fish that offered, in whose mouth he should
find a piece of money. The disciple obeyed, and found the money as his Master
had foretold, and gave to the gatherers of the tribute for his Master and
himself, as their proportion of it.

OUR blessed Savior having entered the city of Jerusalem in triumph, he
repaired to Bethany; from whence he sent two of his disciples, Peter and John,
to make preparation for his celebrating the passover before his death.

PREPARATION being made, the great Redeemer and his apostles entered the house,
and set down at table. But their great Master, who often taught them by example
as well as precept, arose from his seat, laid aside his upper garment, took a
towel, and pouring water into a basin, began to wash his disciples' feet, to
teach them humility and charity by his own example. But on his coming to Peter,
he would by no means admit his Master to perform so mean and condescending an
office. What! the Son of God stoop to wash the feet of a sinful mortel! A
thought which shocked the apostle, who strenuously declared, Thou shall never
wash my feet. But the blessed JESUS told him, that if he washed him not, he
could have no part with him; meaning that this action was mystical, and
signified the remission of sins, and the purifying virtue of the spirit of the
Most High, to be poured upon all true Christians. This answer sufficiently
removed the scruples of Peter, who cried out, Lord, not my feet only, but also
my hands and my head.

THE dear Redeemer now began the institution of his supper, that great and
solemn institution, which he resolved to leave behind him, to be constantly
celebrated in his church, as a standing monument and memorial of his love in
dying for mankind; telling them at the same time, that he himself was now going
to leave them, and that whither he went, they could not come. Peter, not well
understanding what he meant, asked him whither he was going? To which our
blessed Lord replied, that he was going to that place, whither he could not
now, but should hereafter follow him; intimating the martyrdom he was to suffer
for his Master's religion. Peter answered, that he was ready to follow him,
even if it required him to lay down his life. This confident presumption was
not at all agreeable to the blessed JESUS, who told him he had promised great
things, but would be so far from performing them, that before the cock crew
twice, that is before three in the morning, he would deny his Master thrice.

HAVING now ended supper, they sung an hymn, and departed to the Mount of
Olives; where JESUS again put them in mind how greatly the things he was going
to suffer would offend them. To which Peter replied, that though all men shall
be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.

AFTER this they repaired to the garden of Gethsemane; and leaving the rest of
the apostles near the entrance, our blessed Savior, taking with him Peter,
James, and John, retired into the more solitary parts of the garden, to enter
on the preparatory scene of the great tragedy that was now ^igh at hand.

THE blessed JESUS at this awful juncture labored under the bitterest agony
that human nature suffered, during which he prayed with the utmost fervency to
his almighty Father, offering up prayers and supplications, with strong cryings
and tears; and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to
the ground. While our great Redeemer was thus interceding with the Almighty,
his three disciples were fallen asleep, though he had made three several visits
to them; calling to Peter, asked him, if he could not watch one hour with him?
advising them all to watch and pray, that they might not enter into temptation,
adding, The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

DURING our Lord's conversation with them, a band of soldiers from the chief
priests and elders, preceeded by the traitor Judas to conduct and direct them,
rushed into the garden, and seized the great High Priest of our profession.
Peter, whose ungovernable zeal would admit of no restaint, drew his sword, and,
without the least order from his Master, struck at one of the persons who
seemed to be remarkably busy in binding JESUS, and cut off his right ear. This
wild and unwarrantable zeal was very offensive to his Master, who rebuked
Peter, and entreated the patience of the soldiers, while he healed the wound by
a miracle.

THE fidelity of the apostles, which they had urged with so much confidence,
was now put to the trial. They saw their Master in the hands of a rude and
inconsiderate band of men; and therefore should have exerted their power to
release him, or at least have been the companions of his sufferings, and
endeavored, by every kind and endearing action, to have lessened his grief.
But, alas! instead of assisting or comforting their Master, they all forsook
him and fled, -- from innocence in distress.

HEREUPON the soldiers who had bound JESUS led him away, delivered him to the
chief priests and elders, who carried him from one tribunal to another; first
to Annas, and then to Caiaphas, where the Jewesh Sanhedrim were assembled, in
order to try and condemn him to death.

PETER, who in the mean time had followed the other disciples in their flight,
recovered his spirits, and encouraged by his companion St. John, returned to
seek his Master; and seeing him leading to the high-priest's hall followed at a
distance, to know the event: but on his coming to the door he was refused
admittance, till one of the disciples probably St. John, who was acquainted
there, came out, and prevailed on the servant who kept the door to let him in.
Peter being admitted, repaired to the fire burning in the middle of the hall,
round which the officers and servants were standing; where being observed by
the maidservant who let him in, she charged him with being one of CHRIST's
disciples; but Peter publicly denied the charge, declaring that he did not
know him, and presently withdrew into a porch, where he heard the cock crow: an
intimation seemingly sufficient to have awakened his conscience into a quick
sense of his duty, and the promise he had a few hours before made to his
Master. But, alas! human nature when left to itself, is remarkably frail and
inconstant. This Peter sufficiently experienced; for while he continued in the
porch, another maid met him, and charged him with being one of the followers of
JESUS of Nazareth; which Peter stiffly denied, and, the better to gain belief,
uttered an oath, to confirm his assertion.

NEARLY an hour after this, the servant of the high priest (he whose ear Peter
had cut off) charged him with being a disciple of CHRIST, and that he himself
had seen him in the garden with him; adding, that his very speech proved him to
be a Galilean. Peter, however, still denied the fact; and to add the highest
accomplishment to his sins, ratified it, not only by an oath, but a solemn
curse and execration, that he was not the person, that he knew not the man. But
no sooner had he uttered this denial, than the cock crew. At which his master
turned about, and earnestly looked upon him: a look that pierced him to the
heart, and brought to his remembrance what his Savior more than once foretold,
that he would basely and shamefully deny him. Peter was now no longer able to
contain his sorrow; he fled from the palace of the high priest, and wept
bitterly, passionately bewailing his folly, and the aggrevations of his sin;
endeavoring thereby to make some reparation for his apostasy, and recover the
the favor of heaven, and prevent the execution of divine justice, by taking a
severe revenge upon himself for his crime.

ST. PETER's fall should convince us of the miserable frailty even of the best
of men, and effectually subdue those vain confidences which are apt to rise in
our hearts from our own supposed strength and virtue; for as this great
disciple fell in so scandalous a manner, we shall hereafter care to depend upon
the highest degree of knowledge, when one so wise, so perfectly satisfied of
the truth of the Christian doctrine, was after the fullest convictions of his
own conscience, so weak and frail as to deny and abjure his Lord who instructed
and bought him, even at the price of his own blood? Who shall presume upon his
best resolutions, when he who declared so firm a purpose of adhearing to JESUS,
did within a few hours peremptorily and solemnly disown that very person for
whose sake he was lately ready and disposed to lay down his life.

FROM this example we should also remember the wisdom and goodness of the
Almighty, in causing the faults and infirmities of his faints to be recorded in
the Holy scriptures, and the use we ought to make of their failings and
temptations. Their eminent virtues, and their as eminent repentance where they
did amiss, are written as a seasonable warning, and exhibit an instance of
humiliation to all future ages; by letting us see, that the most perfect are
but men, subject to blemishes and imperfections: and that the highest and
purest state is no security from danger. This should make us very tender how we
judge and despise our brethern; whose faults, however severely we may censure
them, might probably have been our own had we been in their circumstances and
surrounded with their temptations: for let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall. We should not then promise ourselves safety and freedom from
temptations in any circumstances in life; or so far presume on our own virtue,
as to think we are incapable of committing the blackest crimes, should the
Almighty withdraw his grace, and leave us to ourselves.

WE have no account whether St. Peter, after the denial of his Master, retired
into some solitary place to give vent to his grief and indulge his tears: or
whether he followed his Savior through the several stages of his trial, and
personally attended as a mourner at the funeral of his Master. But however that
be, he staid at Jerusalem, or, at least, in the neighborhood, and probably
with St. John; for when Mary Magdalene returned from the sepulcher, to inform
the disciples that the stone was rolled away from the door, and the body not to
be found, Peter and John set out immediately toward the garden. John who was
the younger arrived first at the sepulcher, looked into it, but did not enter,
either out of fear, or a reverence to his Savior.

PETER, whose zeal was greatly increased, came soon after, and resolutely went
into the sepulcher where he found the linen cloths lying together in one place,
the napkin that was about his head wrapped together in another; a sufficient
indication that the body was not stolen away: for had that been the case so
much care and order would not have been observed in disposing of the linen
cloths. But he did not wait long in suspense with regard to his great Lord and
Master; for the same day, and probably about noon, JESUS appeared to him;
perhaps in compassion to his sorrow, in which he was overwhelmed for his late
shameful denial of his Master. And as he was the first of the disciples who had
made a signal confession of the divinity of the Messiah, so it was reasonable
he should first see him after his resurerction; and, at the same time to
convince him that the crime he had been guilty of in denying him was pardoned,
and that he was come, like the good Samaritan, to pour oil into his wounded
conscience, and administer comfort to his afflicted soul.

THE apostles soon after prepared to obey the command of their great Master, of
retiring into Galilee; and we find that Peter, Nathaniel, the two sons of
Zebedee, and two other disciples, returned to their old trade of fishing on the
lake. One morning early, as they were laboring at their employment, having
spent the whole night to no purpose, they saw on the shore a grave person
(perhaps in the habit of a traveller) who called to them, and asked if they had
any meat? To which they answered No. Cast then, replied he, the net on the
right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They followed his directions, and
enclosed a prodigious number of large fish. Astonished at such remarkable
success, the disciples looked one upon another for some time, till St. John
told Peter, that the person on the shore, was doubtless their great Lord and
Master, whom the winds, the sea, and the inhabitants of the watery region, were
so ready to yield obedience to.

ST. PETER no sooner heard the beloved disciple declare his opinion, concerning
the stranger, than his zeal took fire, and, notwithstanding the coolness of the
season, girt on his fisher's coat, threw himself into the sea, and swam to
shore; his impatience to be with his Lord and Master, not suffering him to stay
the few minutes necessary to bring the ship to the shore.

AS soon as the disciples came on land, they found a fire kindled, and fish
laid upon it, either immediately created by the power of their divine Master,
or that came ashore of its own accord, and offered itself to his hand: but
notwithstanding there were fish already on the fire, he ordered them to bring
of those they had now caught, and dress them for their repast, he himself
eating with them; both to give them an instance of mutual love and friendship,
and also to assure them of the truth of his human nature, since he was risen
from the dead, as they now beheld.

THE repast being ended, our blessed Savior addressed himself particularly to
St. Peter, urging him to the utmost diligence in his care of souls; and because
he knew that nothing but a sincere love to himself could support him under the
troubles and dangers of so laborious and difficult an employment, he inquired
of him whether he loved him more than the rest of the apostles; mildly
reproving him for his over-confident resolution. Peter, whom fatal experience
had taught humility, modestly answered, that none knew so well as himself the
integrity of his affections; thou know the hearts of all men, nothing is hid
from thee, and therefore thou know that I love thee. The question was three
several times repeated by our blessed Savior, and as many times answered by
the apostle: it being but just that he, who by a threefold denial, had given so
much reason to question his affection, should now, by a threefold confession,
give more than common assurance of his sincere love for his Master; and to each
of these confessions, our great Redeemer added this signal trial of his
affection, Feed my sheep.

OUR dear Lord having thus engaged Peter to a cheerful compliance with dangers
that might attend the discharge of his office, particularly intimated to him
the fate that would attend him; telling him, that when he was young, he girt
himself, lived at his pleasure, and went wherever his fancy directed him; but
when he should reach the term of old age, he should stretch forth his hands,
and another should gird him, and bind him, and lead him, whither he had no
desire to go; intimating, as the evangelists tell us, by what death he should
glorify God, and seal the truth with his blood.

ST. PETER was not averse to drinking the bitter cup, and making his confession
as public as his denial, that he might thereby testify the sincerity of his
sorrow, and contrition for his great offense. And seeing John following, he
asked his great Master what should be his fate, and whether he, who had been
the object of his Master's love in his lifetime, should not have as honorable
a death as he that had denied him? To which JESUS replied, it does not concern
thee to know how I shall dispose of events with regard to him; he shall see the
destruction of the Jewish nation, and then go down in peace to the chambers of
the dust.

OUR blessed Savior soon after appeared to his disciples at Jerusalem, and
take his last farewell of them, who had constantly attended him during his
ministry amongst the sons of men. He now led them out as far as Bethany; a
small village on Mount Olivet, where he briefly told them, that they were the
persons he had chosen to be the witnesses both of his death and resurrection; a
testimony which they should publish in every part of the world: in order to
which, he would, after his ascension into heaven, pour out his spirit upon them
in an extraordinary manner, that they might be the better enabled to struggle
with that violent rage and fury with which the doctrine of the gospel would be
opposed by men and devils; adding, that in the mean time they should return to
Jerusalem, and there wait till those miraculous powers were given from on high.
This discourse being finished, he laid hands upon them, and gave them his
solemn benediction; during which he was taken from them, and received up unto
the regions of the heavenly Canaan.

OUR glorious Redeemer having left this vale of misery, and ascended into the
blissful habitations of immortality, the apostles began to act in conformity to
the power and commission they had received from him. The first object that
engaged their attention after their return to Jerusalem, was to fill up the
vacancy in their college, lately made by the unhappy fall and apostasy of
Judas. In order to this they called together the church, and entered into an
upper room, where Peter, as president of the assembly, proposed to them the
choice of a new apostle. He put them in mind that Judas, one of the disciples
of their great and beloved Master, being betrayed by his covetous and
insatiable temper, had lately fallen from the honor of his place and ministry;
that this was no more than what the prophet had long since foretold should come
to pass; and that the care of the church which had been committed to him,
should devolve upon another; that therefore it was highly necessary that some
person who had been familiarly conversant with the blessed JESUS, from first to
last, and consequently, a competent witness both of his doctrine and miracles,
his death, resurrection, and ascension, should be substituted in his room, and
appointed to that high office. In order to which, two candidates were proposed,
Joseph, called Barsabas, and Matthias, both qualified for the great and
important office of the apostleship; and having prayed that the Divine
Providence would immediately guide and direct their choice, they cast lots, and
the lot fell upon Matthias, who was accordingly admitted into the number of the
twelve apostles of our Lord.

THIS vacancy being filled up in the apostolic college, they spent their time
in prayer and meditation, till the feast of Pentecost; when the promise of
their great Master in sending the Holy Ghost was fulfilled. The Christian
assembly were met as usual, to perform the public services of their worship,
when suddenly a sound, like that of a mighty wind, rushed in upon them,
representing the powerful efficacy of that Divine Spirit which was now to be
communicated to them; after which there appeared small flames of fire, which,
in the shape of cloven tongues, descended, and sat upon the head of each of
them, to denote that their enjoyment of this gift should be constant and
perpetual, and not like the prophets of old, who were inspired only at some
particular times and seasons: upon which they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, which, in an instant, enabled them to speak fluently several languages
they had never learned, and probably never heard till this time.

AS this surprising transaction had different effects on the minds of the
audience, some considering it as the effect of a miracle, and others to the
power and strength of new wine; the apostles thereupon all stood up, and Peter,
in the name of the rest, undertook to confute this injurious calumny: he told
them that this scandalous slander proceeded from the spirit of malice and
falsehood; that their censure was as uncharitable as it was unjust; that it was
early in the morning, and therefore not a time for drinking, especially on a
day set apart for devotion; that these extraordinary and miraculous effects
were but the accomplishment of an ancient prophecy, which the Almighty had
expressly declared should be fulfilled in the times of the Messiah; that JESUS
of Nazareth had evidently proved himself to be that great prophet, the Son of
the Most High, by many unquestionable miracles, of which they themselves had
been eyewitnesses; and though, by the permission of Omnipotence, who had
determined by this means, to bring about the redemption of mankind, they had
wickedly crucified and slain him, yet God had raised him from the dead.

THOUGH this was the first discourse that St. Peter ever made in public, it
deeply affected the audience, and every word, like a dagger, pierced them to
the heart; so that they cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? To which
Peter answered, "The only way to expiate your guilt, and obtain pardon for the
sins you have committed, and acquire the gifts of the Holy Ghost, is to repent
sincerely, and be baptized into the religion of this crucified Savior."

A short time after this wonderful conversation, Peter and John going up to the
temple about three in the afternoon, near the conclusion of one of the solemn
hours of prayer, they saw a poor impotent cripple near forty years of age, who
had been lame from his birth, lying at the beautiful gate of the temple, and
asking alms of those who entered the sacred edifice. This miserable object
moved their compassion; and Peter beholding him with attention, said, "The
riches of this world, the silver and gold so highly coveted by the sons of men,
are not in my power to bestow; but I possess the power of restoring life and
health, and am ready to assist thee." Then taking the man by the hand,
commanded him in the name of JESUS of Nazareth to rise up and walk. Immediately
the nerves and sinews were enlarged, and the several parts of the diseased
members performed their natural transactions: upon which the man accompanied
them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God for his cure.

AN event so strange and extraordinary, filled the minds of the people with
admiration, and their curiosity drew them round the apostles to view the men
who had performed it. Peter, seeing the multitude gathering round them took the
opportunity of speaking to them in the following manner: "Men and brethren,
this remarkable cure should not excite your admiration of us, as if we had
performed it by our own power; it was wrought in the name of JESUS of Nazareth,
our crucified Master, by the power of that very CHRIST, that holy and just
Person, whom you yourselves denied, and delivered to Pilate, nay, and preferred
a murderer before him, when the governor was desirous of letting him go: but
though you have put him to death, yet we are witnesses that he has raised him
again from the dead, and that he is ascended into heaven, where he will remain
till the great and tremendous day of general restitution."

WHILE Peter was speaking to the people in one part of the temple, John was, in
all probability, doing the same in the other: and the success plainly indicated
how powerfully the preaching of the apostles was; five thousand persons
embracing the doctrine of the gospel, and acknowledging the crucified JESUS for
their Lord and Redeemer.

THE attention and envy of the rulers of Israel could not fail of being excited
at such amazing success from the preaching of the apostles; accordingly, the
priests and Sadducees repaired to the Roman magistrate, and intimated to him,
that, in all probability, this concourse of people would prove the cause of a
tumult and insurrection. Upon this information, the captain of the temple
seized on the apostles, and cast them into prison. The next day they were
carried before the Jewish Sanhedrim: and being asked by what power and
authority they had done this, Peter boldly answered, "Be it known unto you and
to all the descendants of Jacob, that this miracle was wrought wholly in the
name of JESUS of Nazareth, whom ye yourselves have crucified and slain, and
whom the Almighty has raised again from the dead. This is the stone which you
builders refused, and which is become the head of the corner: nor is there any
other way by which you, or any of the sons of men can be saved, but by this
crucified Savior, the Lord JESUS CHRIST."

AFTER beholding the apostles with a kind of astonishment, the court remembered
that they had seen them with JESUS of Nazareth, and therefore ordered them to
withdraw, whilst they debated amongst themselves what was proper to be done: it
was impossible to deny the mi^acle, for it was performed before all the people,
and the person on whom it was wrought, no stranger in Jerusalem. They therefore
resolved to charge them strictly not to preach any more in the name of JESUS:
accordingly, they were again called in, and acquainted with the resolution of
the council: to which the apostles answered, "That as they had received a
commission from heaven, to declare to all nations what they had seen and heard,
it was certainly their duty to obey God rather than man."

ALTHOUGH this was a fair appeal to the consciences of their very judges; yet
these rulers of Israel, instead of being satisfied with it, would in all
probability have proceeded to a greater violence, had not the peoples'
veneration for the apostles checked their malice; so that all they dared to do,
was to enforce their menaces, and suffer them to depart.

THIS intrepidity of the apostles had the desired effect; the church increased
exceedingly: and that so great a company, especially the poor and needy, might
be maintained, the professors of the religion of the holy JESUS sold their
estates, and brought the money to the apostles, that they might deposit it in
one common treasury, and from thence supply the several exigences of their poor
brethren.

WE find, however, that hypocrisy was not unknown amongst the professors of
religion, even in these primitive times. Ananias and his wife Sapphira, having
embraced the doctrine of the gospel, pretended to follow the free and generous
spirit of these times, by consecrating and devoting their estate to the honor
of God, and the necessities of the church. Accordingly, they sold their
possessions, and brought part of the money and laid it at the apostles' feet;
hoping to deceive them, though guided by the spirit of Omnipotence: but Peter,
at his first coming in, asked Ananias how he could suffer Satan to fill his
heart with such enormous wickedness, as to think to deceive the Holy Ghost?
That before it was sold, it was wholly in his own power; and afterward the
money entirely at his own disposal: so that this action was capable of no other
interpretation, than that he had not only abused and injured man, but mocked
the Almighty himself, who he must know was privy to the most secret thoughts of
his heart.

NO sooner had the apostles finished, than Ananias, to the great terror of all
that were present, fell down dead by a stroke from heaven; and not long after
his wife came in, whom Peter reproved in the same manner he had done her
husband, adding, that she should immediately end her life in the same awful
manner; upon which she was smitten by the hand of Omnipotence, and fell down
dead; sharing with her husband in the punishment, as she had before in the
heinous crime.

THIS remarkable instance of severity, filled all the converts with fear and
trembling, and prevented in a great measure, that hypocrisy and dissimulation,
by which others might flatter themselves to deceive the church. But such
instances of severity were very extraordinary; the power of the apostles was
generally exerted in works of mercy and beneficence toward the sons and
daughters of affliction: they cured all kinds of diseases, and cast out devils;
so that they brought the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and
couches, that the shadow, at least of Peter as he passed by, might cover some
of them* well knowing, a single touch or word from either of the apostles was
sufficient to remove a disease of the most inveterate nature.

HOWEVER, these stupendous works of the apostles, and the growing numbers of
the church alarmed the rulers of Israel, who seized the apostles and cast them
into prison. Their power, however, was limited, and like the drop of a bucket
to the ocean, when opposed to the Almighty arm of the great Jehovah. The prison
doors, though fastened with the utmost caution, opened of themselves at the
approach of a messenger from the court of heaven, who commanded the apostles to
leave the dungeon, repair to the temple, and preach the glad-tidings of the
gospel to the people in Jerusalem.

WHEN the officers returned in the morning, they found the prison doors shut
and guarded, but the prisoners gone. This remarkable circumstance greatly
alarmed them, and they repaired to the council to acquaint them with what had
happened. The rulers were astonished at the news; but hearing that the apostles
were teaching in the temple, they sent an officer to bring them, without the
least violence to their persons, before the Sanhedrim. Their orders were soon
obeyed, and the disciples of JESUS placed before the same court, by which their
Master had been so lately condemned.

BEING thus brought before the Sanhedrim, the high priest asked the apostles
how they dared to propagate a doctrine they had lately so strictly charged them
not to preach: to which Peter, in the name of the rest replied, "We certainly
ought to obey God rather than man; and though you have so barbarously and
contumeliously treated the Savior of the world, yet God has raised him up to
be a Prince and a Savior, to give both repentance and remission of sins: and
of these things both we are witnesses, together with the miraculous powers
which the Holy Ghost has conferred on all Christians."

AS the apostles delivered this answer with remarkable boldness, it exasperated
the council, and they began to consult how they might destroy them: but
Gamaliel, a grave and learned counselor, after commanding the apostles to
withdraw, desired them to proceed with caution in an affair of this nature;
reminding them, that several persons had already raised parties, and drawn
great numbers of persons after them; but that every one of them had miscarried,
and all their designs were rendered abortive without the interposition of that
court. That they would therefore do well to let the apostles alone; for if
their doctrines and designs were of human invention, they would come to
nothing; but if they were of God, all their powers and policy would be of no
effect.

THE council were satisfied with this prudent and rational advice, and after
commanding the apostles to be scourged, they strictly charged them to preach no
more in the name of JESUS, and set them at liberty: but this charge had little
effect on the disciples of the blessed JESUS; they returned home in triumph,
rejoicing that they were thought worthy to suffer in so righteous a cause, and
to undergo shame and reproach for so kind and so powerful a Master.

HITHERTO the church at Jerusalem had been tossed with gentle storms, but now
it was overtaken by a more violent tempest, which commenced with the death of
the proto-martyr Stephen, and was now carried on with greater violence; nor did
it end but with the dispersion of the disciples, by which means, the
glad-tidings of the gospel, which had till then been confined to Judea, and the
professors of it hid in secret places, was now preached to the Gentile world,
and an ancient prophecy fulfilled, which says, Out of Zion shall go forth the
law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Thus does the Almighty bring good
out of evil, and cause the malicious intentions of the wicked to redound to his
praise, in the further spreading of the truth.

THE followers of the blessed JESUS being thus dispersed, Philip, the deacon,
retired to Samaria, where he preached the gospel, and confirmed his doctrine by
many miraculous cures, and casting out devils. In this city was one Simon, who,
by magic arts and diabolical sorceries, was beheld with admiration by the
people; and some considered him as the great power of God; a name he
blasphemously gave himself, pretending to be the first and chief deity, or what
every nation considered as the supreme God. This wicked mortal, hearing the
sermons of Philip, and beholding the miracles wrought by him, became a convert
to the religion of JESUS, and was baptized with the others who had embraced
Christianity.

SEVERAL of the apostles who continued at Jerusalem, were soon informed of this
remarkable success of Philip's ministry at Samaria, and thought it necessary to
send him assistance. Accordingly, Peter and John were deputed to this infant
church, who having prayed and laid their hands on the new converts, they
received the Holy Ghost. Such miraculous gifts astonished the magician, and
desirous of obtaining the same privilege, he offered the disciples money to
invest him with this power, that on whomsoever he laid his hands he might
receive the Holy Ghost; but Peter, who perceived the insincerity of his heart,
rejected his offer with scorn and detestation. " Thy money, said that great
apostle, perish with thee. And as thy heart is full of hypocrisy and deceit,
thou can have no share nor portion in so great a privilege. Thou would do
well to repent for so monstrous a crime, and sincerely apply thyself to seek
the Almighty, that the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee; for I
perceive that thy temper and disposition of mind is still vicious and corrupt,
and that thou art yet bound by the chains of iniquity, and in a state
displeasing to the Almighty, and dangerous to the welfare of thy own soul."

THIS speech of St. Peter terrified Simon, his conscience flew in his face, and
he prayed the apostles to make intercession for him to the throne of grace,
that the Almighty might pardon his sin, and not inflict on him those heavy
judgments they had denounced.

AFTER this violent storm, the church enjoyed a time of calmness and serenity;
during which St. Peter went to visit the churches lately planted in those
parts, by the disciples whom the persecution had dispersed: and at his arrival
at Lydda, he miraculously healed Eneas, who had been afflicted with the palsy,
and confined to his bed eight years; but on Peter's bidding him arise in the
name of JESUS, he was immediately restored to perfect health. Nor was the
success of this miracle confined to Eneas and his family, the fame of it being
blazed through all the neighboring country, and many believed in the doctrine
of the Son of God. It was even known at Joppa, a seaport town, about six miles
from Lydda; and the brethren immediately sent for Peter, on the following
melancholy occasion: Tibatha, whose Greek name was Dorcas, a woman venerable
for her piety and extensive charity, was newly dead, to the great loss of all
mankind who loved the paths of virtue, especially the poor and afflicted, who
were supported by her benevolence.

WHEN St. Peter arrived, he found her dressed for her funeral solemnity, and
surrounded by mournful widows, who showed the coats and garments wherewith she
had clothed them, the monuments of her liberality: but Peter put them all out,
and kneeling down, prayed with the utmost fervency; then turning to the body,
he commanded her to arise, and taking her by the hand, presented her in perfect
health to her friends and others, who were assembled to pay their last duties
to so good a woman. This miracle confirmed those who newly embraced the gospel
of JESUS, and converted many more to the faith. After which, he stayed a
considerable time here, and lodged in the house of Simon a Tanner, at Joppa.

WHILE he abode in this city, one day, when he was offering up his prayers to
the Almighty, he found himself hungry, and called for meat; but while it was
dressing for him, he fell into a trance, wherein was presented to him a large
sheet let down from heaven, containing all sorts of creatures, clean and
unclean; and at the same time a voice said to him, Arise Peter, kill and eat:
but the apostle, as yet tenacious of the rites and institutions of the Mosaic
law, answered, that his conscience refused to comply, having never eaten any
thing that was common or unclean. To which the voice replied, "That it was
unjust to consider that as common which God had cleansed." This was done
thrice, after which the vessel was again drawn up to heaven, and the vision
disappeared. By this symbolical representation, St. Peter was given to
understand, that the Almighty was now going to send him on a new embassy, which
the Spirit at the same time commanded him to undertake. While he was still
wondering with himself what the event could prove, three messengers knocked at
the gate, enquiring for him; and from them he received the following account:
That Cornelius, a Roman captain of a band of Italian soldiers at Cesarea, a
person of great piety and religion, one who had been long a proselyte of the
gate, had sent for him, by an immediate command from God. Peter accompanied
with some of the brethren, went the next day with the messengers, and soon
after arrived at Cesarea.

CORNELIUS having information of his coming, had summoned his friends and
kindred to Cesarea; and at the apostle's entering his house, fell at his feet,
a method of address frequent in the Eastern countries; but Peter, who
considered that honor as due only to the Almighty, lifted him up, and declared
to the company the reason of his coming, saying he had lately learned, that
with God there was no respect of persons.

AS soon as the apostle had ended his speech, Cornelius, at his request,
related the particular reason for his sending for him. "Four days ago, said
this Roman officer, being conversant in the duties of fasting and prayer, an
angel from the courts of heaven appeared to me, declaring that my prayers and
alms were come up as a memorial before the throne of the Most High; and at the
same time, ordered me to send to Joppa, for one Simon Peter, who lodged at the
house of a Tanner near the sea-sides, who would give me further information in
the duties of religion. Accordingly, I made no hesitation to obey the Heavenly
messenger, but sent immediately for thee."

THE apostle was at first astonished at this relation of the centurion; but he
was soon convinced that God had broken down the partition^wall, and no longer
maintained a peculiar kindness for the sons of Jacob; that it was not the
nation* but the religion; not the external quality of the man, but the internal
temper of the mind, that recommended the human race to the favor of
Omnipotence: that the devout and pious, the righteous and the good man,
whatever part of the earth he may inhabit, i^ the favorite of heaven; that God
as highly respects a just and virtuous man in the barren wastes of Scythia, as
on the mountain of Sion; that the reconciling and making peace between God and
man by JESUS CHRIST, was the doctrine published by the prophets of old; and
that God had now anointed and consecrated JESUS of Nazareth with divine power,
in the exercise whereof he went about doing good to the children of men.

AT the time that Peter was thus preaching to them, the Holy Ghost fell upon
the greatest part of his hearers, enabling them to speak several languages, and
in them to magnify the great Creator of the sons of men. At this the Jews, who
accompanied Peter, marvelled exceedingly, to see that the gifts of the Holy
Ghost were poured upon the Gentiles; and Peter seeing this, told the company,
that he knew no reason why these persons should not be baptized, as they had
received the Holy Ghost as well as them; and, accordingly, he gave orders that
they should be baptized; and, to confirm them in the holy faith they had
embraced, he tarried some time with them.

HAVING thus finished his visitation to the new-planted churches, Peter
returned to Jerusalem, and was indefatigable in instructing the converts in the
religion of JESUS, and preaching the glad-tidings of salvation to the
descendants of Jacob: but he did not long continue in this pleasing course;
Herod Agrippa, in order to ingratiate himself into the favor of the Jews, put
St. James to death, and finding the action was highly acceptable to that
stiff-necked people, he resolved to extend his cruelty to Peter, and
accordingly cast him into prison: but the churches were incessant in their
prayers to God for his safety; and what have mortals to fear, when guarded by
the hand of Omnipotence! Herod was persuaded he should soon accomplish his
intentions, and sacrifice Peter to the insatiable cruelty of the Jews.

THE night before the intended execution, a messenger from the courts of heaven
visited the gloomy horrors of the dungeon, where he found Peter asleep between
his keepers. The angel raised him up, took off his chains, ordered him to gird
on his garments, and follow him: Peter obeyed, and having passed through the
first and second watch, they came to the iron gate leading to the city, which
opened to them of its own accord: the angel also accompanied him through one of
the streets, and then departed from him; on which Peter came to himself, and
perceived that it was no vision, but that his great and beloved Master had
really sent a messenger from above, and released him from prison. He therefore
repaired to the house of Mary, where the church was assembled, and offering up
their prayers to the throne of grace for his safety. On his knocking at the
door, a maid who came to let him in, knowing his voice, ran back to tell them
that Peter was at the door, which they at first considered as the effect of
fancy: but the damsel continuing to affirm that it was really true, they
concluded it was an angel, or some messenger sent to him from the courts of
heaven: but on opening the door, they were convinced of their mistake, finding
that it was Peter himself, who briefly told them how he was delivered, and,
desiring them to inform his brethren of his being set at liberty, he retired
from them.

THE officers came in the morning from Herod to the prison, with orders to
bring Peter out to the people, who were gathered together to behold his
execution: but when they came to the prison, the keepers informed them, that
the apostle had made his escape; which so exasperated Herod, that he commanded
those to be put to death who were entrusted with the care of the prisoner.

AFTER this miraculous deliverance of St. Peter, a controversy arose between
the Jewish and the Gentile converts, with regard to the observation of the
Mosaic law, a dispute which gave great uneasiness to the minds of many persons;
the Jews zealously contending, that it was absolutely necessary to salvation to
be circumcised, and observe the precepts of the ceremonial law as well as those
of the gospel. To compose this difference, it was thought necessary to summon a
general council of the apostles and brethren to meet at Jerusalem. This was
accordingly done, and the case thoroughly debated.

AT last Peter stood up, and declared, that God having chosen him out of all
the apostles to be a preacher of the Gospel, not only to the Jews, but also to
the Gentiles, God who was best able to judge of the hearts of men, had borne
witness to them, that they were accepted of him by giving them his Holy Spirit,
as he had done the Jews; and, consequently, that there was no difference
between them.

ST. PETER's declaration convinced the church, and it was unanimously decreed,
that no other burden than the temporary observance of a few particular
precepts, equally convenient ^o Jew and Gentile, should be imposed on them: and
the decision drawn up into a synodical epistle, and sent to the several
churches, for allaying the heats and controversies which had been occasioned by
this dispute.

In ANGEL Delivering Peter out of Prison who had been confined for preaching
the Gospel of our Savior JESUS CHRIST.


PETER soon after left Jerusalem, and went down to Antioch; where, using the
liberty given him by the gospel, he freely ate and conversed with the Gentile
proselytes, considering them now as fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God. This he had been taught by the vision of the sheet let down
from heaven; this had been lately decreed at Jerusalem; this he had before
practiced with regard to Cornelius and his family, and justified the action to
the satisfaction of his accusers; and this he had freely and innocently done at
Antioch, till some of the Jewish brethren coming thither, he, for fear of
offending them, withdrew himself from the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful
for him to hold conversation with uncircumcised persons; notwithstanding he
knew, and was fully satisfied, that our blessed Savior had broken down the
partition wall between the Jews and Gentiles, under the gospel.

HAVING thus acted against the light of his own mind and judgment, Peter
condemned what he had approved, and destroyed the superstructure he had before
erected; at the same time, he confirmed the Jewish zealots in their inveterate
errors, filled the minds of the Gentiles with scruples, and their consciences
with fears. Nor was this all, the old prejudices between Jew and Gentile were
revived, and the whole number of Jewish converts, following the apostle's
examples, separated themselves from the company of the Gentile Christians; nay,
even Barnabas himself was carried away by the torrent of unwarrantable practice
that now unhappily prevailed.

THE apostle Paul was now at Antioch, and resolutely opposed St. Peter to his
face; he publicly reproved him as a person worthy to be blamed for his gross
prevarication. He reasoned and severely expostulated with him, that he who was
himself a Jew, and consequently under a more immediate obligation of observing
the Mosaic law, should throw off the yoke himself, and at the same time
endeavor to impose it on the Gentiles, who were never under the necessity of
observing the ceremonies of the Israelites; a severe, though an impartial
charge.

THUS far we have had an infalliable guide to direct us in writing the life of
this great apostle; but here the sacred historian has left us, and therefore
we must have recourse to the ancients for materials in the further prosecution
of his history.

BEFORE this contest at Antioch, St. Peter had preached the gospel in various
parts of the world, enlarged the kingdom of his great Master, and spreading the
glad-tidings of salvation amongst the inhabitants of various countries; and,
amongst the rest, those of Rome, then the mistress of the world. In that
capital he is said to have continued several years, till the emperor Claudius
taking advantage of some seditious tumults raised by the Jews, published an
edict, whereby they were banished from Rome, and amongst the rest St. Peter,
who returned to Jerusalem, and was present at the synod already mentioned; but
how long he continued in the capital of Judea is uncertain; for we have no
account of his transactions for many years. This however is certain, that he
was not idle in the service of his great Master; and Eusebius tells us, from
Metaphrastes, that he visited several of the western parts, and particularly
the island of Great Britain, where he continued several years, spreading the
glad-tidings of salvation in these remote parts, and converting the several
nations to the faith of the gospel.

HOWEVER this be, whether St. Peter was or was not in England, it is certain,
that toward the latter end of Nero's reign he returned to Rome, where he found
the minds of the people strongly bewitched, and hardened against the doctrines
of the gospel by the sorceries of Simon Magus, who, as I have already observed,
was chastised by Peter for his wickedness at Samaria. This Monster of impiety
not only opposed the preaching of the apostles, but also did all in his power
to render them and their doctrines odious to the emperor. St. Peter foreseeing
that the calumnies of Simon and his adherents would hasten his death, took the
greater pains, and was still more assiduous to confirm those he had been any
ways instrumental in converting in the sublime truths they had received.

IN order to this, the apostle strongly opposed the great deceiver of mankind;
for in the last year of his life, he seems to have written his two epistles to
the dispersed Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bythinia; and, in an
appointed encounter with Simon, discovered his magical impostures, and through
the power and the assistance of the Almighty, brought him to an exemplary and
miserable death.

THE account of the miserable end of this unhappy man no sooner reached the
emperor's ears, than he vowed revenge, both for the death of his favorite, and
the endeavors used by the apostles to turn mankind from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. Accordingly, he issued orders for
apprehending St. Peter, together with his companion St. Paul. St. Ambrose tells
us, that when the people perceived the danger to which St. Peter was now
exposed, they prayed him to quit Rome, and repair for a while to some secure
retreat, that his life might be preserved for the benefit of the church. Peter,
with great reluctance, yielded to their entreaties, and made his escape by
night: but as he passed the gate, he was met by a person in the form of his
great and beloved Master, and on Peter's asking him, whither he was going,
answered, "To Rome to be crucified the second time:" which Peter taking for a
reproof of his cowardice, returned again into the city, was soon after
apprehended, and cast, together with St. Paul, into the Mamertine prison. Here
they were confined eight or nine months, but spent their time in the exercise
of religion, especially in preaching to the prisoners, and those who resorted
to them: and during this confinement, it is generally thought St. Peter wrote
his second epistle to the dispersed Jews; wherein he endeavors to confirm them
in the belief and practice of Christianity, and to fortify them against those
poisonous and pernicious principles and actions, which began to break in upon
the church, then in its infancy.

AT length, Nero returning from Achaia, he entered Rome in triumph; and soon
after his arrival, resolved that the apostles should fall as victims and
sacrifices to his cruelty and revenge. While the fatal stroke was daily
expected, the Christians in Rome were continually offering up their prayers to
heaven to protect those two holy persons: but the Almighty was now willing to
put an end to their sorrows; and after sealing the truth they had preached with
their own blood, to receive them into the regions of eternal bliss and
happiness, and exchange their crowns of martyrdom for crowns of glory.
Accordingly, they were both condemned by the cruel emperor of Rome; and St.
Peter having taken his farewell of the brethren, especially St. Paul, was taken
from the prison, and led to the top of the Vatican mount, near the Tiber, where
he was sentenced to surrender up his life by crucifixion.

COMING to the place of execution, he begged the favor of the officers, that
he might not be crucified in the common manner, but with his head downwards;
affirming, that he was unworthy to suffer in the same posture in which his Lord
had suffered before him. This request was accordingly complied with, and the
great apostle St. Peter surrendered up his soul into the hands of his great and
beneficent Master, who came down from heaven to ransom mankind from
destruction, and to open the gates of the heavenly Canaan to all believers.

THE body of Peter being taken down from the cross, is said to have been
embalmed by Mercellinus the presbyter after the manner of the Jews, and then
buried in the Vatican, near the Appian way, two miles from Rome. Here it
remained till the time of pope Cornelius, who conveyed it to the Vatican at
Rome, where it rested in an obscure place, till the reign of Constantine, who,
from the great reverence he entertained for the Christian religion, erected
many churches at Rome, and rebuilt and vastly enlarged the Vatican in honor of
St. Peter.

IF we consider St. Peter as a man, there will seem to have been a natural
eagerness predominant in his temper, which animated his soul to the most bold
and generous undertakings: but if we consider him as a disciple of the blessed
JESUS, we shall find him exemplary in the great duties of religion. To
conclude: if we consider him as an apostle, as a pastor, or shepherd of the
souls of men, we shall find him faithful and diligent in his office, zealously
endeavoring to instruct the ignorant, reduce the erroneous, strengthen the
weak, confirm the strong, reclaim the vicious, and turn the children of men
into the paths of righteousness. He never omitted any opportunity of preaching
to the people, and spreading the glad-tidings of the gospel amongst the human
race: and so powerful were his discourses, that he converted many thousands at
one time. How many painful journies and dangerous voyages did he undertake!
With what unconquerable patience did he endure the greatest trials, surmount
every difficulty, and remove every obstacle, that he might plant the gospel of
his beloved Master! Never refusing even to lay down his life to promote it: nor
was he only assiduous to perform these duties himself; he was also careful to
animate others to do the like, earnestly pressing and persuading the pastors
and governors of the church to feed the flock of God, to labor freely for the
good of the souls of men, and not undertake those offices to acquire advantages
to themselves; beseeching them to treat the flock committed to their care with
lenity and gentleness, and to be themselves shining examples of piety and
religion, the surest method of rendering their ministry successful: and,
because it was impossible for him to be always present, to teach and warn the
children of men, he endeavored by letters to imprint in their minds the
practice of what they had been taught: a method, he tells us, he was resolved
to pursue, as long as he continued an inhabitant of this world; thinking it
meet, while he was in this tabernacle, to stir up the professors of the gospel,
by putting them in mind of these things; that so they might be able after his
decease to have them always in remembrance, and not let them slip out of their
minds.

ST. JUDE, THE APOSTLE.
ST. JUDE is mentioned by three several names in the evangelical history,
namely, Jude or Judas, Thaddeus, and Lebbeus. The first he had in common with
the other Jews, and in honor of one of the twelve patriarchs; the other two
might be added to the former, partly to distinguish him from Judas the traitor,
who had rendered the name odious to the Christians, and partly as a
commendation of his wisdom and zeal: for Lebbeus, according to St. Jerome,
signifies a man of understanding, and Thaddeus imports divine favor; and hence
some of the fathers call him Zelotes, or Zealous.

THIS apostle was brother to St. James the Less, afterward bishop of
Jerusalem, being the son of Joseph, the reputed father of CHRIST, by a former
wife. It is not known when, or by what means, he became a disciple of our
blessed Savor, nothing being said of him, till we find him in the catalogue of
the twelve apostles; nor afterward till CHRIST's last supper, when discoursing
with them about his departure, and comforting them with a promise, that he
would return to them again, meaning after his resurrection, and that the world
should see him no more, though they should see him; our apostle said to his
Master, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thyself unto us, and not unto
the world? It seems, from this question, that St. Jude expected that the
Messiah would establish a secuar kingdom; and, therefore, could not reconcile
the solemnity and grandeur of it, with the private manifestations of CHRIST to
his disciples only.

IT is affirmed by St. Jerome, that St. Thomas sent St. Jude the apostle, soon
after our Lord's ascension, to Edessa, to heal Abagarus: but this is a mistake,
it being Thaddeus, one of the seventy disciples, and not Judas Thaddeus the
apostle, who was sent to Abagarus.

WE are told by Paulinus, that the province which fell to the share of St. Jude
in the apostolic division of the provinces, was Lybia; but he does not tell us,
whether it was the Cyrenean Lybia, which is thought to have received the gospel
from St. Mark, or the more southern part of Africa: but however that be, in his
first setting out to preach the gospel, he traveled up and down Judea and
Galilee; then through Samaria into Idumea, and to the cities of Arabia, and the
neighboring countries, and afterward to Syria and Mesopotamia. Nicephorus
adds, that he came at last to Edessa, where Abagarus governed, and where
Thaddeus, one of the seventy, had already sown the seeds of the gospel. Here he
perfected what the other had begun; and having by his sermons and miracles
established the religion of JESUS, he died in peace; but others say that he was
stain at Berytes, and honorably buried there.

THE writers of the Latin church are unanimous in declaring, that St. Jude
traveled into Persia, where, after great success in his apostolical ministry
for many years, he was at last, for his free and open reproving the
superstitious rites and customs of the Magi, cruelly put to death by the
enemies of the gospel.

WE do not find that St. Jude left more than one epistle, which is placed the
last of those seven, styled catholic, in the sacred canon. It has no
particular inscription, as the other six have, but is thought to have been
primarily intended for the Christian Jews, in their several dispersions, as St.
Peter's epistles were. In it he tells them, "That he at first intended to write
to them in general of the common salvation, and establish and confirm them in
it: but seeing the doctrine of CHRIST attacked on every side by Heretics, he
conceived it more necessary to spend his time in exhorting them to fight
manfully in defense of the faith once delivered to the saints, and oppose the
false teachers who labored so indefatigably to corrupt the truth."

IT is generally understood, the Heretics meant in this epistle, were the
Nicolatans, the Gnostics, the followers of Simon Magus and others of the same
kind, whose morals were as corrupt as their doctrine, trusting to a faith
without works, as sufficient to their salvation: so that the subject of St.
Jude's epistle is nearly the same with that of the second of St. Peter, whose
sense he generally follows, and often uses the very same expressions: only as
the infection had spread itself further, and had gotten more ground, he seems
to oppose those Heretics with more zeal and sharpness than St. Peter had done:
but because true Christian charity, though it be zealous, yet is without
bitterness and hatred, he exhorts the Christians to use gentle methods with
those deluded people, and to pluck them as brands out of the fire; meaning by
fire, their impious principles and practices, which if continued in, would
certainly consume them. He seems expressly to cite St. Peter's second epistle,
and to intimate plainly that most of the apostles were dead; so that his
epistle seems not to have been written till after Nero's reign and the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans.

THIS epistle was not at first generally received in the church: the author
indeed, like St. James, St. John, and sometimes St. Paul himself, does not call
himself an apostle, styling himself only the servant of Christ: but he has
added what is equivalent, Jude the brother of James, a character that can
belong to none but our apostle: and surely the humility of a follower of JESUS
should be no objection against his writings, but rather be a recommendation of
them.

ONE great objection against this epistle, was, the apostle's mentioning the
tradition of Michael the archangel contending with the Devil about the body of
Moses, but he has done no more than St. Paul in nameing Jannes and Jambres;
namely, alleging a story which was then current and acknowledged by the Jews,
though nothing of it was inserted in the sacred writings, so that St. Jude
reasons with the Jews from their own authors and concessions, the more easily
to convince and confute them.

WE have now, we trust, obviated the difficulties that have arisen concerning
the epistle of St. Jude; and Eusebius tells us, that in his time most churches
read it publicly: it is indeed evident, that before the close of the fourth
age, it was acknowledged as canonical Scripture, in the councils of Laodicea
and Carthage, by general consent.

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. THOMAS THE APOSTLE.
THE Jews, when they traveled into foreign countries, or familiarly conversed
with the Greeks and Romans, were wont to assume a Latin name of the same
signification, or at least that bore some affinity with that by which they were
known in their own country. Thus our blessed Savior was called CHRIST,
answering to his Hebrew title Messiah, the anointed: Simon, who was called
Caphas in Hebrew, was styled P^tros in Greek, both signifying a rock: Tabitha
was called Dorcas, both signifying a goat: and thus Thomas, according to the
Syriac import of his name, was called Didymus, a twin, which is the meaning of
both appellations.

THERE is no mention in the evangelical history either of the country or
kindred of St. Thomas: it is however certain that he was a Jew, and in all
probability a Galilean. Metaphrastes tell us, that he was descended from very
mean parents, who brought him up to the trade of fishing; but at the same time,
took care to give him a more useful education, instructing him in the knowledge
of the Scripture, whereby he learned wisely to regulate his conduct.

THIS apostle was, together with the rest, called to the apostleship and not
long after gave an eminent instance of his being ready to undergo the most
melancholy fate that might attend him: for when the rest of the apostles were
dissuading their Master from going into Judea at the time of Lazarus's death,
because the Jews lately endeavored to stone him, Thomas desired them not to
hinder his journey thither, though it might cost them all their lives: Let us
go, said he, that we may die with him; concluding that instead of Lazarus being
raised from the dead, they should all, like him, be placed in the chambers of
the dust.

THE holy JESUS, a little before his sufferings, had been speaking to them of
the joys of heaven, and had told them, that he was going to prepare mansions
for them, that they might follow him, and that they knew both the place whither
he was going, and the way thither; on hearing this, our apostle replied, that
they knew not whither he was going, much less the way that would lead them
thither. To which our Lord returned this short but satisfactory answer, I am
the way; I am the person whom the Father has sent into the world to show
mankind the paths that lead to eternal life, and therefore you cannot miss the
way if you follow my example, and obey my precepts.

THE minds of the disciples, who had seen their great Master expire on the
cross, were distracted by hopes and fears concerning his resurrection, about
which they were not then fully satisfied, which engaged him the sooner to
hasten his appearance, that by the sensible manifestations of himself he might
put the matter beyond all possibility of dispute. Accordingly, the very day on
which he arose from the dead, he came into the house where they were assembled,
while, for fear of the Jews, the doors were close shut, and gave them
sufficient assurance, that he was risen from the dead. Thomas was not present
at this meeting, having probably never rejoined their company since their
dispersion in the garden, when every one's fears prompted him to consult his
own safety. At his return, they told him, that the Lord had appeared to them,
but he obstinately refused to give credit to what they said, or to believe that
it was really he, presuming it rather a spectre or apparation, unless he might
see the very print of the nails, and feel the wounds in his hands and side: a
strong piece of infidelity! Was it any thing more than what Moses and the
prophets had long since foretold? Had not our Lord frequently declared in plain
terms, that he must rise from the dead the third day? And could they question
the possibility of what he told them, when they had so often seen him work the
greatest miracles.

THE stubbornness of Thomas, on this occasion, might have betrayed him into an
eternal infidelity; but our compassionate Savior would not take the advantage
of his perverse obstinacy; for, on that day seven-night he came again to them,
as they were met at their solemn devotions, and, calling to Thomas, bade him
look upon his hands, put his fingers into the print of the nails, and thrust
his hand into his side, to satisfy his faith by a demonstration from the
senses. Thomas was soon convinced of his error and obstinacy, confessing that
he now acknowledged him to be his Lord and Master, a God omnipotent, as he was
thus able to rescue himself from the power of death. Our Lord answered, that it
was happy for him that he believed the testimony of his own senses; but that it
was a more noble and commendable act of faith, to acquiesce in a rational
evidence, and to receive the doctrines and precepts of the gospel upon such
testimonies and assurances as will satisfy a wise and sober man, though he did
not himself behold them.

AFTER the blessed JESUS had left this vale of misery, and bestowed eminent
gifts and miraculous powers on the apostles, St. Thomas, as well as the rest,
preached the gospel in several parts of Judea; and, after the dispersion of the
Christian church in Jerusalem, repaired into Parthia, the province assigned him
for his ministry. After which, as Sempronius and others inform us, he preached
the gospel to the Medes, Persians, Caramanians, Hyrcanis, Bactarians, and the
neighboring nations.

DEPARTING from Persia he traveled into Ethiopia, preaching the glad-tidings
of the Gospel, healing the sick, and working other miracles, to prove he had
his commission from on high. And after traveling through these countries, he
entered the Indian territories.

WE are told by Nicephorus, that he was at first unwilling to enter these
countries, fearing he should find their manners as rude and intractable as
their faces were black and deformed, till encouraged by a vision, wherein he
was assured of the Divine Presence to ST. ANDREW.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW.

ST. BARNABAS.

ST. JAMES. the Less.

The APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS, etc. of our Blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST.

assist him. He traveled a great way into the Eastern countries, and even
visited the island Taprobane, since called Sumatra, and the country of the
Brachmans, preaching every where with the greatest gentleness, and using the
most persuasive discourses, not flying out into invectives against their
idolatrous practices, but calmly instructing them in the doctrines of
Christianity, persuading them by degrees to renounce their follies, well
knowing that confirmed habits must be cured by patience and forbearance, by
slow and gentle methods; and by these means he reclaimed the people from the
grossest errors and superstitions, to an hearty belief and reception of
Christianity.

THE Porteguese, when they first visited these countries, after their discovery
of a passage by the Cape of Good Hope, received the following particulars,
partly from ancient monuments, and partly from constant and uncontroverted
traditions preserved by the Christians in those parts; namely, that St. Thomas
came first to Socotora, an island in the Arabian sea, and thence to Cranganor,
where, having converted many from the error of their ways, he traveled further
into the East: and having successfully preached the gospel, returned back to
the kingdom of Coromandel, where at Mallipur, the metropolis of the kingdom,
not far from the mouth of the Ganges, he began to erect a place for divine
worship, till prohibited by the idolatrous priests, as well as by Sagamo,
prince of that country: but after performing several miracles, the work was
suffered to proceed, and Sagamo himself embraced the Christian faith, whose
example was soon followed by great numbers of his subjects and attendants.

THE Brachmans were greatly alarmed at this remarkable success, at they plainly
perceived that their religion would soon be extirpated, unless some method
could be found of putting a stop to the progress of Christianity: and therefore
resolved to put the apostle to death. At a small distance from the city was a
tomb, whither St. Thomas often retired for private devotions. Hither the
Brachmans and their armed followers pursued him, and while he was intent at
prayer, they first shot at him a shower of darts, after which, one of the
priests ran him through with a lance. His body was taken up by his disciples,
and buried in the church he had lately erected, and which was afterward
improved into a stately and magnificent fabric.

ACCORDING to St. Chrysostom, St. Thomas, who at first was the weakest and most
incredulous of all the apostles, became, through CHRIST's condescension to
satisfy his scruples, and the power of the divine grace, the most active and
invincible of them all; traveling over most parts of the world, and living
without fear in the midst of barbarous nations, for the propagation of the
Christian faith.

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. ANDREW, THE APOSTLE.
ALTHOUGH the sacred historians have largely described the transactions of St.
Peter and St. Paul, yet we find they have been sparing in their accounts of the
other apostles, giving us only now and then a few oblique strokes and
accidental remarks concerning them. Why no more of their respective actions
were recorded by the penmen of the Holy Scriptures, is to us unknown: perhaps
the Divine Providence thought it convenient that no further account should be
given of the first planting of Christianity in the world, than what concerned
Judea and the neighboring countries, at least the most eminent places in the
Roman empire, that the truth of the prophetical predictions might appear, which
had foretold, That the law of the Messiah should come forth from Zion, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Besides a particular relation of the acts of
so many apostles, performed in so many countries, must have swelled the sacred
volumes to an enormous bulk, and consequently rendered them less serviceable to
the use of Christians in general.

THE Apostle St. Andrew was born at Bethsaida, a city of Galilee, built on the
banks of the lake of Gennesareth, and was the son to John or Jonas, a fisherman
of that town. He was brother to Simon Peter, but whether elder or younger, is
not certainly known though the generality of the ancients intimate that he was
the younger: but, however that be, he was brought up to his father's trade, at
which he labored till our blessed Savior called him to be a fisher of men,
for which he was, by some preparatory institutions qualified even before the
appearance of the Messiah, in his public character.

WE are told by the evangelist, John the Baptist had lately preached the
doctrine of repentance; and was, by the generality of the Jews, from the
impartiality of his precept^, and the remarkable strictness and austerity of
his life, held in great veneration. He trained up his proselytes under the
discipline of repentance, and, by urging on them a severe change and
reformation of life, prepared them to entertain the doctrine of the Messiah,
whose approach he told them was now near at hand; representing to them the
greatness of his person, and the importance of the design for which he came
into the world.

BESIDES the multitudes that flocked to the Baptist's discourses, he
accordingly to the custom of the Jewish masters, had some peculiar and select
disciples, who more constantly attended on his lectures, and generally waited
upon his person. In the number of these followers was our apostle; who was with
him beyond Jordan, when the Messiah, who had some time before been baptized,
came that way. Upon his approach, the Baptist pointed him out as the Messiah,
styling him the Lamb of God, the true sacrifice, that was to expiate the sins
of the world.

AS soon as the Baptist had given this character of JESUS, Andrew, and another
disciple, probably St. John, followed the Savior of mankind to the place of
his abode; from whence, after some conversation with him, Andrew departed, and
having found his brother Simon, informed him that he had discovered the great
Messiah, so long expected by the house of Jacob; and, accordingly, brought him
to JESUS. They did not, however, stay long with their Master, but returned to
their occupation.

UPWARDS of a year afterward, JESUS passing through Galilee, found Andrew and
Peter fishing on the sea of Galilee, where he fully satisfied them of the
greatness and divinity of his person, by a miraculous draught of fishes which
they took at his command. He now told them, that they should enter on a
different series of labors, and, instead of fish, they should by the efficacy
and influence of their doctrine, catch men; commanding them to follow him, as
his immediate disciples and attendants; and t^^y accordingly left all and
followed him immediately.

ANDREW, together with the rest, was shortly after called to the office and
honor of the apostolate, and made choice of to be one of CHRIST's immediate
vicegerents for planting and propagating the Christian church.

WE learn from the sacred historian, that after the ascension of the blessed
JESUS into heaven, and the Holy Ghost had descended in a visible manner on the
apostles, St Andrew was chosen to preach the gospel in Scythia, and the
countries adjacent. He accordingly departed for Jerusalem, and first traveled
through Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia, instructing the inhabitants in the
faith of CHRIST, and continued his journey along the Euxine sea into the
solitudes of Scythia.

ST. ANDREW afterward arrived at Sinope, a city situated on the same sea, and
famous both for the birth and burial of king Mithridates: here he met with his
brother Peter* and staid with him a considerable time at this place. The
inhabitants of Sinope were mostly Jews, who partly, from a zeal for their
religion, and partly from their barbarous manner, were exasperated against St.
Andrew, and entered into a confederacy to burn the house in which he lodged:
but being disappointed in this design, they treated him with the most savage
cruelty, throwing him on the ground, stamping upon him with their feet, pulling
and dragging him from place to place: some beating him with clubs, some pelting
him with stones, and others to satisfy their brutal revenge, biting off his
flesh with their teeth; till apprehending they had entirely deprived him of
life, they cast him out into the fields: but he miraculously recovered, and
returned publicly into the city; by which and other miracles he wrought among
them, he converted many from the error of their ways, and induced them to
become disciples of the Son of God.

AFTER departing from Sinope, he returned to Amynsus, passed from thence
through Trapezius, and Neocaesarea to Sam^sata, where he silenced the accutest
and wisest philosophers of that country; and, having spent some time there in
preaching the glad-tidings of the gospel, he returned to Jerusalem: but he did
not continue long in his native country, returning again to the province
allotted him for the exercise of his ministry, traveling first into the
country of the Abasgi, and had great success in the gospel to the inhabitants
of the city of Sebastople, situated on the eastern shore of the Euxine sea,
between the rivers Phasis, and Absarus; from thence he removed into the country
of the Zecchi, and the Bosphorani; but finding the people remarkably barbarous
and intractable, he did not stay long amongst them, except at Cherson, a large
and populous city within the Bosphorus, where he had great success in his
ministry; and therefore continued some time with the new converts, to instruct
and confirm them in the faith. From this city he passed by sea to Sinope, the
royal seat of Mithridates to encourage and confirm the churches he had planted
in those parts; and here he ordained Philologos, formerly one of St. Paul's
disciples, bishop thereof.

ST. ANDREW, after leaving Sinope, came to Byzantium, since called
Constantinople, where he instructed the inhabitants in the Christian religion,
founded a church for divine worship, and ordained Stachys, first bishop of that
place: but being banished from the city, he fled to Argyropolis, were he
preached the gospel for two years together with remarkable success, converting
great numbers to the Christian faith. He next traveled over Thrace, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Achaia, and Epirus, preaching the gospel, propagating Christianity,
and confirming the doctrine he taught with signs and miracles. At last he came
to Petrea, a city of Achaia, where he gave his last and greatest testimony to
the gospel of his divine Master; we mean, he sealed it with his blood, and
received the crown of martyrdom by the following means.

AEGEAS, who was proconsul of Achaia, came at this time to Patrea where
observing that multitudes had abandoned the heathen religion, and embraced
Christianity he had recourse to every method both of favor and cruelty, to
reduce the people to their old idolatry. The apostle, whom no difficulties or
dangers could deter from performing the duties of his ministry, addressed the
proconsul, and calmly put him in mind, that being only a judge of men, he ought
to revere him who was the supreme and impartial Judge of all, pay him the
divine honors due to his exalted Majesty, and abandon the impieties of his
idolatrous worship. The proconsul, instead of assenting to these arguments of
the apostle, ridiculed him as an innovator in religion, and a propagator of
that superstition, whose author the Jews had put to the infamous death of the
cross. On his mentioning the cross, our apostle took the opportunity of
representing to him the infinite love and kindness of our great Redeemer, who
came down from heaven to purchase the salvation of mankind; and to obtain it,
did not disdain to die upon the cross. The proconsul answered, that he might
hope to persuade the credulous multitude of the truth of what he said; but, for
his part, he would not listen to such a legentary tale: and if he did not
comply with him, in doing sacrifice to the gods, he would cause him to suffer
upon that cross he had so highly magnified. St. Andrew replied, that he
sacrificed every day to God, the only true and omnipotent being, not with fumes
and bloody offering, but in the sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb of God. This
answer provoked the proconsul, and he committed the apostle to prison; which so
exasperated the people, that a mutiny would have ensued, had not St. Andrew
restored them, persuading them to imitate the mildness and patience of the meek
and humble JESUS, and not hinder him from receiving the crown of martyrdom,
which he was now going to receive.

HE was brought again the next day before the proconsul, who persuaded him not
foolishly to throw away his life, but preserve it, and enjoy the pleasures of
the world. The apostle told him, that if he would renounce his idolatries and
heartily embrace the Christian faith, he should, with him and the members who
had believed in the Son of God, receive eternal happiness in the Messiah's
kingdom. The proconsul answered, that he himself should never embrace the
religion he mentioned; and that the only reason why he was so earnest with him
to sacrifice to the gods, was that those whom he had every where seduced,
might, by his example, be brought back to the ancient religion they had
forsaken. To which the apostle replied, that he saw it was in vain to endeavor
to persuade a person incapable of sober councils, and hardened in his own
blindness and folly; that with regard to himself, he might act as he pleased,
and if he had any torment greater than another, he might heap that upon him; as
the greater constancy he showed in his sufferings for CHRIST, the more
acceptable he should be to his Lord and Master. Aegeas, upon this, immediately
passed sentence of death upon him, not being able to restrain his rage any
longer.

THE Proconsul first ordered St. Andrew to be scourged, seven lictors
successively whipping his naked body; and, seeing his invincible patience and
constancy, commanded him to be crucified; but to be fastened to the cross with
cords instead of nails, that his death might be more lingering and tedious. As
he was led to the place of execution, walking with a cheerful and composed
mind, the people cried out that a good and innocent man was unjustly condemned
to die. On his coming near the cross, he saluted it in the following manner: I
have long desired and expected this happy hour. The cross has been consecrated
by the body of CHRIST hanging on it, and adorned with his members as with so
many inestimable jewels: I therefore come joyfully and triumphing to it, that
it may receive me as a disciple and follower of him who once hung upon it, and
be the means of carrying me safe to my Master, being the instrument on which he
redeemed me and all his people from everlasting misery."

HAVING offered up his prayers to the throne of grace, and exhorted the people
to constancy and perseverance in the religion he had delivered to them, he was
fastened to the cross, on which he hung two whole days, teaching and
instructing the people. In the mean time, great interest was made to the
proconsul to spare his life; but the apostle earnestly begged of the Almighty,
that he might now depart, and seal the truth of his religion with his blood.
His prayers were heard, and he immediately expired on the last day of November,
but in what year is not recorded by historians.

THE cross on which he suffered, appears to have something peculiar in the form
of it, and is commonly thought to have been a cross decussate, or two pieces of
timber crossing each other in the form of the letter X, hence usually known by
the name of St. Andrew's cross; though some affirm that he suffered death on an
Olive Tree, and not on a cross.

AFTER his body was taken from the cross, it was decently and honorably
intered by Maximilla, a lady of great quality and estate, and who, Nicephorus
tells us, was wife to the proconsul. Constantine the great afterward removed
his body to Constantinople, and buried it in the great church he had built to
the honor of the apostles: but this structure being taken down some hundred of
years after, in order to rebuild it, by Justinian the emperor, the body of St.
Andrew was found in a wooden coffin, and again deposited in the place where it
was at first intered.

WE have the following encomiastic character of St. Andrew, from Hesychius,
presbyter of Jerusalem, with which we shall conclude this account of his life.
"St. Andrew was the firstborn of the apostolic choir, the principal and first
pillar of the church, a rock before the rock, the foundation of that
foundation, the first fruits of the beginning, a caller before he was called
himself; he preached that gospel which was not yet revealed or entertained; he
revealed and made known that life to his brother, which he had not yet
perfectly learned himself: so great treasures did that one question bring him,
Master, where dwell thou? which he soon perceived by the answer, Come and
see. How art thou become a prophet? whence thus divinely skilful? what is it
that thou soundest in Peter's ears. We have found him of whom Moses and the
prophets did write, etc. Why do thou attempt to compass him whom thou can
not comprehend? how can he be found who is omnipresent? But he knew very well
what he said, we have found him whom Adam lost, whom Eve injured, whom the
clouds of sin have hidden from us, and to whom our transgressions had hitherto
rendered us strangers. Thus had St. Andrew the honor of being the first
apostle that preached the gospel of the Son of God; as appears by his
declaration recited above."

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW, THE APOSTLE.
WE learn from the evangelical history of the election of the apostles, that
St. Bartholomew was one of the twelve: because he is but just named, without
any further notice taken of him, the generality of writers, ancient and modern,
suppose that he lay concealed under the name of Nathanael, one of the first
disciples that came to CHRIST. Accordingly, we may observe, that as St. John
never mentions Bartholomew in the number of the apostles, so the other
evangelists take no notice of Nathanael, probably as being the same person
under two different names: and as in St. John, Philip and Nathanael are joined
together in their coming to CHRIST; so in the rest of the evangelists, Philip
and Bartholomew are constantly put together; certainly for no other reason,
than because they were jointly called to the discipleship: but what renders
this opinion still more probable, is, that Nathanael is particularly mentioned
amongst the other apostles, to whom our Lord appeared at the sea of Tiberias
after his resurrection.

IT is not reasonable to suppose that Bartholomew was the proper name of this
apostle, any more than B^r-jona was the proper name of Peter; but given to
denote his relative capacity, either as a son or a scholar. If it refers to his
father, he was the son of Thalmai, a name not uncommon amongst the Jews: if to
his sect as a scholar, he was of the school of the Thalmaeans, so called from
their founder Thalmaei, scholar to Heber, the ancient master of the Hebrews.
Now it was usual for scholars, out of a great reverence to their master, as
first institutor of the order, to adopt his name, as Ben-ezra, Ben-uziel, and
the like: but which ever of these conjectures appears most satisfactory to the
reader, either will be sufficient for my purpose, namely, to reconcile the
difference there seems to be between St. John and the other evangelists about
the name of this apostle* the one calling him by his proper name, and the other
by his relative or paternal appellation.

ST. Augustine indeed seemed to object, that it is not probable that our
blessed Savior, who proposed to confound the wisdom of this world by the
preaching of illiterate men, would choose Nathanael, a doctor of the law, to be
one of his apostles: but this objection will appear to be built on a sandy
foundation, if we consider, that the same argument is as strong against Philip,
of whose knowledge in the law and the prophets, there is as strong evidence in
the history of the gospel as for that of Nathanael; and may be urged with still
greater force against St. Paul, whose abilities in human learning were
remarkably great, and few were more complete masters of the Jewish law, than
that great apostle.

THIS difficulty being removed, we shall proceed to the history of this
apostle, and consider the names of Nathanael and Bartholomew as belonging to
one and the same, and not to two persons.

AS to his descent and family, some are of opinion that he was a Syrian, and
that he was descended from the Ptolemies of Egypt; probably for no other reason
than the mere analogy and sound of the name: but it is plain from the
evangelical history, that he was a Galilean, St. John having expressly told us,
that Nathanael was of Cana in that part o^ Judea. His trade and manner of life
are not mentioned in Scripture, though from some circumstances there is room to
imagine that he was a fisherman: but however that be, he was at his first
coming to CHRIST, conducted by Philip, who told him they had now found the long
expected Messiah so often foretold by Moses and the prophets, Jesus of
Nazareth, the son of Joseph. And when he objected that the Messiah could not be
born in Nazareth, Philip desired him to come and satisfy himself of the truth.

OUR blessed Savior, on his approach, entertained him with this honorable
character, that he was an Israelite indeed, a man of true simplicity and
dignity; and indeed his simplicity particularly appears in this, that when he
was told of JESUS, he did not object against the meanness of his original, the
low condition of his parents, or the narrowness of their fortunes, but only
against the place of his birth, which, as he justly observed, could not be
Nazareth, the Scriptures peremptorily foretelling that the Messiah should be
born at Bethlehem.

THIS apostle was greatly surprised at our Lord's salutation, wondering how he
could know him at the first sight, being certain he had never before seen his
face: but he was answered, that he had seen him while he was yet under the
fig tree, even before Philip called him. Convinced by this instance of ou^
Lord's divinity, he presently made this confession, that he was now sure that
JESUS was the promised Messiah, the Son of God, whom he had appointed to govern
his church. Our blessed Savior told him, that if, from this instance, he could
believe him to be the Messiah, he should have far greater arguments to confirm
his faith; for that he should hereafter behold the heavens opened to receive
him, and the angels visibly appearing to attend his triumphant entrance into
the heaven of heavens.

AFTER the visible descent of the Holy Ghost on the apostles, St. Bartholomew
visited different parts of the world to preach the gospel, and penetrated as
far as the hither India. Having spent a considerable time there, and in the
eastern extremities of Asia, he returned to the northern and western parts: and
we find him at Hierapolis in Phrygia, laboring in concert with St. Philip, to
plant Christianity in those parts, and to convince the blind idolaters of the
evil of their ways, and direct them in the paths that lead to the regions of
felicity. This enraged the bigoted magistrates, and he was, together with St.
Philip, designed for Martyrdom; and in order to this fastened to a cross: but a
sudden trembling and motion of the earth convinced the idolaters that the
justice of Omnipotence would revenge their deaths; so that they took him
immediately down from the cross and dismissed him.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW passed from hence into Lycaonia, and St. Chrysostom assures
us, that he instructed and trained up the inhabitants in the Christian
discipline. His last remove was to Adrianople in Great Armenia, a place
miserably overrun with idolatry, from which he labored to reclaim the people:
but his endeavors to turn them from darkness unto light; and from the power of
Satan unto God, were so far from having the desired effect, that it provoked
the magistrates, who prevailed on the governor to put him to death, which he
cheerfully underwent, sealing with his blood the truth of the doctrine he had
preached.

WE are told by some of the ancients, that he was crucified with his head
downwards; and by others, that he was flayed alive. Perhaps he suffered both;
for Plutarch records a particular instance of Mesobates, the Persian eunuch,
who was first flayed alive, and then crucified; and the inhabitants of
Adrianople might easily borrow this barbarous and inhuman cruelty from the
Persians, who were remarkably severe in their punishments.

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. BARNABAS, THE APOSTLE.
THIS apostle was at first called Joses, a softer termination generally given
by the Greeks to Joseph; his fellow disciples added the name of Barnabas, as
significant of some extraordinary property in him. St. Luke interprets it, the
son of consolation, which he was ever ready to administer to the afflicted,
both by word and action; as his comfortable discourses, his selling his own
estate, and collecting the benevolence of others, for the relief of the poor
indigent Christians, abundantly testify. St. Jerome observes that his name also
denotes the son of a prophet: and in this respect likewise it was well suited
to our apostle, as being eminent for his endowments and prophetic gifts.

ST. BARNABAS was a descendant of the tribe of Levi, of a family removed out of
Judea, and settled in the isle of Cyprus, where they had purchased an estate,
as the Levites might do out of their country. His parents finding their son of
a promising geni^s and disposition, placed him in one of the schools of
Jerusalem, under the tuition of Gamaliel, and St. Paul's master; a circumstance
which, in all probability, laid the first foundation for that intimacy which
afterward subsisted between these two eminent servants of JESUS CHRIST.

ST. BARNABAS is first mentioned in the Holy Scripture, in record of th^^ great
and worthy service he did the church of CHRIST, by securing it with the sale of
his patrimony in Cyprus, the whole price of which he laid at the apostle's
feet, to be put into the common stock, and disposed of as they should think
fit, amongst the indigent followers of the Holy JESUS. This worthy example was
followed by those who were blessed with the goods of fortune; none kept their
plenty to themselves, but turned their houses and lands into money, and devoted
it to the common use of the church. St. Barnabas is indeed mentioned as selling
the most valuable estate on this occasion; or being the most forward and ready
to begin a common stock and set others a laudable pattern of charity and
benevolence to the brethern.

OUR apostle now became considerable in the ministry and government of the
church; for we find that St. Paul coming to Jerusalem three years after his
conversion, and not readily procuring admittance into the church, because he
had been so grievous a persecuter of it, and might still be suspected of a
design to betray it, he addressed himself to Barnabas as a leading man amongst
the Christians, and one that had personal knowledge of him. He accordingly
introduced him to Peter and James and satisfied them of the sincerity of his
conversion, and in what a miraculous manner it was brought about.

THE agreeable news was brought to Jerusalem, about four or five years
afterward that several of their body, who had been driven out of Judea by the
persecutions raised about St. Stephen, had preached at Antioch with such
success, that a great number, both of Jews and proselytes, embraced
Christianity, and were desirous that some of the superior order would come down
and confirm them. This request was immediately granted; and Barnabas was
deputed to settle this new plantation. Upon his arrival, he rejoiced extremely,
to see what progress the gospel had made amongst them; and earnestly exhorted
them to continue immovable in their profession of CHRIST JESUS. And being
himself a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost; and of faith, his charitable
deeds accompanying his discourses, and his pious life exemplifying his sound
doctrine, the people were greatly influenced by him, and very large additions
were made to the Christian church: but there being too large a field for one
labourer, he went to fetch Paul from Tarsus* who came back with him to Antioch,
and assisted him a whole year in establishing that church. Their labors
prospered, their assemblies were crowded, and the disciples, who before this
were called amongst themselves brethren, believers, elect, and by their
enemies, Nazare^es, and Galileans, were now called Christians first in this
city.

WHILE these apostles preached in Antioch, Agabus, a prophet, gave the church
notice, that there would shortly be a great famine thoughout the Roman empire;
especially in Judea. On hearing this prophecy, the Christians of Antioch
considering the number and necessities of their brethren at Jerusalem, and how
generously the rich amongst them had exhausted their estates in maintaining the
poor, determined to send them assistance against the ensuing scarcity, which
they raised by contributions according to every man's abilities, and sent it to
the heads of the church at Jerusalem, by the hands of Barnabas and Paul. This
famine lay heavy on Judea, during the four years government of Caspius Fadus,
and Tiberias Alexander, who, under the emperor Claudius, were presidents of
that province.

AFTER the apostles had fulfilled their charitable embassy, and staid some time
at Jerusalem to see the good effect of it, they returned again to Antioch,
bringing with them John, whose surname was Mark, the son of Mary, sister to
Barnabas; and at whose house the disciples found both security for their
persons, and convenience for the solemnities of their worship. But soon after
the apostles return to Antioch, an express revelation was made to the church,
by the mouth of one of the prophets who ministered there, that Barnabas and
Paul should be set apart for an extraordinary work, unto which the Holy Ghost
had appointed them. Upon this declaration the church set apart a day for a
solemn mission, and after devout prayer and fasting, they laid their hands upon
them, and ordained them to their office; which was to travel over certain
countries, and preach the gospel to the Gentiles: from this joint commission,
Barnabas obtained the name of an apostle, not only amongst later writers of the
church, but with St. Paul himself, and with St. Luke, in the history of the
acts of the apostles written by him.

BEING thus consecrated the apostles of the Gentiles, they entered upon their
ministry, taking with them John Mark for their minister or deacon, who assisted
them in many ecclesiastical offices, particularly in taking care of the poor
and receiving contributions for them.

AFTER their departure from Antioch, the first city they visited was Selucia, a
city of Syria, adjoining to the sea; from whence they sailed for the island of
Cyprus, the native place of St. Barnabas, and arrived at Salamis, a port
formerly remarkable for its trade. Here they boldly preached the doctrines of
the gospel, in the synagogue of the Jews; and from thence traveled to Paphos,
the capital of the island. Here their preaching was attended with remarkable
success; Servius Paulus, the proconsul, being, amongst others, converted to the
faith of the gospel.

HAVING quitted Cyprus, they crossed the sea to preach in Pamphyli^, were their
deacon John, to the great grief of his uncle Barnabas, left them* and returned
to Jerusalem. The apostles afterward went to Perga, where they did not
continue long, but traveled seventy or eighty miles northward to Antioch in
Pisidia* so called to distinguish it from Antioch in Syria, where the apostles
received their ordination. Here they preached to the Jews in their synagogue;
but meeting with blasphemous opposition, they told them plainly, that they
thought it reasonable to preach the gospel first to them; but as they had so
unthankfully rejected it, they would (...) make the same offers of salvation to
the Gentiles, according to the commandment of God, by his prophets; but the
exasperated Jews stirred up some of the principal citizens to persecute them,
and force them to leave the city; whereupon they departed from Antioch* and
came to Iconium, the metropolis of Lycaonia, where they continued a
considerable time, preaching in the synagogues with great success: but, at
last, the old spirit of Jewish rage and malice prevailed against them, and
obliged them, in order to avoid the madness of the multitude, to retire to
Derbe, a city of Lycaonia.

THEY returned from Derbe to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch in Pisidi^,
con^^r^ing the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
faith; and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.
After a short stay, they again visited the churches of Pamphylia, Perga, and
Attalia, were they took ship and sailed to Antioch in Syria, the place from
whence they first set out. Presently after their arrival, they called the
church of this city together, and gave them an account of their travel, and of
the great success which had attended their preaching in the Gentile world.

THEY had not long continued in this city, before their assistance was required
to compose a difference in this church, occasioned by some of the Jewish
converts, who endeavored to persuade the Gentiles that they were bound to
observe the law of Moses, as well as that of CHRIST; and be circumcised as well
as baptized. Barnabas endeavored to persuade the zealots from pressing such
unnecessary observations; but all his endeavors proving ineffectual, he was
deputed with St. Paul and others, to go to the church at Jerusalem, to submit
the question to be determined there in a full assembly.

DURING their stay at Jerusalem, Mark, in all probability, reconciled himself
to his uncle Barnabas, and returned with him and St. Paul to Antioch, after
they had succeeded in their business at Jerusalem, and obtained a decree from
the synod there, that the Gentile converts should not have circumcision and
other Mosaic rites imposed upon them, as they were now under the gospel
dispensation.

THE minds of the Gentiles were greatly quieted and comforted by this
determination; nevertheless it did not prevent the bigoted Jews from keeping
up a separation from them; and that with so much obstinacy, that when St. Peter
some time after came to Antioch, he, for fear of offending them, contradicted
his former practice, and late speech and vote in the synod of Jerusalem, by
refraining from all kind of communion with the Gentiles; and Barnabas himself,
though so great and good a man, was induced, by the authority of his example,
to commit the same error; though doubtless, on being reproved by St. Paul, they
both took more courage, and walked according to that true liberty and freedom
which the gospel imparts.

AFTER this transaction, Paul made a proposal to Barnabas, that they should
repeat their late travels amongst the Gentiles, and see how the churches they
had planted increased in their numbers, and improved in the doctrines they had
taught them. Barnabas very readily complied with the proposal, but desired they
might take with them this reconciled nephew, John Mark. This Paul absolutely
refused, because in their former voyage, Mark had not shown the constancy of a
faithful minister of CHRIST, but consulted his own ease at a dangerous
juncture, departed from them without leave at Pamphylia, and returned to
Jerusalem. Barnabas still insisted on taking him, and the other continuing as
resolute to oppose it, a short debate arose, which terminated in a rupture;
whereby these two holy men, who had for several years been companions in the
ministry, and with united endeavors propagated the gospel of the Son of God,
now took different provinces. Barnabas, with his kinsman, failed to his own
country, Cyprus; and Paul traveled to the churches of Syria and Cilicia,
taking Silas with him.

THE sacred writers give us no account of St. Barnabas, after his separation
from St. Paul; nor are the ecclesiastical writers agreed amongst themselves
with regard to the actions of our apostle, after his sailing for Cyprus: this
however seems to be certain, that he did not spend the whole remainder of his
life in that island, but visited different parts of the world, preaching the
glad-tidings of the gospel, healing the sick, and working other miracles
amongst the Gentiles; and after long and painful travels, attended with
different degrees of success in different places, he returned to Cyprus, his
native country, where he suffered martyrdom in the following manner: certain
Jews coming from Syria to Salamis, where Barnabas was then preaching the
gospel, were highly exasperated at his extraordinary success, fell upon him as
he was disputing in the synagogue, dragged him out, and after the most inhuman
tortures, stoned him to death. His kinsman John Mark, who was a spectator of
this barbarous action, privately interred his body in a cave, where it remained
till the time of the emperor Zeno, in the year of CHRIST 485, when it was
discovered laying on his breast, with St. Matthew's gospel in Hebrew, written
with his own hand.

ST. PHILIP.

ST. SIMON.

ST. MATTHIAS.

ST. JUDE.

The EVANGELISTS etc. of our Blessed savior JESUS CHRIST.



AN epistle in Greek is still extant, which bears this apostle's name: but the
church has not received it into the canon of Scripture: and for that reason,
both Eusebius and St. Jerome called it apocryphal, though they do not deny its
being the work of St. Barnabas. Clemens Alexandrinus and Origin often quote it
as his, and Monardus, who published the Greek with the old Latin version,
sufficiently shows, that it is the same known to the ancients, because all
their quotations are found in it. The style of it resembles that of the
apostolic age; but it appears to have been written some time after the
destruction of Jerusalem, a period which St. Barnabas may easily be supposed to
survive: the beginning of it is wanting, and the inscription, if ever it had
any: but the matter of it evidently shows, that it was written to such Jews as
are mentioned in the fifteenth chapter of the acts, who having embraced
Christianity, still held, that the observance of the ceremonial law was
necessary to salvation: but this law St. Barnabas shows to be abolished by the
gospel, and that the customs of it are of no consequence to the Christians. The
latter part contains excellent precepts, delivered under two different
similitudes, the one of light, the other of darkness; the former under the
conduct of the angels of God, the latter under the influence of the angels of
Satan. The way of light is a summary of what the Christian is to do, that he
may attain eternal happiness; and the way of darkness represents those
particular sins and vices which exclude men from the kingdom of heaven. He
closes the whole with pressing Christians to live in such a manner, while they
sojourn in this vale of misery, that they may after they quit it, enjoy the
pleasures of the heavenly Canaan, and inherit the kingdom of glory for ever and
ever.

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. PHILIP, THE APOSTLE.
ST. PHILIP was a native of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. He had the
honor of being first called to be a disciple of the great Messiah, which
happened in the following manner. Our blessed Savior, soon after his return
from the wilderness, where he had been tempted by the devil, met with Andrew
and his brother Peter, and after some discourse parted from them. The next day,
as he was passing through Galilee, he found Philip, whom he presently commanded
to follow him, the constant form he made use of in calling his disciples, and
those that inseparably attended him; so that the prerogative of being first
called, evidently belongs to St. Philip, he being the first of our Lord's
disciples; for though Andrew and St. John were the first that came and
conversed with the Savior of the world, yet they immediately returned to their
occupation, and were not called till a whole year afterward.

OUR apostle was not idle after the honor he had received of being called to
attend the Savior of the world; he immediately imparted the glad-tidings of
the Messiah's appearance to his brother Nathanael, and conducted him to JESUS:
so ready is a good man to conduct others in the paths that lead to happiness
and peace.

WE have very little recorded of St. Philip by the evangelist, after his being
called to the apostleship. It was, however, to him that our Savior proposed
the question, where they should find bread sufficient to satisfy the hunger of
so great a multitude? To which Philip answered, that it was not easy to procure
so large a quantity; not considering, that it was equally easy for Almighty
power to feed double the number, when it pleased to exert itself. It was also
to the same apostle, that the Gentile proselytes, who came up to worship at
Jerusalem, applied, when they were desirous to see the Savior of the world:
and it was with him our Lord had the discourse a little before the paschal
supper, when he was going about to suffer.

WHILE the holy compassionate JESUS was fortifying the minds of his disciples
with proper considerations against his departure from them, and had told them,
a place in the mansions of the heavenly Canaan: that he was the way, truth, and
the life: that no man could come to the Father but by him, and that knowing
him, they both knew and had seen the Father: Philip, not thoroughly
understanding the force of his Master's reasonings begged of him that he would
show them the Father. We can hardly suppose that Philip should have such gross
conceptions of the Deity, as to imagine the Father invested with a corporeal
and visible nature; but CHRIST having told them that they had seen him, and
knowing that of old, God frequently appeared in a visible shape, he only
desired that he would manifest himself to them by some such appearance. Our
Lord gently reproved his ignorance, that after attending so long to his
instructions, he should know, that he was the image of his Father, the express
characters of his infinite wisdom, power and goodness, appearing in him; that
he said and did nothing but by his Father's appointment, which, if they did not
believe, his miracles were a sufficient evidence; that such demands were
therefore unnecessary and impertinent; and that it was an indication of great
weakness in him, after three years education under his discipline and
institution, to appear so ignorant with regard to these particulars.

WE are told by the ancients, that in the distribution made by the apostles of
the several regions of the world, the upper Asia fell to the share of St.
Philip, where he applied himself with an indefatigable diligence and industry,
to turn the children of men from the paths of wickedness which lead to
destruction, to the ways that terminate in eternal felicity: and by the
constancy and power of his preaching, and the efficacy of his maricles, he
gained numerous converts, whom he baptized into the Christian faith, curing at
once their bodies of infirmities and distempers, and their souls of error and
idolatry, he continued with them a considerable time in settling churches, and
appointing them spiritual guides and ministers.

HAVING several years successfully exercised his apostolical office in all
those parts, he came at last to Hierapolis in Phrygia, a city remarkable rich
and populous, but at the same time overrun with the most enormous idolatry:
amongst the many vain and trifling deities, to whom they paid religious
adoration, was a serpent or dragon, of an enormous magnitude which they
worshipped with the most solemn reverence and devotion.

BEING grieved to see the people so wretchedly enslaved by error and
superstition, St. Philip continually offered his addresses to heaven, till by
his prayers, and often calling upon the name of CHRIST, he procured the death,
or, at least, the vanishing of this famous and beloved serpent. Having thus
demolished their deity, he demonstrated to them, how rediculous and unjust it
was for them to pay divine honors to such odious creatures, showed them, that
God alone was to be worshipped as the great Parent of all the world, who, in
the beginning made man after his glorious image, and when fallen from that
innocent and happy state, sent his own Son into the world to redeem him; that,
in order to perform this glorious work, he died on the cross, and rose again
from the dead, and at the end of the world will come again to raise all the
sons of men from the chambers of the dust, and sentence them to everlasting
rewards and punishments, according to their works. This discouse roused them
from their lethargy; so that great numbers were ashamed of their late idolatry,
and embraced the doctrines of the gospel with earnestness and sincerity.

THE great enemy of mankind, being provoked at this success had recourse to his
old methods, cruelty and persecution. The magistrates of the city seized the
apostle, and having thrown him into prison, caused him to be severely scourged.
When this preparatory cruelty was over, he was led to execution, and, being
bound, was hanged against a pillar; or, according to others, crucified: but
Omnipotence did not behold this scene of cruelty without testifying his anger;
for when this indefatigable apostle was expiring, the earth began suddenly to
quake, and the ground whereon the people stood to sink under them; but, on
their considering it as a mark of the divine vengeance, and imploring pardon
for their crime, it suddenly stopped, and returned to its former position. The
apostle being dead, his body was taken down by St. Bartholomew, his
fellow laborer in the gospel, and Mariamne, St. Philip's sister, the constant
companions of his travels, and decently buried; after which they confirmed the
people in the faith of CHRIST, and departed from those parts.

THE ancient writers unanimously agree that he was a married man; and Clemens
of Alexandria, that he had daughters, whom he disposed of in marriage: but he,
not carefully distinguishing between Philip the deacon, who lived at Cesarea,
with his three virgin daughters, as mentioned in the acts of the apostles, has
caused some confusion amongst the ancient authors: nay, some have concluded,
that they were one and the same person; though the one was called to the
apostleship by our Lord himself, and the other only a deacon chosen by the
apostles at Jerusalem, after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them.

IT does not appear that St. Philip left any writings behind him, being fully
employed in ministeries more immediately useful to the happiness of mankind as
an apostle.

ST. SIMON, THE APOSTLE, SURNAMED THE ZEALOT.
THIS apostle was, as some think, one of the four brothers of our Savior, sons
of Joseph by his former marriage; though the only proof of it is, that one of
these was called Simon, too weak an argument to found any on, except a bare
conjecture. In the catalogue of the apostles, he is styled Simon the Canaanite,
whence some conjecture he was born in Cana of Galilee, and others will have him
to have been the bridegroom mentioned by St. John, at whose marriage our
blessed Savior turned the water into wine: but this word has no relation to
his country, or the place of his nativity, being derived from the Hebrew word
knah, which signifies zeal; and denote a warm and sprightly temper. What some
of the evangelists, therefore, call Canaanite, others rendering the Hebrew by
the Greek word, style Zealot: not from his great zeal, his ardent affection to
his Master, and a desire of advancing his religion in the world, but from his
warm active temper, and zealous forwardness in some part^cular sect of
religion, before our Savior called him to be a disciple.

THAT we may understand this the better it will be necessary to observe, that
as there were several sects and parties amongst the Jews, so there was one,
either a distinct sect, or, at least, a branch of the Pharisees, called the
sect of the Zealots: they were remarkable assertors of the honor of the law,
and of the strictness and purity of religion, assuming a liberty to themselves
of questioning notorious offenders, without staying for the ordinary
formalities of law; nay, they did not scruple, when they thought it necessary,
to inflict capital punishments upon them: thus, when a blasphemer cursed God by
the name of an idol, the Zealot who first met him had the liberty of killing
him, without carrying him before the Sanhedrim. They considered themselves as
the successors of Phineas, who in defense of the honor of God, inflicted death
on Zimri and Cozbi: an act which was counted unto him for righteousness unto
all generations f^r ever more; and God was so well pleased with it, that he
made with him and his seed after him the covenant of an everlasting priesthood,
because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for Israel.

WHATEVER St. Simon was before, we can have no reason to suspect, but that
after his conversion he was very zealous for the honor of his master, and
considered all those who were enemies to CHRIST, as enemies to himself, how
near soever they might be to him in any natural relation: and he was very exact
in all the practical duties of the Christian religion, so he showed a very
serious and pious indignation toward those who professed religion, and a faith
in CHRIST, with their mouths, but dishonored their sacred profession, by their
irregular and vicious lives, as many of the first Christians really did, and
became heretics and apostates.

WE are told by Theodoret, that St. Simon the Zealot was of the tribe of
Zebulon or Naphthali, and that by this particular he was distinguished from St.
Simon, a relation of our blessed Savior, and after St. James, bishop of
Jerusalem, who was of the tribe of Judah; but there are stronger reasons to
prove this difference, the authority of Eusebius, who never calls Simon bishop
of Jerusalem, an apostle, but says expressly, that the apostolic age ended with
his death, who died before Simon, bishop of Jerusalem.

IT appears that St. Simon continued in communion with the rest of the apostles
and disciples at Jerusalem; and at the feast of Pentecost, received the same
miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost: so that he was qualified with the rest of
his brethren for the apostolic office, in propagating the gospel of the son of
God; and we cannot doubt of his exercising his gifts with the same zeal and
fidelity, though in what part of the world, is uncertain, some say he went into
Egypt, Cyrene, and Africa, preaching the gospel to the inhabitants of those
remote and barbarous countries: and others add, that after he had just passed
through those burning wastes, he took ship, and visited the frozen regions of
the North, preaching the gospel to the inhabitants of the western parts, and
even in Britain itself, where having converted great multitudes, and sustained
the greatest hardships and persecutions, he was at length crucified, and buried
in some part of Great Britain, but the particular spot cannot be ascertained.

AN ACCOUNT OF ST. MATTHIAS THE APOSTLE.
ST. MATTHIAS not being an apostle of the first election, immediately called
and chosen by the Son of God himself, it cannot be expected that any account of
him can be found in the evangelical history. He was one of our Lord's
disciples, probably one of the seventy, that had attended on him the whole time
of his public ministry, and after his death was elected into the apostolate, to
supply the place of Judas, who, after betraying his great Lord and Master, laid
violent hands on himself.

AS the defection of Judas had made a vacancy in the apostolic college, the
first thing the disciples did, after their return from Mount Olivet, when their
great Master ascended to the throne of glory, was to fill up this vacancy with
a proper person. Accordingly, Peter acquainted them that Judas, according to
the prophetical prediction, being fallen from his ministry, it was necessary
that another should be substituted in his room, and at the same time requisite,
that the person elected should have been a constant attendant on the blessed
JESUS, that he might be the better qualified for bearing witness to his life,
death, resurrection, ascension, and intercession.

ST. PETER having thus addressed the assembly, two persons were proposed,
namely, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias, both of whom were duly qualified
for that important office. The method of election was by lots, a way common
both amongst the Jews and Gentiles for determining doubtful and difficult
cases, especially in choosing judges or magistrates; and this course seems to
have been taken by the apostles, because the Holy Ghost was not yet given, by
whose immediate dictates and inspirations they were afterward chiefly guided.

THAT the business might proceed with the greater alacrity and success, they
first solemnly made their addresses to heaven, that the omniscient Being, who
governed the world, and perfectly understood the tempers and dispositions of
men, would immediately guide and direct the choice, and show them which of the
two he would appoint to take that part of the apostolic charge, from which
Judas had so lately fallen. The prayer being ended, the lots were drawn, by
which it appeared that Matthias was the person, and he was numbered amongst the
twelve apostles accordingly.

SOON after this election, the promised powers of the Holy Ghost were conferred
upon the apostles, to qualify them for that great and arduous employment upon
which they were sent, the establishing the holy religion of the Son of God
amongst the children of men, in various parts of the world.

THE first years of the ministry of St. Matthias, was spent in Judea, where he
reaped a very considerable harvest of souls, and then traveled into different
parts of the world, to publish the glad-tidings of salvation to people who had
never yet heard of our Savior: but the particular parts he visited, are not
certainly known. The Greeks suppose, that he traveled eastward; St. Jerome,
says, his principal residence was near the influx of the river Apsus into the
haven of Hyscus in Cappadocia: but the people were remarkably rough and
uncivilized, so that it is no wonder that he at last fell a victim to their
ferocity; though this did not happen till after he had long indefatigably
labored in the vineyard of his great Master, and brought over vast numbers to
an acknowledgment and reception of the truth.

WE are not told by what kind of death this apostle left the regions of
mortality, and sealed the truth of the gospel he had so assiduously preached
with his blood. Dorotheus says, he finished his course at Sebastople, and was
buried their near the temple of the sun. An ancient martyrologist reports him
to have been seized by the Jews, and as a blasphemer, to have been stoned, and
then beheaded: but the Greek offices, supported herein by several ancient
breviaries, tell us, that he was crucified. His body is by some pretended to be
now at Rome, where some relics of it are shown with great veneration; while
others contend, that it is at Triers in Germany. Bollandus is of opinion, that
the body of Matthias, now at Rome, is that of Matthias, who was bishop of
Jerusalem in the year 120, and whose history they have confounded with that of
the apostle St. Matthias; but Popish legends and traditions are in no instance
to be relied on.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE VIRGIN MARY, MOTHER OF JESUS.
WE are taught by the predictions of the prophets, that a virgin was to be the
mother of the promised Messiah, and we are also assured by the unanimous
concurrence of the evangelists, that this virgin's name was Mary, the daughter
of Joachim and Anne, of the tribe of Judah, and married to Joseph of the same
tribe. The Scripture indeed tells us no more of the blessed virgin's parents,
than that she was of the family of David, and of the town of Bethlehem; not so
much as their names being mentioned, unless by Heli, in St. Luke's genealogy we
understand Joachim the virgin's father. All that is said concerning the birth
of Mary and her parents, is to be found only in some apocryphal writings; and
which however are very ancient. St. John says that Mary the wife of Cleophas,
who was the mother of those which the gospel styles our Lord's brethren, was
the virgin's sister. Mary then was of the royal race of David; she was allied
likewise to the family of Aaron, since Elizabeth the wife of Zacharias, and
mother of John the Baptist, was the cousin of Mary.

IN conformity to (...) Greek church, the Latins have for some centuries past
honored St. Joachim as the father of St. Anne, the mother of the blessed
virgin; and though God has not been pleased to acquaint us with the
particulars of her birth; yet the Roman church, from a grateful sense of the
infinite blessings conveyed to us by the blessed JESUS, has long celebrated
her conception on the eighth of December in the West, and on the ninth in the
East, and her nativity on the eighth of September. An anniversary festival of
her representation in the temple is kept likewise on the twenty-first of
November; and it is commonly believed, that she was consecrated to God at three
years of age: but not to build upon uncertainties, thus much we are assured by
the testimony of an angel, that she was happy above all other women in the
divine favor; that she was full of grace; and that the Lord was in a peculiar
manner with her.

WHETHER the holy virgin immediately after the annunciation, went up to the
passover at Jerusalem [as some have imagined, this being the season of the year
for it] or not, we have no account from the evangelist St. Luke: but this he
assures us that a little while after she set out for Hebron, a city in the
mountains of Judah in order to visit her cousin Elizabeth, to congratulate her
upon her pregnancy, which she had learned from the angel, at an age when such a
blessing was not usually to be expected.

NO sooner had Mary entered the house, and began to speak, than, upon
Elizabeth's hearing the voice of her cousin's salutation, her child, young John
the Baptist, transported with supernatural emotions of joy, leaped in her womb:
where upon she was filled with the Holy Ghost, and being by divine inspiration
acquainted with the mystery of the incarnation, she re-saluted Mary, and cried
out. Blessed art thou amongst women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And
whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For lo, as
soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my
womb for joy. And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. Then Mary,
filled with acknowledgments and supernatural light, praised God, saying, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, etc.

MARY having continued here about three months, till Elizabeth was delivered as
St. Ambrose thinks, that she might see him on whose account she principally
made that visit, returned afterward to her own house at Nazareth, waiting for
the time of her delivery: but when she was ready to be delivered, an edict was
published by Caesar Augustus, in the year of the world 4000, the first of
CHRIST, and the third before the vulgar Era; which decreed, that all the
subjects of the Roman empire should go to the respective cities and places;
there to have their names registered according to their families. Thus Joseph
and Mary, who were both of the lineage of David, repaired to their city of
Bethlehem, the original and native place of their family: but while they were
in this city, the time being fulfilled in which Mary was to be delivered, she
brought forth her firstborn son, wrapped him in swaddling-clothes and laid him
in the manger of the stable, whither they had retired; for they could find no
place in public inn, because of the great concourse of people that were then at
Bethlehem on the same occasion; or they were forced to withdraw into the stable
of the inn, not being able to get a more convenient place for her to be
delivered in.

THE angels made the birth of CHRIST known to the shepherds, who were at this
time in the fields near Bethlehem, and who came in the night to see Mary and
Joseph, and the child lying in the manger, in order to pay him their tribute of
adoration. Mary took notice of all these things, and laid them up in her heart.
Some time after came the Magi, or wise men from the East, and brought to JESUS
the mysterious presents of gold, frankincense, and myrrh, having been directed
thither by a star which led the way before them to the very house where the
babe lay. After this, being warned by an angel that appeared to them in a
dream, they returned into their own country by a way different from that by
which they came, without giving Herod the intelligence he wanted; which he
pretended was in order to come and worship the babe, though his real design was
to cut him off, from a jealousy of his rivalling that artful monarch in his
sovereignty over the Jews.

THE time of Mary's purification being now come, that is, forty days after the
birth of JESUS, she went to Jerusalem, to present her son in the temple; and
there to offer the sacrifice appointed by the law, for the purification of
women after childbirth. At that time there was at Jerusalem an old man named
Simeon, who was full of the Holy Ghost; and had received a secret assurance,
that he should not die till he had seen CHRIST the Lord: accordingly, he came
into the temple by the impulse of the Spirit of God, and taking the child JESUS
in his arms, he blessed the Lord; and then addressing himself to Mary, said,
This child is sent for the raising and falling of many in Israel; and for a
sign which shall be spoken against: even so far as that thy own soul shall be
pierced as with a sword, that the secret thoughts in the hearts of many may be
discovered and laid open.

WHEN Joseph and Mary were preparing afterward to return to their own country
of Nazareth, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, bidding him
to retire into Egypt with Mary and the child, because Herod had a design to
destroy JESUS. Joseph obeyed the admonition, and continued in Egypt till after
the death of Herod; when both he and Mary returned to Nazareth not daring to go
to Bethlehem, because it was in the jurisdiction of Archelaus, the son and
successor of Herod the great who was a cruel prince.

NOW it being the constant practice of Joseph and Mary to go every year to
Jerusalem, to the feast of the passover: and when JESUS was twelve years of
age, they brought him with them to the capital. When the days of the festival
were ended, they set out on their return home; but the child JESUS continued at
Jerusalem, without their perceiving it, and, thinking that he might be with
some of the company, they went on a day's journey; when not finding him amongst
their acquaintance, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking for him: three days
after, they found him in the temple, sitting amongst the doctors, hearing them,
and asking them questions. When they saw him, they were filled with
astonishment; and Mary said to him, my son, why have thou served us thus?
Behold thy father and myself, who have sought thee in great affliction. JESUS
answered them, Why did you seek me? Did not you know that I must be employed
about my Father's business? afterward he returned with them to Nazareth, and
lived with filial submission to them: but his mother laid up all these things
in her heart. The gospel says nothing more of the virgin Mary, till the
marriage at Cana of Galilee, where she was present with JESUS her son.

THE blessed JESUS, in the thirtieth year of the vulgar era, resolved to
manifest himself to the world, and, therefore, went to be baptized by St. John,
from thence into the wilderness, and thence to the abovementioned wedding, to
which he, with his mother and disciples, had been invited. At this
entertainment, the provision of wine being somewhat scanty (probably because
the friends of the married couple were but mean) CHRIST's mother told her son,
they had no wine, not doubting of his power to supply them: to which JESUS
answered in terms which had some appearance of a rebuke, Woman, what have I to
do with thee? mine hour is not yet come.

SIX great stone pitchers being in the room, JESUS ordered them to be filled
brimfull of water; and afterward commanded the servants to fill out and carry
it to the master of the feast, who, on tasting it, found it to be excellent
wine. This is the first miracle JESUS wrought at the beginning of his public
ministry; and from hence our Lord went to Capernaum with his mother and
brethren.

IT is true, we learn from the third chapter of St. Mark, that on a certain day
in the year of CHTIST thirty-four, and vulgar era thirty-one, that as JESUS
CHRIST was teaching in a house at Capernaum, so great a crowd of people stood
about him, that neither he nor his disciples had time to take any refreshment;
which caused a report to be spread abroad, that he had fainted away, or fallen
into a swoon. The virgin and the brethren or relations of JESUS came to see
what had given occasion to this report; and when they could not get into the
house for the throngs of people, they caused a message to be conveyed from one
to another, till it was told JESUS, "That his mother and his brethren were at
the door, and desired to speak with him." JESUS being accordingly informed of
their coming, and that they waited to speak with him, being at that instant
engaged in the work of his ministry, preaching the word of God, he made this
reply, Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? And looking upon those that
were round about him, he said, These are my mother and brethren; declaring,
That whosoever did the will of his heavenly Father, the same was his mother,
and sister, and brother. This was what CHRIST had taught in another place, that
we must perfer God to all human relations, and give the preference to his
service: but this saying could not reflect upon his mother, who was amongst the
principle of those who did the will of his heavenly Father.

IMMEDIATELY upon Mary's approach, a woman of the company said with a loud
voice, directing her words to JESUS: Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the paps which thou have sucked. To which he replied, Yea, rather blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it. Not intimating hereby, that she who
had the honor to hear him, did not deserve to be called blessed throughout all
generations; but that even her happiness consisted more in doing the will of
CHRIST than in giving him a human body, which was indeed not her own act, but
effected by the power of God.

WE have no further account of the holy virgin from this time, till we find her
in Jerusalem at the last passover our Savior celebrated there; which was in
the thirty-sixth year of CHRIST, and thirty-third of the vulgar era. In this
city she saw all that was transacted against him, followed him to Mount
Calvary, and stayed at the foot of the cross during the passion of her blessed
Son. We cannot doubt but her soul was at this time pierced through, as old
Simeon had prophesied, with the most acute pains, for the death of such a Son.
Yet her constancy was remarkable: for when the apostles were all frightened
away from their Master, she, with a courage undaunted, and worthy of the mother
of CHRIST, continued even in the midst of the executioners, being prepared to
die with her Son, who was now become her Savior; who being now ready to leave
the world, and seeing his mother at the foot of the cross, and his beloved
disciple St. John near her, he bequeathed her to him by his last will and
testament, saying, to his mother, Woman, behold thy Son; and to his disciple,
Behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her home to his own
house, and provided for her.

SOME authors of the fifth century think the virgin Mary died and was buried at
Jerusalem, or rather in her sepulcher at Gethsemane, near that city, where, to
this day, it is shown in a magnificent church dedicated to her.

THE ancient fathers of the Eastern and Western churches, asserted her
perpetual virginity, and St. Augustine tells us, that this is one of those
points which we ought to receive as of apostolic tradition, since the Holy
Scripture gives us no more account of it, than by only remarking how fully the
blessed virgin was resolved to serve God with an entire purity. The title which
has been constantly appropriated to her in all ages, as often as she is
mentioned, is a good argument to confirm our belief concerning this: See Ezekiel.
xliv.2.

MARY MAGDALENE.
THIS remarkable convert was a native either of Magdala, a town in Galilee, o^
the other side of Jordan, or Magdalos, a town situated at the foot of Mount
Carmel, and had her surname from the place of her birth. Some affirm, that she
was the sinner mentioned by St. Luke, chapter vii.37, etc. but this opinion is
built only on conjecture. Both St. Matthew and St. Mark tell us, that JESUS had
cast out of her seven devils; which some understand in a literal, and others in
a figurative sense.

MARY became, however a constant attendant on the blessed JESUS, after he had
removed her plague. She followed him to Mount Calvary, continued amidst the
Roman guards at the foot of the cross, with the holy virgin, and saw his
precious body laid in the tomb; after which she returned to Jerusalem, in
order, after the Sabbath, to embalm her Lord.

SHE also carried the welcome tidings to Peter and John, and our blessed Lord
himself appeared to her first after his resurrection. The apostles, however,
did not believe her report, till it was confirmed by others, and they
themselves had seen their Savior. After this event, she is not mentioned in
sacred writ.

MARY, THE SISTER OF LAZARUS.
MARY, the sister of Lazarus, with her sister Martha, lived with their brother
at Bethany, a village near Jerusalem, Our dear Redeemer had a particular
affection for this family, and often retired to their house with his disciples.
One day (and perhaps the first time that JESUS went thither) Martha received
him with remarkable affection, and took abundance of pains in providing a
proper entertainment for him; but Mary her sister continued sitting at her
Savior's feet, listening to his words with peculiar attention. This Martha
considered as an instance of disrespect, and therefore said to JESUS, Lord,
do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her,
therefore, that she help me. But our Lord justified Mary, by telling her
sister; that she had chosen the better part, which she should never be deprived
of.

LAZARUS their brother, some time after this, fell sick, and his sisters sent
to acquaint JESUS of the misfortune; but he did not arrive at Bethany till
after Lazarus was dead. Martha hearing JESUS was come in to the neighborhood,
went to him, and told him, that if he had not been absent her brother had been
still alive. JESUS promised her, that her brother should rise again: to which
Martha answered, I know that he shall rise again at the last day, JESUS replied
I am the resurrection and the life; he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall be live; and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
die, believe thou this? Martha answered, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art
the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world. Having said this,
she departed, and gave her sister notice privately, that JESUS was come. Mary,
as soon as she heard the welcome tidings, arose and went to JESUS: and, as
Martha had done before her, said, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had
not died. The blessed JESUS was greatly moved at the pathetic complaints of
these worthy sisters, and on asking where they had buried him, they conducted
him to the sepulcher. On his arrival at the place where the body of Lazarus was
deposited, the great Redeemer of mankind groaned deeply in his spirit; he wept,
he prayed to his Father, and then cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.
The dead obeyed the voice of the Son of God; Lazarus immediately revived, and
JESUS restored him to his sisters.

DURING the supper at Bethany, Mary, to express her gratitude to JESUS, took a
pound of spikenard, a very precious perfume, and poured it on the head and feet
of JESUS, wiping his feet with the hair of her head: and the whole house was
filled with the odor of the ointment. Judas Iscariot was highly offended at
this generous action: but his Master vindicated Mary, and told him, that by
this she had performed an act preparatory to his embalment, signifying, that
his death and burial were not far off. This is the last account of her in
Scripture.

MARY OF CLEOPHAS.
ST. JEROME says, that Mary had the name of Cleophas, on account of her father,
her family, or some other reason not known. Others believe, with greater
probability, that she was wife of Cleophas, and mother of St. James the less.
However, she was present at the last passover, just before the death of our
Savior; she followed him to Mount Calvary; and, during his passion, she was,
together with the virgin, at the foot of his cross: she was also present at his
burial, and on the Friday before had prepared the perfumes for embalming him.

THE year when Mary the wife of Cleophas died is not known; but the Greeks keep
the eighth of April in memory of the holy women who brought perfumes to embalm
the body of CHRIST, and pretend to have their bodies at Constantinople in a
church of the holy virgin, built by Justin H.

MARY SALOME, AN HEBREW CONVERT.
THIS holy woman was the daughter of Mary of Cleophas, mentioned in the
preceding article and the sister of St. James the less, and others, who are in
Scripture called the brethren of our Lord: she was cousin-german to the blessed
JESUS, according to the flesh, and niece to the blessed virgin Mary. Her proper
name was Salome and was improperly called Mary, which was the name of her
mother; she was the wife of Zebedee, and mother of St. James the great, and St.
John the evangelist: she was also one of those pious women that used to attend
upon our blessed Savior in his journeys, and to minister to him. It was she
that requested JESUS to place her two sons, James and John, the one on his
right hand and the other on his left in his kingdom.

SALOME followed our Savior to Calvary, and did not forsake him even at the
cross: she was also one of the holy women who brought perfumes to embalm him,
and for that purpose came early on the Sunday morning to the sepulcher.

TROPHIMUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
TROPHIMUS was a disciple of St. Paul, a Gentile by religion, and an Ephesian
by birth. After St. Paul had converted him, he constantly adhered to him nor
did he quit him ever after. He came with the apostle from Ephesus to Corinth,
and kept him company in his whole journey from Corinth to Jerusalem, in the
year of our Lord fifty-eight. The Greeks keep the fourteenth of April in honor
of Trophimus; and say he was beheaded by the command of Nero, together with St.
Paul. His festival is observed on the twenty ninth of December by those of
Aries.

TYCHICUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
TYCHICUS was also a disciple of St. Paul, whom that apostle often made use of
for carrying his letters to the several churches. He was of the province of
Asia, and accompanied St. Paul, when, in the year fifty-eight, he made his
journey from Corinth to Jerusalem. He carried the epistle to the Colossians
written in the year sixty-one; and that to the Ephesians written in sixty-five
and the first to Timothy, written in sixty-four.

THE Greeks celebrate the festival of Tychicus on the eighth or ninth of
December, and give him the title of one of the seventy disciples, and bishop of
Colophon, in the province of Asia. Other martyrologists mark his festival on
the nineteenth of April.

TERTIUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
TERTIUS, called also Tirentius, was the amanuensis or scribe of St. Paul, when
he wrote his epistle to the Romans in the year of CHRIST fifty-eight, as
appears in the sixteenth chapter, I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you
in the Lord. The Greeks keep his festival on the tenth of November and give him
great commendations: and they make him successor to Sosipater in the bishopric
of Iconium, in Asia.

LINUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
LINUS was one of St. Paul's disciples, who mentions him in the first chapter
of his second epistle to Timothy, "Linus and Claudia, and all the brethren
greet ye." St. Irenaeus, Eusebius, Optatus, Epiphanius, St. Jerome, and
Theodoret, affirm, that Linus succeeded immediately to St. Peter in the sea of
Rome: he governed for twelve years and some months. The destruction of
Jerusalem happened during his pontificate, in the year of CHRIST seventy. His
festival is kept on the fifth of November by the Greeks, and on the
twenty-third of September by the Latins.

ONESIPHORUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
ONESIPHORUS was a disciple of St. Paul, and is mentioned by him in the first
chapter of his second epistle to Timothy. He came to Rome in the year of CHRIST
sixty-five, while the apostle was in prison for the faith, and at a time when
almost every one had forsaken him. The Greeks place his festival on the
twenty-ninth of April and the eighth of December, and rank him in the order of
the seventy disciples, and seem to ascribe martyrdom to him. The Roman
martyrology on the sixteenth of December says, that he suffered martyrdom on
the Hellespont, whither he went to preach the gospel along with Porphyrius.

STEPHANUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
STEPHANUS was one of the principal Christians of Corinth, whom St. Paul
baptized with all his family, as we find in the first chapter of the epistle to
the Corinthians, probably about the fifty-second year of CHRIST.

STEPHANUS devoted himself to the service of the church; and in the year of our
Lord fifty-six, he came to St. Paul at Ephesus, and according to Chrysostom,
brought him letters which the church of Corinth wrote to him, in order to
consult him concerning marriage, continency, and perhaps other subjects, which
St. Paul treats of in the said first epistle to the Corinthians. This the
apostle wrote from Ephesus in the fifty-sixth year; and it was sent by
Stephanus, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, to the Corinthian church.

PHEBE, A DEACONNESS.
PHEBE, for whom St. Paul had a particular esteem was a deaconness of the port
of Corinth called Cenchrea: and Theodoret thinks, that the apostle lodged at
the house of this holy woman for some time, while he continued in or near
Corinth. In the sixteenth chapter of Romans, St. Paul says, I commend unto you
Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea: that
ye receive her in the Lord, as becomes saints; and that ye assist her in
whatsoever business she has need of you: for she has been a succourrer of
many, and of myself also. Some moderns have advanced a notion that Phebe was
wife to St. Paul; but none of the ancients have said any thing like it. It is
thought that, in quality of deaconness, she was employed by the church in some
ministrations suitable to her sex and condition; such as visiting and
instructing the Christian women, attending them in their sicknesses, and
distributing alms to them. Phebe's festival is fixed by the martyrologists on
the third of September.

SOSIPATER, A GENTILE CONVERT.
WE think, that it may be confidently asserted, that this Sosipater, who was at
Rome in the fifty-eighth year of CHRIST, when St. Paul wrote his epistle to the
Romans of Berea; since he accompanied St. Paul, in the same year fifty-eight,
in his journey to Jerusalem; and who probably went with him from Corinth,
whence the epistle to the Romans was written, to go by the way of Macedonia to
Jerusalem; as may be seen in the twentieth chapter of the acts of the apostles.

THE Latins celebrate his feast on the twenty-fifth of June, and call him a
disciple of St. Paul. The Greeks honor him upon the twenty-eighth or
twenty-ninth of April.

DEMAS, A GENTILE PROFESSOR.
THE apostle St. Paul, in the fourth chapter of the Colossians, mentions Demas
as a native of Thessalonica. At first he was one of the most zealous disciples
which this apostle had, and was very serviceable to him at Rome during his
imprisonment there: but some years after, about the year of CHRIST sixty-five,
he forsook St. Paul, in order to follow a more secular life, and withdrew to
Thessalonica, the place of his birth.

EPIPHANIUS informs us, that he renounced the faith, and with Cerinthius,
Ebion, and others, held JESUS CHRIST to be a mere man: but others affirm, that
he recovered after his fall, and suffered martyrdom for the truth.

ARISTARCHUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
ARISTARCHUS was one of St. Paul's disciples, who has mentioned him in his
epistles to the Colossians and Philemon: he is also often mentioned in the acts
of the apostles. He was a Macedonian, and a native of Thessalonica: he
accompanied St. Paul to Ephesus, and continued with him during the two years of
his abode there, partaking with him in all the dangers and labors of the
apostleship. He was very near being killed in a tumult raised by the Ephesian
goldsmiths.

THE Greeks say he was bishop of Apamea, in Syria, and was beheaded with St.
Paul at Rome, in the reign of Nero: continuing to the very last inviolably
attached to that apostle, with whom he had labored in the work of the ministry.

CLEMENT, A GENTILE CONVERT.
THIS disciple is mentioned by St. Paul in his epistle to the Philippians,
where the apostle says, that Clement's name is written in the book of life. The
generality of the fathers, and other interpreters, make no question but that
this is the same Clement who succeeded St. Peter, after Linus and Cletus, in
the government of the church of Rome; and this seems to be intimated, when in
the office for St. Clement's day, that church appoints this part of the epistle
to the Philippians to be read. On the contrary, Grocius is of opinion, that the
Clement St. Paul speaks of was no more than a priest of the church of Philippi
in Macedonia. We have no certain accounts of what happened to St. Clement
during the persecution under Domitian; but we are very well assured that he
lived to the third year of Trajan, which is the hundredth of JESUS CHRIST. His
festival is set down by Bid, and all the Latin martyrologists, on the
twenty-third of November. The Greeks honor him on the twenty-fourth or
twenty-fifth of the same month. He is ranked amongst the martyrs.

ANANIAS, A JEWISH CONVERT.
ANANIAS was a disciple of the blessed JESUS: he dwelt at Damascus, when he was
directed in a vision from the Lord, to go and find Paul, who had been lately
converted and was come to that city.

WE know no other circumstances of Ananias's life besides this now related. The
modern Greeks maintain, that he was one of the seventy disciples, and made
bishop of Damascus; and that having obtained the crown of martyrdom, he was
buried in the same city: and here a fine church is to be seen in the place
where he was interred.

NICHOLAS A DISCIPLE AND DEACON.
NICHOLAS was a proselyte at Antioch, and there converted from the Pagan to the
Jewish religion; but the time of his birth is uncertain. Afterward he embraced
christianity, and was one of the most zealous and most holy men amongst the
first christians: so that he was chosen for one of the seven first deacons of
the church of Jerusalem. But he afterward plunged himself into irregularities,
and gave beginnings to the sect of the Nicolaitans, to that of the Gnostics,
and to several others; who, following the bent of their passions, invented a
thousand different sorts of crimes and excesses.

NICODEMUS, AN HEBREW CONVERT.
HHIS remarkable disciple of our blessed Savior was a Jew by nation, and by
sect a Pharisee. The gospel calls him a ruler of the Jews; and CHRIST gives him
the name of a master of Israel. When our Savior began to manifest himself by
his miracles at Jerusalem, at the first passover which he celebrated there
after his baptism, Nicodemus made no doubt but that he was the Messiah, and
came to him by night, that he might learn of him the way to salvation.

NICODEMUS, after this conversation, became a disciple of JESUS CHRIST; and
there is no doubt to be made but he came to hear him, as often as our Savior
came to Jerusalem. It happened on a time, that the priests and Pharisees had
sent officers to seize JESUS, who returned to them, and made this report, that
never man spoke as he did. Afterward, Nicodemus declared himself openly a
disciple of JESUS CHRIST, when he came with Joseph of Arimathea to pay the last
duties to the body of CHRIST, crucified; which they took down from the cross,
embalmed, and laid in the sepulcher prepared for his reception.

WHEN he died, Gamaliel buried him honorably near St. Stephen: his body was
discovered in the year 415, together with those of St. Stephen and Gamaliel,
and the Latin church pays honor on the third of August to all the three.

JOSEPH OF ARIMATHEA, AN HEBREW DISCIPLE.
JOSEPH of Arimathea, or of Ranatha, Rama, or Ramula, a city between J^ppa and
Jerusalem, was a Jewish senator, and privately a disciple of JESUS CHRIST: he
was not consenting to the designs of the rest of the Jews, particularly of the
members of the Sanhedrim, who condemned and put JESUS CHRIST to death: but when
our Savior was dead, he went boldly to Pilate, and desired the body of JESUS,
in order to bury it. This he obtained; and, accordingly he buried it after an
honorable manner, in a sepulcher newly made in a garden, which was upon the
same Mount Calvary where JESUS had been crucified. After he had placed it
there, he closed the entrance of it with a stone cut particularly for this
purpose, and which exactly filled the open part.

THE festival of Joseph of Arimathea is observed by the Greek church on the
thirty-first of July.

PHILEMON, A GENTILE CONVERT.
THIS eminent disciple was a rich citizen of Colosse, and probably a native of
that place. He was converted, together with his wife, to the christian faith,
by Epaphras, a disciple of St. Paul; for St. Paul himself never preached in
Colosse, though he wrote an epistle to the brethren there.

WE read, that Philemon had made a church of his house: and all his domestics,
as well as himself, were of the household of faith. His charity, liberality,
and compassion were a sure refuge to all who were in distress: he followed the
example of that great Master in whom he believed; and was delighted, when
exercised in works of beneficence and mercy. His name is placed on the
twenty-second of November in the martyrologies.

PRISCILLA, A JEWISH CONVERT.
IN the times of the apostles, Priscilla was very famous in the church, and is
often mentioned by the sacred writers before her husband Aquila. They were both
Jews; but their country and births are uncertain. They were at Corinth when St.
Paul came thither, and had the happiness of entertaining him in their house a
very considerable time; the apostle being of the same trade with Aquila;
namely, a maker of tents of leather, for the use of the army, and at which they
both wrought for some time, for their livelihood.

ON St. Paul's leaving Corinth, both Aquila and Priscilla came with him to
Ephesus, where they dwelt a considerable time, and preached the gospel with
good success. Their house was so well regulated, that St. Paul calls it a
church; an example that should, in some measure, be followed by every one who
pretends to be a follower of the blessed JESUS, though shamefully neglected by
the greatest part of christians in the present day.

WHETHER they died in peace, or by the hands of those who opposed the progress
of the christian faith, is not known; but however this be, they labored
faithfully to extend the religion of JESUS; and, therefore, have been justly
placed amongst the first preachers of the gospel in the apostolic age.

APOLLOS, A JEWISH CONVERT.
THE ancient writers give no account either of the birth or family of Apollos:
all they mention is that he was a Jew of Alexandria, and came to Ephesus during
St. Paul's absence, who was gone to Jerusalem, to visit the other apostles and
the church in that city.

THIS eminent person was distinguished for his eloquence, and knowledge of the
Scriptures. He was instructed in the way of the Lord, and as he spoke with zeal
and fervor, taught diligently the things relating to the kingdom of heaven,
though he knew only the baptism of John.

APOLLOS was no sooner come to Ephesus, than he began to speak boldly in the
synagogue, and to show that JESUS was the CHRIST. Aquila and Priscilla, having
heard him, took him home with them, instructed him more fully in the ways of
the Almighty, and baptized him. He was very useful at Corinth, in convincing
the Jews out of the Scriptures, and demonstrating to them that JESUS was the
CHRIST. Thus he watered what Paul had planted in that city.

IT is allowed by all, that he was an active and powerful preacher of the
gospel; and that great numbers were, by his preaching, rendered obedient to the
faith of CHRIST.

TITUS, A GENTILE CONVERT.
THIS eminent person was a Heathen by religion and birth, but converted by St.
Paul, who calls him his son. Titus was sent by St. Paul to Corinth, upon
occasion of some disputes which then divided the church. He was very well
received by the Corinthians, and very much satisfied with their ready
compliance; but would receive nothing from them, imitating thereby the
disinterestedness of his Master, who sought not theirs, but them.

HE went from Corinth to St. Paul into Macedonia, and gave him an account of
the state of the Corinthian church. A little while after, the apostle desired
him to return again to Corinth, to set things in order against his coming.
Titus readily undertook this journey, and departed immediately carrying with
him St. Paul's second letter to the Corinthians.

TITUS was made bishop of the isle of Crete, about the sixty-third year of
CHRIST, when St. Paul was obliged to quit this island, in order to take care of
the other church^s. The following year he wrote to him to desire, that as soon
as he should have sent Tychicus or Artemas to him for supplying his place in
Crete, Titus would come to him to Nicopolis in Macedonia, or to Nicopolis in
Epirus upon the gulf of Ambracia, where the apostle intended to pass his
winter. The subject of this epistle is to represent to Titus what are the
qualities that a bishop should be endued with.

ST. PAUL's epistle to Titus has always been acknowledged by the church. The
Marcionities did not receive it, nor did the Basilidians, and some other
Heretics; but Tatian, the head of the Encratites, received it, and preferred it
before all the rest. It is not certainly known by whom it was sent nor from
what place it was written.

IT appears, that Titus was deputed to preach the gospel in Dalmatia; and he
was still there in the year sixty-five, when the apostle wrote his second
epistle to Timothy. He died at the age of Ninety-four, and was buried in Crete.
His festival is kept by the Greeks on the 25th of August, and on the 4th of
January by the Latin church.

TIMOTHY, A GENTILE CONVERT.
HE was born according to some at Lystra; or, according to others, at Derbe.
His father was a Gentile, but his mother a Jewess, whose name was Eunice* and
that of his grandmother Lais. He was a convert and disciple of St. Paul.

WE take notice of these particulars, because St. Paul commends their piety,
and the good education which they had given Timothy. When St. Paul came to
Derbe and Lystra about the year of CHRIST fifty-one or fifty-two, the brethren
gave a very advantageous testimony of the merit and good dispositions of
Timothy; and the apostle would have him along with him; but he circumcised him
at Lystra, before he received him into his company.

TIMOTHY applied himself to labor with St. Paul in the business of the gospel;
and did him very important services, through the whole course of his preaching.

TIMOTHY accompanied St. Paul to Macedonia, to Philippi, to Thessalonica, to
Berea; and when the apostle went from Berea, he left Timothy and Silas there to
confirm the converts. When he came to Athens, he sent to Timothy to come
thither to him; and when he was come, and had given him an account of the
churches of Macedonia, St. Paul sent him back to Thessalonica, from whence he
afterward returned with Silas, and came to St. Paul at Corinth. There he
continued with him, and the apostle mentions him with Silas, at the beginning
of the two epistles, which he then wrote to the church at Thessalonica. In the
year sixty-three, when St. Paul wrote to the Hebrews, he tells them that
Timothy was come out of prison; but he gives us no circumstances either of the
imprisonment of this disciple, or of his release. In sixty-four, when St. Paul
returned from Rome, he left Timothy at Ephesus, to take care of that church, of
which he was the first Bishop, as he is recognized by the council of Chalcedon.
St. Paul wrote to Timothy from Macedonia, the first of the two letters which
are addressed to him.

WE may safely affirm, that if he did not die before the year ninety-seven, he
must be the angel of the church of Ephesus, to whom St. John writes, Rev. ii.2
-- 5: though the reproaches which the Holy Ghost make to him, etc. of having
left his first love, do not seem to belong to so holy a man as Timothy was.

ST. STEPHEN, THE PROTO-MARTYR.
IN the year fifty-three, the seven deacons were chosen, and we find St.
Stephen always placed at their head, as the chief and most worthy; and it is
generally believed, that he had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel.
However, he was remarkably zealous for the cause of religion, and full of the
Holy Ghost; working many wonderful miracles before the people, and pressing
them with the greatest earnestness to embrace the doctrines of the gospel of
JESUS CHRIST.

THE Jews were highly provoked at the zeal of Stephen, and some of the
synagogue of the freed men of Cyrenia, Alexandria, and other places, entered
into dispute with him; but being unable to resist the wisdom and spirit by
which he spoke, they suborned false witnesses against him, to testify that they
heard him blaspheme against Moses and against God. Nor did they stop here: they
stirred up the people by their calumnies: so that they dragged him before the
council of the nation, or great Sanhedrim, where they produced false witnesses
against him, who deposed, that they had heard him speak against the temple, and
against the law, and affirm that JESUS of Nazareth would destroy the holy
place, and abolish the law of Moses. Stephen, supported by his own innocence,
and an invisible Power from on high, appeared undaunted in the midst of this
assembly, and his countenance shone like that of an angel.

THE Jewish council were so highly enraged at the speech of Stephen, especially
the latter part of it, that they gnashed their teeth against him: but Stephen
lifting up his eyes to heaven, saw the glory of God, and JESUS standing at the
right hand of Omnipotence; upon which, he said to the council, I see the
heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. This so
greatly provoked the Jews, that they cried out with one voice, and stopped
their ears, as if they had heard some dreadful blasphemy; and falling upon him,
they dragged him out of the city, and stoned him to death.

IT is related in Scripture, that St. Stephen, while they were mangling his
body with stones, was praying to God for their pardon. Lord, said he, lay not
this sin to their charge. And then calling on his dear Redeemer to receive his
spirit, he yielded up his soul. Some pious persons who beheld the martyrdom of
this good man, took care to bury his remains; and the church attended his
funeral with great lamentations.

ST. SILAS OR SYLVANUS, AN HEBREW DISCIPLE.
THIS holy person was, according to St. Luke, a chief man amongst the brethren,
an expression which indicates that he was one of the seventy disciples: but the
first account we have of him is in the transaction relating to the dispute
between the Jewish and Christian converts, with regard to the necessity of
keeping the law of Moses, when they chose Paul, Barnabas, Judas and Silas, to
go to Jerusalem, to advise with the apostles concerning this question.

BE that as it may, when the dispute happened between Paul and Barnabas, which
terminated in a rupture, Silas joined himself to Paul, and became his companion
and assistant in the great work of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles. They
first visited the churches of Syria and Cilicia; from thence they passed into
Lyconia, Phrygia, and Galatia; and lastly, they crossed the sea and came into
Macedonia.

DURING their stay at Philippi, they found a young woman possessed with an
unclean spirit, who followed them several days, till Paul cast out the evil
spirit, and delivered her from so dreadful a plague. This action provoked the
masters of the young woman; for she acquired considerable gains by the oracles
and predictions the devil pronounced by making use of her organs: they
therefore seized upon Paul and Silas, dragged them before the magistrates, and
accused them of introducing customs amongst them, contrary to those of the
Romans; so that the magistrates ordered that Paul and Silas should be scourged,
and committed to prison: but in the nightime there was a great earthquake,
the doors of the prison opened, and the fetters of the prisoners fell off
without any human assistance.

DEPARTING from Philippi, they traveled to Thessalonica and Berea, where they
preached the doctrines of the gospel; and Paul continuing his journey to
Athens: sent Silas thither, though they did not meet till they both arrived at
Corinth, where St. Paul wrote his two epistles to the Thessalonian church.

ST. PHILIP, THE DEACON, AN HEBREW CONVERT.
IT is supposed that St. Philip was a native of Caesarea in Galilee, it being
certain that his daughters lived in that city; however, he was one of the seven
deacons chosen by the apostles soon after our Savior's resurrection.

ALL the Christians, except the apostles, having, after the death of St.
Stephen, left Jerusalem, and dispersed themselves in several parts, St. Philip
went down to preach the gospel at Samaria, where he wrought many miracles, and
converted great numbers to the faith; he also baptized them, but being only a
deacon, could not administer the sacrament of the Lord's supper.

IT is probable St. Philip was at Samaria when the angel directed him to go
toward the South, to the road that leads from Jerusalem to Old Gaza, an
ancient city in the route to Egypt. Philip obeyed the summons of the heavenly
messenger, and there met with an Ethiopian eunuch, belonging to Candace, queen
of Ethiopia; a person who was highly esteemed by his mistress, as well as
entrusted with the care of all her revenues, and who had been at Jerusalem, to
worship the Almighty in that city.

WHEN the chariot of this Ethiopian appeared in the sight of Philip, the angel
bid him advance toward the stranger: he immediately obeyed, and heard the
eunuch, reading a passage of the prophet Isaiah; upon which Philip asked him,
if he understood what he was reading? And the eunuch answered, How should I
understand, except some person should explain it to me; desiring Philip, that
he would come and sit down by him in the chariot. The passage he read was this;
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and as a lamb before his shearers is
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. Having finished this passage, the eunuch
desired to know whom the prophet intended: "Is it, says he, himself the prophet
here means, or some other man." In answer to the question proposed by the
eunuch, Philip began to instruct him concerning the Redeemer of the world, the
man CHRIST JESUS; and afterward baptized him, and he became a member of the
church of CHRIST.

THE sacred writers are silent with regard to the actions of St. Philip, after
the time of his baptizing the Ethiopian eunuch -- but the Greek ecclesiastical
writers say, that he left Palestine and traveled to Tralles, in the Lesser
Asia, where he founded a church, of which he was both the bishop and apostle;
and where, after long laboring in the vineyard of his Master, and working many
miracles, he slept in peace, and was buried in the church he had caused to be
erected.

HAVING now given the most ample account possible of the followers of the
blessed JESUS, the persons who spread the light of the glorious gospel over the
whole world, removed the veil of ignorance and superstition drawn over the
kingdoms of the earth, and taught us the method of attaining eternal happiness
in the courts of the new Jerusalem -- may it be our highest ambition to follow
their bright example, as they followed CHRIST; may we imitate their faith,
piety, hope, and love: then shall we pass through things temporal in such a
manner, that we shall finally gain the things that are eternal, and be admitted
as worthy guests at the marriage-supper of the Lamb, to adore and praise him,
and live and reign with him in his heavenly kingdom for ever and ever. So be it.

A COMPLETE GENERAL VIEW OF THE APOSTLES AND THEIR SUCCESSORS, IN THE FIVE
GREAT CHURCHES FOUNDED BY THEM, THENCE CALLED BY THE ANCIENTS, Apostolic
Churches: During the First Three hundred Years of the Christian Era.
THE CHURCH AT ANTIOCH, IN SYRIA.
WE place this first, partly because it is generally acknowledged, even by the
Romish writers, that a church was founded here by St. Peter some considerable
time before that at Rome; partly because here it was that the venerable name of
Christians did first commence. In which respect the fathers in the council at
Constantinople, under Nectarius, in their synodicon to them at Rome, style the
church at Antioch, The most ancient and truly apostolical; and, St. Chrysostom,
the head of the whole world. The succession of its bishops, till the time of
Constantine (which shall be the boundary of this account) was in the following
order:

1. ST. PETER the apostle, who governed this church, at least seven years:
Nicephorus of Constantinople says eleven. 2. Evodius, who sat twenty-three
years. The disciples were first called christians at Antioch in his time. 3.
Ignatius: after near forty years presidency over this church, he was carried
out of Syria to Rome, and there thrown to wild beasts in the theater, A. D. one
hundred and ten; Trajan, eleven. 4. Heron: he was bishop twenty years. To him
succeeded, 5. Cornelius, who kept the place thirteen years, dying A. D. one
hundred and forty-two. 6. Eros, twenty-six; or, as Eusebius's twenty-four
years. 7. Theophilus, thirteen: he was a man of great parts and learning; many
of his works were extent in Eusebius's time, and some of them are handed down
to us. 8. Maximinus, thirteen: he dying, the next that was chosen, was, 9.
Serapio, twenty-five: many of his works are mentioned by Eusebius and St.
Jerome. To him succeeded, 10. Asclepiades: he was a man of great worth and
eminency* and invincible constancy in the time of persecution: he continued in
this see nine years. 11. Philetus, eight. 12. Zebinus, or Zebennus: he sat six
years. 13. Babylas, thirteen: after many conflicts and sufferings for the
faith, he received the crown of martyrdom under Decius, who demanded his chains
to be buried with him. 14. Fabius, or, as the patriarch Nicephorus calls him,
Flavius, possessed the chair nine years. He was a little inclining toward
novationism. 15. Demetrianus: he sat bishop, according to Nicephorus, four;
Eusebius says, eight years. 16. Paulus Samosatenus sat in the chair eight
years; when, for his unepiscopal manners and practices, his unsound dogmata and
principles, and especially his mean and unworthy opinions concerning our
Savior, he was condemned and deposed by a synod at Antioch, whose synodical
determination is at large extent in Eusebius's history. 17. Domnus succeeded in
the place of the deposed. He was son to Demetrian, Paulus's predecessor in that
see; constituted and ordained to the place by the fathers of that synod, who
further give him this honorable character, that he was a man endued with all
episcopal virtues and ornaments. Eusebius makes him to have held the sea six,
Nicephorus but two years. 18. Timaeus: he sat in the chair ten years. 19.
Cyrillus, who presided over that church, in the account of Nicephorus, fifteen;
according to Eusebius twenty-four years. 20. Tyrannus: he sat thirteen years.
In his time began the tenth persecution under Dioclesian, which raged with
great severity against the christians. 21. Vitalis, six. 22. Paulinus, or, as
Nicephorus calls him, Paulus; who, after five years, was deposed and driven out
by the Arian faction, which then prevailed. 23. Eustathius, formerly bishop of
Beroea, was a learned man, and of great note and eminency in the council of
Nice, which was the first general council summoned by Constantine the great,
after he had restored peace and prosperity to the church in general.

THE CHURCH AT ROME, IN ITALY.
MANY of the fathers having with good reason, equally attributed the foundation
of this celebrated church to Peter and Paul, the one as the apostle of the
circumsion preached to the Jews, while the other, probably as the apostle of
the uncircumsion preached to the Gentiles. The following is the order in which
its bishops succeeded.

1. ST. PETER and St. Paul, who both suffered martyrdom under Nero, the Roman
emperor. 2. Linus, the son of Herculanus, a Tuscan; he is mentioned by St.
Paul: ^e ^at between eleven and twelve years. 3. Cleus, or Anacletus, or
Anancletus a Roman, the son of Aemilianus: he sat nine, though others say but
two years. 4. Clemens, a Roman, born in Mount Caelius, was the son of
Faustinus, near akin, say some, to the emperor: he was condemned to dig in the
marble quarries near the Euxine sea, and, by the command of Trajan, with an
anchor about his neck, thrown into the sea. He was bishop of Rome nine years
and four months. 5. Euaristus, by birth a Greek but his father was a Jew of
Bethlehem: he is said to have been crowned with martyrdom the last year of
Trajan, in the ninth of his bishopric, or the thirteenth according to others.
6. Alexander, a Roman, though young in years, was grave in his manners and
conversation: he sat ten years and seven months, and died a martyr. 7. Xystus,
or Sixtus, a Roman: he was martyred in the tenth year of his bishopric, and
buried in the Tatican at Rome. 8. Telesphorus, a Greek, succeeded. Justin the
martyr flourished in his time. He died a martyr, having sat eleven years and
three months; ten years and eight months, according to others; he lies buried
near St. Peter, in the Vatican. 9. Hyginus, the son of an Athenian philosopher,
was advanced to the chair under Antoninus Pius: he sat four years; Eusebius
says eight. 10. Pius, an Italian, was born at Aquileia: he died, having been
bishop eleven years and four months; according to Eusebius, fifteen years. 11.
Anicetus, born in Syria: he is said, after nine, or, as others eleven years, to
have suffered martyrdom, and was buried in the Via Appia, in the cemetery of
Callistus. In his time Polycarp came to Rome. 12. Sotar, or, as Nicephorus
calls him Soterichus, was a Campanian, the son of Concordius. There was an
intercourse of letters between him and Dionysius bishop of Corinth. He died
after he had sat nine, or, as Eusebius reckons, seven years. 13. Eleutherius,
born at Nicopolis in Greece. To him Lucius king of Britain sent a letter and an
embassy. He sat fifteen years, died A. D. one hundred and eighty-six, and lies
buried in the Vatican at Rome. 14. Victor, an African, the son of Felix, was a
man of a furious and intemperate spirit. He was bishop ten years. 15.
Zephyrinus, a Roman, succeeded, and possessed the chair eight, or, as others
eighteen years; twenty, says Onuphrius: a pious and learned man, but a little
warping toward the errors of Montanus. 16. Callistus, or Calixtus, the son of
Domitius, a Roman; a prudent and modest man: he suffered much in the
persecution under Alexander Sever^^, under whom he became a martyr, being
thrown into a well by the procurement of Ulpian the great lawyer, but a severe
enemy to Christians. He sat six years, or as others maintain, five and one
month, and though he made a cemetery, or burial place, called after his own
name, yet was he buried in that of Calepodius, in the Appian Way. 17. Urbanus,
the son of Pontianus, a Roman; after four, or as, some, six years, he suffered
martyrdom for the faith; Eusebius has five, St. Jerome, in his translation,
nine. He was buried in Praetextatus's cemetery in the Appian Way. 18.
Pontianus, the son of Calphurnius, a Roman: for his boldly reproving the Roman
idolatry, he was banished into the island Sardinia, where he died; he was
bishop about three or four, or, as Eusebius, five years. 19. Anteros, a Greek,
the son of Romulus: he died, according to some, when he had kept his place only
one month, (though others, without reason, make him to have lived in it many
years) and was buried in the cemetery of Callistus. 20. Fabianus, a Roman, he
was unexpectedly chosen bishop, while, several others being in competition, a
pigeon suddenly descended, and sat upon his head, the great emblem of the Holy
Spirit. He died a martyr, after fourteen years; and was buried in the same
place with his predecessor. 21 Cornelius, a Roman, who opposed and condemned
Novocation: frequent letters passed between him and Cyprian. After somewhat
more than two years, he was first cruelly whipped, then beheaded, and
afterward buried in a vault within the grange of Lucina, near the Appian Way.
22. Lucius, a Roman, sat two, or, as others, three years: he suffered martyrdom
by the command of Valerian, and was buried in Callistus's cemetery. 23.
Stephanus, a Roman, the son of Julius: great contest^ were between him and
Cyprian, about re-baptizing those who had been baptized by heretics. He was
beheaded after he had sat about two or three years, though others say seven;
and was buried by his predecessor. 24. Xystus, a Greek, formerly a philosopher
of Athens. After one, or, as others compute, two years and ten months, he
suffered martyrdom: Eusebius reckons it eight years. 25. Dionysius, of a monk
made bishop: in the judgment of Dionysius, bishop of Alexandria, was a truly
learned and admirable person. The time of his presidency is uncertainly
assigned, six, nine, ten, eleven: Eusebius extends it to twelve years. 26.
Felix, a Roman; in his time arose the Manichaean heresy. He suffered about the
fourth or fifth year of his episcopacy, and lies buried in the Aurelian Way, in
a cemetery of his own, two miles from Rome. 27. Eutychianus, a Tuscan, a man
exceedingly careful of the burial of martyrs; after one year's space, was
himself crowned with martyrdom: Eusebius allows him but eight months: Onuphrius
eight years and six months. 28. Caius, or, as Eusebius calls him, Gaianus, a
Dalmatian, kinsman to the emperor Dioclesian, and in the persecution under him,
became a martyr. He sat eleven years; some say longer: Eusebius fifteen years.
He was beheaded, and buried in Callistus's cemetery. 29 Marcellinus, a Roman:
through fear of torment he sacrificed to the gods; but recovering himself, died
a martyr, after he had sat eight or nine years. He was beheaded, and buried in
the cemetery of Priscilly, in the Salarian Way. To him succeeded. 30.
Marcellus, a Roman: he was condemned by Maxentius the tyrant, to keep beasts in
a stable, which he performed, yet without omitting his prayers and exercises of
devotion. He died after five years and six months, and was buried in the
cemetery of Priscilla. 31. Eusebius, a Greek, was the son of a physician: he
suffered much under the tyranny of Maxentlus. He sat six years, say others;
though Eusebius allows him but seven months: Onuphrius one year and seven
months. He was buried in the Appian Way, near Callistus's cemetery. 32.
Miltiades, an African: he might probably be a confessor under Maxentius, but
could not be a martyr under Maximinus, as some report him, He sat three or
four, though others assign him but two years; and was buried in the cemetery of
Callistus. 33. Silvester, a Roman: he was elected unto the place, A. D. three
hundred and fourteen, fe^ched from the mountain Soract, whither he had fled for
fear of persecution. He was highly in favor with Constantine the great. He sat
twenty-three, Nicephorus says, twenty-eight years.

THE CHURCH AT JERUSALEM, IN JUDEA.
IT may with some degree of truth be affirmed, that the church of Jerusalem was
founded by our Lord himself, as it was for some time cultivated and improved by
the ministry of the whole college of apostles. The bishops of it succeeded in
the following order.

1. ST. JAMES the Less, the brother of our Lord, by him, say some, immediately
constituted bishop; but as others, more probably, by the apostles: he was
thrown off the temple, and his brains beat out with a fuller's club. 2. Simeon,
the son of Cleophas, brother of Joseph, our Lord's reputed father he sat in
this chair twenty-three years, and suffered martyrdom in the reign of Trajan,
in the one hundred and twentieth year of his age. 3. Justus succeeded in his
room, and sat six years. 4. Zecheus, or, as Nicephorus the patriarch calls him,
Zacharias, four. 5. Tobias: to him, after four years, succeeded. 6. Benjamin,
who sat two years. 7. John, who continued the same space. 8. Matthias, or
Matthaeus, two years. 9. Philipus, one year: next came. 10. Senaca, who sat
four years. 11. Justus, four. 12. Levi, or Lebes, two. 13. Ephrem, or, Ephres,
or, as Epiphanius styles him, Vaphres, two. 14. Joseph, two. 15. Judas, two. We
may observe, that most of these bishops governed the church but a short time,
following one another with a very quick succession; which, doubtless, was in a
great measure owing to the turbulent and unquiet humor of the Jewish nation,
frequently rebelling against the Roman powers, whereby they provoked them to
fall heavy upon them, and cut off all that came in their way, making no
distinction between Jews and Christians; as indeed they were all Jews, though
differing in the rites of their religion: for hithereto the bishops of
Jerusalem had successively been of the circumsion, the church there having been
entirely made up of Je^ish converts: but Jerusalem being now utterly laid
waste, and the Jews dispersed into all other countries, the Gentiles were
admitted not only into the body of that church, but even into the episcopal
chair. They are ranged in the following order: 16. Marcus, who sat eight years.
17. Cassianus, eight. 18. Publius, five. 19. Maximus, four. 20. Julanus, two.
21. Caianus, three. 22. Julianus, four. 23. Elius, two. We do not find this
bishop mentioned by Eusebius; but he is recorded by Nicephorus of
Constantinople. 24. Capito, four. 25. Maxinus, four. 26. Antonius, five. 27.
Valens, three. 28. Dulichianus, two. 29. Narcissus, four. He was a man of
eminent piety, famous for the great miracles which he wrought; but not being
able to bear the aspersions which some unjustly cast upon him (though God
finally and miraculously vindicated his innocence) he left his church, and
retired into deserts and solitary places. In his absence was chosen. 30. Dius,
who sat eight years after him. 31. Germanio, four. 32. Gordius, five. In his
time Narcissus, as one from the dead, returned from his place of retirement,
and was importuned by the people again to take the government of the church
upon him; being highly reverenced by them, both for his strict and
philosophical course of life, and the signal vengeance which God took of his
accusers: and in this second administration he continued ten years, suffering
martyrdom when he was near an hundred and twenty years old. To relieve the
infirmities of his great age, they took in to be his colleague, 33. Alexander,
formerly bishop in Cappadocia: he was an eminent confessor, and after having
sat fifteen years, died in prison under the Decian persecution. 34. Mazabanes,
nine years. 35. Hymenaeus, twenty-three. 36. Zabdas, ten. 37. Hermon, nine. He
was as Eusebius tells us, the last bishop of this see, before that fatal
persecution that raged even in his time. 38. Macarius, ordained A. D. three
hundred and fifteen: he was present in the great Nicence council. He sat, says
Nicephorus of Constantinople, twenty years: but St. Jerome allows him to have
continued a much longer time in the government of the church.

THE CHURCH AT CONSTANTINOPLE, ANCIENTLY CALLED BYZANTIUM.
IT cannot be doubted that this church was first founded by St. Andrew. The
succession of it is bishops was as follows:

1. ST. ANDREW the apostle. He was crucified at Patrae in Achaia. 2. Stachys,
whom St. Paul calls his beloved Stachys, ordained bishop by St. Andrew: he sat
sixteen years. 3. Onesinmus, fourteen. 4. Polycarpus, seventeen. 5. Plutarchus,
sixteen. 6. Sedecio, nine. 7. Diogenes, fifteen. Of the last three no mention
is made in Nicephorus of Constantinople, but they are delivered by Nicephorus
Callistus, lib. viii. c. 6. p. 540. 8. Eleutheris, seven. 9. Felix, five. 10.
Polycarpus, seventeen. 11. Athenodorus, four. He erected a church called Elea,
afterward much beautified and enlarged by Constantine the Great. 12. Euzoius,
sixteen; though Nicephorus Callistus allows but six. 13. Laurentius, eleven
years and six months. 14. Alypius, thirteen. 15. Pertinax, a man of consular
dignity, he built another church near the seaside, which he called Peace. He
sat nineteen years, which Nicephorus Callistus reduces to nine. 16. Olimpianus,
eleven. 17. Marcus, thirteen. 18. Cyriacus, or Cyrillianus, sixteen. 19.
Constantinus, seven. In the first year of his bishopric, he built a church in
the north part of the city, which he dedicated to the honor of Euphemia the
martyr, who had suffered in that place. In this oratory he spent the remainder
of his life, quitting his episcopal chair to 20. Titus, who sat thirty-five
years and six-months; though Nicephorus Callistus makes it thirty-seven years.
After him came 21. Dometius, brother (as they tell us) to the emperor Probus.
He was bishop twenty-one years and six months. 22. Probus succeeded his father
Dometius, and sat twelve years after him. 23. Metrophanus his brother, who
governed that church ten years. And in his time it was that Constantine
translated the imperial court hither, enlarged and adorned it, called it after
his own name, and made it the seat of the empire. 24. Alexander succeeded; he
was a man of great piety and integrity, zealous and constant in maintaining the
truth against the blasphemies of* Arius. He sat twenty-thre^ years.

THE CHURCH AT ALEXANDRIA, IN EGYPT.
ECCLESIASTICAL writers affirm, that the foundations of this church were laid,
and a great part of its superstructure raised by St. Mark; who though not
strictly and properly an apostle, yet being an apostle at large, and
immediately commissioned by St. Peter, it justly obtained the honor of an
apostolical church. Its bishops and governors are thus set down.

1. ST. MARK the evangelist, of whose travels and martyrdom we have spoken in
his life. He sat two years. 2. Anianus, characterized by Eusebius "A man
beloved of God, and admirable in all things." He sat twenty-two years. 3.
Avilius, twelve; or, as Eusebius, thirteen. 4. Cerdo, who succeeded about the
first year of Trajan. He sat ten years; according to Eusebius, eleven. 5.
Primus, twelve. 6. Justus, or Justinus ten. 7. Eumenes, ten, or as Eusebius,
thirteen: St. Jerome, in his translation, calls him Hymenaeus. 8. Marcus, or
Marcianus, thirteen; or, as Eusebius, ten. 9. Celadion, ten; but in Eusebius's
computation, fourteen. 10. Agrippinus, fourteen; according to Eusebius, twelve.
11. Julianus, fifteen; though Eusebius allows but ten. 12. Demetrius,
twenty-one; according to Eusebius, forty-three. 13. Heraclas, a man of
philosophical genius and way of life. He sat sixteen years; though Nicephorus
of Constantinople, by a mistake, we suppose, for his predecessor, makes it
forty-three. 14. Dionysius, seventeen. He was one of the most eminent bishops
of his time. He died in the twelfth year of the emperor Gallineus. 15. Maximus.
Of a presbyter he was made bishop of Alexandria. He sat in that chair eighteen
years, according to Eusebius's computation; though Nicephorus of Constantinople
assigns him but eight. 16. Theonas, seventeen; or according to St. Jerome's
version of Eusebius, nineteen. To him succeeded 17. Petrus, twelve. He began
his office three years before the last persecution. A man of infinite
strictness and accuracy, and of indefatigable industry for the good of the
church. He suffered in the ninth year of the persecution, gaining the crown of
martyrdom with the loss of his head. 18. Achillas nine; though Nicephorus of
Constantinople allows him but one year. By him Arius, upon his submission, was
ordained presbyter. 19. Alexander, twenty-three. Under him Arius began more
openly to bro^ch his heresy at Alexandria, who was there. Upon justly
excommunicated and thrust out by Alexander, and shortly after condemned by the
fathers of the council of Nice. Nevertheless, his abominable tenets have
infected the church, more or less, to the present day, and are openly avowed by
the enemies of the gospel of JESUS, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Amen.

The EVIDENCES upon which CHRISTIANITY is founded; including a Complete Defense
of Christianity, together with plain and satisfactory Answers to all Objections
made against our Holy Religion by Jews, Athiests, Deists, Infidels,
Free-Thinkers, etc. etc.
AMONGST other undoubted authorities concerning our Savior and his miracles,
extant amongst Pagan writers, the particulars which follow, are all attested by
some one or other of those Heathen authors, who lived in or near the age of our
Savior and his disciples.

"THAT Augustus Caesar had ordered the whole empire to be censed or taxed,"
which brought our Savior's reputed parents to Bethlehem: this is mentioned by
several Roman historians, as Tacitus, Suetonius, and Dion. "That a great light,
or a new star appeared in the east, which directed the wise men to our
Savior:" this is recorded by Chalcidius. "That Herod, the king of Palestine,
so often mentioned in the Roman history, made a great slaughter of innocent
children," being so jealous of his successor, that he put to death his own sons
on that account; this character of him is given by several historians, and this
cruel fact mentioned by Macrobius, a Heathen author, who tells it as a known
thing, without any mark or doubt upon it. "That our Savior had been in Egypt:"
this, Celsus, though he raises a monstrous story upon it, is so far from
denying, that he tells us our Savior learned the arts of magic in that
country. "That Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea; that our Savior was
brought in judgment before him, and by him condemned and crucified:" this is
recorded by Tacitus. "That many miraculous cures and works, out of the ordinary
course of nature, were wrought by him:" this is confessed by Julian the
apostate Porphyry, and Hierocles, all of them not only Pagans, but professed
enemies and persecutors of Christianity. "That our Savior foretold several
things which came to pass according to his predictions:" this was attested by
Phelegon, in his annals, as we are assured by the learned Origin against
Celsus. "That at the time when our Savior died, there was a miraculous
darkness, and a great earthquake:" this is reckoned by the same Phelegon the
Trallian, who was likewise a Pagan, and freeman to Adrian the emperor. We may
here observe, that a native of Trallian, which was not situated at so great a
distance from Palestine, might very probably be informed of such remarkable
events as had passed amongst the Jews in the age immediately preceding his own
times, since several of his countrymen with whom he had conversed, might have
received a confused report of our Savior before his crucifixion, and probably
lived within the shake of the earthquake, and the shadow of the eclipse, which
are recorded by this author* "That CHRIST was worshipped as a God amongst the
Christians; that they would rather suffer death than blaspheme him; that they
received a sacrament, and by it entered into a vow of abstaining from sin and
wickedness," conformable to the advice given by St. Paul; "that they had
private assemblies of worship, and used to join together in hymns:" this is the
account which Pliny the younger gives of Christianity in his days, about
seventy years after the death of CHRIST, and which agrees in all its
circumstances with the account we have in holy writ, of the first state of
Christianity after the crucifixion of our blessed Savior. "That St. Peter,
whose miracles are many of them recorded in holy writ, did many wonderful
works," is owned by Julian, the apostate, who therefore represents him as a
great magician, and one who had in his possession a book of magical secrets
left him by our Savior. "That the devils or evil spirits were subject to
them," we may learn from Porphyry, who objects to Christianity, that since
JESUS had began to be worshipped, Aesculapius and the rest of the gods did no
more converse with men: nay, Celsus himself affirms the same thing in effect,
when he says, that the power which seemed to reside in Christians proceeded
from the use of certain names, and the invocation of certain daemon's; Origin
remarks on this passage, that the author doubtless hints at those Christians
who put to flight evil spirits and healed those who were possessed with them; a
fact which had been often seen, and which he himself had seen, as he declares
in another part of his discourse against Celsus. But at the same time, he
assures by the use of no other name but that of JESUS, to which were added
several passages in his history, but nothing like any invocation to demons.

CELSUS was so hard set with the report of our Savior's miracles, and the
confident attestations concerning him, that though he often intimates he did
not believe them to be true, yet knowing he might be silenced in such an
answer, provides himself with another retreat, when beaten out of this, namely,
that our Savior was a magician. Thus he compares the feeding of so many
thousands, at two different time, with a few loaves and fishes, to the magical
feasts of those Egyptian impostors, who would present their spectators with
vi^^^^^ry entertainments, that had in them neither substance nor reality:
which, by the way, is to suppose, that an hungry and fainting multitude were
filled by an apparition, or st^^^gthened and refreshed with shadows.

THE unconverted Heathens, who were pressed by the many authorities that
confirmed our Savior's miracles, as well as the unbelieving Jews, who had
actully seen them, were driven to account for them after the same manner; for,
to work by magic, in the Heathen way of speaking, was, in the language of the
Jews, to cast out devils by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. Our Savior,
who new that unbelievers, in all ages, would put this perverse interpretation
on his miracles, has branded the malignity of those men, who, contrary to the
dictates of their own hearts started such an unreasonable objection, as a
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and declared not only the guilt, but the
punishment of so black a crime. At the same time, he condescended to show the
vanity and emptiness of this objection against his miracles, by representing,
that they evidently tended to the destruction of those powers, to whose
assistance the enemies of his doctrine then ascribed them. An argument which,if
duly weighed, renders the objection so very frivolous and groundless that we
may venture to call it even blasphemy against common sense. It would be absurd
to imagine, that evil spirits would enter into a combination with our Savior
to cut off all their correspondence and intercourse with mankind, and to
prevent any for the future from addicting themselves to those rites and
ceremonies, which had done them so much honor. We see the early effect which
Christianity had on the minds of men in this particular, by that number of
books which were filled with the secrets of magic, and made a sacrifice to
Christianity by the converts mentioned in the Acts of the apostles. We have
likewise an eminent instance of the inconsistency of our religon with magic, in
the history of the famous Aquila. This person, who was a kinsman of the emperor
Trajan, and likewise a man of great learning, notwithstanding he had embraced
Christianity, could not be brought off from the studies of magic, by the
repeated admonitions of his fellow Christians; so that at length they expelled
him their society, as rather choosing to lose the reputation of so considerable
a proselyte, than communicate with one who dealt in such dark and infernal
practices. Besides, we may observe, that all the favorers of magic were the
most professed and bitter enemies to the Christian religion; not to mention
Simon Magus and many others, we shall only take notice of those two great
persecutors of Christianity, the emperors Adrian and Julian the apostate, both
of them initiated in the mysteries of divination, and skilled in all the depths
of magic. -- We shall only add, that evil spirits cannot be supposed to have
concu^red in the establishment of a religion, which triumphed over them, drove
them out of the places they possessed, and divested them of their influence on
mankind; nor would we mention this particular, though it be Christian authors,
did it not appear from the authorities above cited, that this was a fact
confessed by Heathens themselves.

WHEN a man is born under Christian parents, and trained up in the profession
of that religion from a child, he generally guides himself by the rules of the
Christian faith, in believing what is delivered by the evangelists; the learned
Pagans of antiquity, before they became Christians, were only guided by the
common rules of historical faith; that is they examined the nature of the
evidence which was to be met with in common fame, tradition, and the writings
of those persons who related them, together with the number, concurrence,
veracity, and private characters of those persons; and being convinced upon all
accounts, that they had the same reason to believe the history of our Savior,
as that of any other person to which they themselves were not actually
eyewitnesses, they were bound by all the rules of historical faith, and of
right reason to give credit to this history. This they did accordingly, and in
consequence of it, published the same truths themselves, suffered many
afflictions, and very often death itself, in the assertion of them. But while
we affirm, an historical belief of the acts of our Savior might induce these
learned Pagans to embrace his doctrine, we do not deny that there were many
other motives, which conduced to it, as the excellency of his precepts, the
fulfilling of prophecies, the miracles of his disciples, the irreproachable
lives and magnanimous sufferings of their followers, with other considerations
of the same nature; but whatever other collateral arguments wrought more or
less with philosophers of that age, it is certain that a belief in the history
of our Savior was one motive with every new convert, and that upon which all
others turned, as being the very basis and foundation of Christianity.

A learned man of our nation, who examined the writings of our most ancient
fathers, refers to several passages in Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens of
Alexandria, Origin, and Cyprian, by which he plainly shows, that each of these
early writers, ascribed to the four evangelists by name their respective
histories; so that there is not the least room for doubting of their belief in
the history of our Savior, as recorded in the gospels. We shall only add that
three of the five fathers here mentioned, and probably four, were Pagans
converted to Christianity, as they were all of them very inquisitive and deep
in the knowledge of Heathen learning and philosophy.

SEVERAL of these therefore, when they had informed themselves of our Savior's
history, and examined with unprejudiced minds the doctrines and manners of his
disciples and followers, were so struck and convinced, that they professed
themselves, of the fact; notwithstanding, by this profession in that juncture
of time, they bid farewell to all the pleasures of this life renounced all the
views of ambition, engaged in an uninterrupted course of severities, and
exposed themselves to the public hatred and contempt, to sufferings of all
kinds, and to death itself. Of this sort we may reckon those three early
converts to Christianity, who each of them was a member of a senate famous for
its wisdom and learning. Joseph the Arimathein, was of the Jewish Sanhedrim:
Dionysius, of the Athenian Areopagus; and Flavius Clemens, of the Roman senate;
nay at the time of his death, consul of Rome.

TERTULLIAN tells the Roman governors, that their corporations, councils,
armies, tribes, companies, the palace, senate, and courts of judicature were
filled with Christians; as Arnobius asserts, that men of the finest parts and
learning, oratory, grammarians, rhetoricians, lawyers, physicians,
philosophers, despising the sentiments they had been once fond of, took up
their rest in the Christian religion; and who can imagine, that men of this
character did not thoroughly inform themselves of the history of that person
whose doctrines they embraced?

BESIDES innumerable authors that are lost, we have the undoubted names, works,
or fragments of several Pagan philosophers, which show them to have been as
learned as any unconverted Heathen authors of the age in which they lived. If
we look into the greatest nurseries of learning in those ages of the world, we
find in Athens, Dionysius, Quadratus, Aristides, and Athenagoras; and in
Alexandria, Dionysius, Clemans, Ammonius, and to whom we may add Origin; for
though his father was a Christian martyr, he became without all controversy,
the most learned and able philosopher of his age, by his education at
Alexandria, in that famous seminary of arts and sciences.

HEATHENS of every age, sex, and quality, born in the most different climates,
and bred up under the most different institutions, when they saw men of plain
sense without the help of learning, armed with patience and courage, instead of
wealth, pomp or power, expressing in their lives those excellent doctrines of
morality, which they taught as delivered to them from our Savior, averring
that they had seen his miracles during his life, and conversed with him after
his death; when they saw no suspicion of falsehood, treachery, or worldly
interest, in their behavior and conversation, and that they submitted to the
most ignominious and cruel deaths, rather than retract their testimony, or even
be silent in matters which they were to publish by their Savior's especial
command, there was no reason to doubt of the veracity of those facts which they
related, or of the divine mission in which they were employed,

A few persons of an odious and despised country, could not have filled the
world with believers, had they not shown undoubted credentials from the divine
Person who sent them on such a message. Accordingly, we are assured, that they
were invested with the power of working miracles, which was the most short and
the most convincing argument that could be produced, and the only one that was
adapted to the reason of all mankind, to the capacities of the wise and
ignorant, and could overcome every cavil and every prejudice. Who would not
believe that our Savior healed the sick, and raised the dead, when it was
published by those who themselves often did the same miracles, in their
presence, and in his name? Could any reasonable person imagine, that God
Almighty would arm men with such powers to authorize a lie, and establish a
religion in the world which was displeasing to him, or that evil spirits would
lend them such an effectual assistance to beat down vice and idolatry.

WHEN the apostles had formed many assemblies in several parts of the Pagan
world, who gave credit to the glad-tidings of the gospel, that, upon their
departure, the memory of what they had related might not perish, they appointed
out of these new converts, men of the best sense and of the most unblemished
lives, to preside over these several assemblies, and to inculcate without
ceasing, what they had heard from the mouths of these eyewitnesses.

THE succession of bishops was quick in the three first centuries, because the
bishop very often ended in the martyr: for when a persecution arose in any
place, the first fury of it fell upon this order of holy men, who abundantly
testified by their deaths and sufferings, that they did not undertake these
offices out of any temporal views, that they were sincere and satisfied in the
belief of what they taught, and that they firmly adhered to what they had
received from the apostles, as laying down their lives in the same hope, and
upon the same principles. None can be supposed so utterly regardless of their
own happiness, as to expire in torment, and hazard their eternity, to support
any fables and inventions of their own, or any forgeries of their predecessors
who had presided in the same church, and which might have been easily detected
by the tradition of that particular church, as well as by the concurring
testimony of others. To this purpose, we think it is very remarkable, that
there was not a single martyr amongst those many heretics, who disagreed with
the apostolical church, and introduced several wild and absurd notions into the
doctrines of Christianity. They durst not stake their present and future
happiness on their own chimerical imaginations, and did not only shun
persecution, but affirmed, that it was unnecessary for their followers to bear
their religion through such fiery trials.

AMONGST the accounts of those very few, out of innumerable multitudes who had
embraced Christianity, we shall single out four persons eminent for their
lives, their writings, and their sufferings, that were successively
cotemporaries, and bring us down as far as to the year of our Lord 254. St.
John, who was the beloved disciple, and conversed the most intimately with our
Savior, lived till A. D. 100. Polycarp, who was the disciple of St. John, and
had conversed with other of the apostles and disciples of our Lord, lived till
A. D. 167, though his life was shortened by martyrdom. Irenaeus, who was the
disciple of Polycarp, and had conversed with many of the immediate disciples of
the apostles, lived at the lowest computation of his age, till the year 202,
when he was likewise cut o^^^^y martyrdom: in which year the great Origin was
appointed regent of the cateeheti^ school in Alexandria, and as he was the
miracle of that age, for industry, learning, and philosophy, he was looked on
as the champion of Christianity, till the year 254, when he died, he was
certainly actuated by the spirit of it, as appears in the whole course of his
life and writings; nay, he had undergone trials worse than death.

THE Christians, who carried their religion through so many general and
particular persecutions, were incessantly comforting and supporting one another
with the example and history of our Savior and his apostles: it was the
subject not only of their solemn assemblies, but of their private visits and
conversation. "Our virgins," says Tatian, who lived in the second century,
"discourse over their distaffs on divine subjects." Indeed when religion was
woven into the civil government, and flourished under the protection of the
emperors' men's thoughts and discourses were, as they are now, full of secular
affairs; but in the three first centuries of Christianity, men who embraced
this religion, had given up all their interests in this world, and lived in a
perpetual preparation for the next, as not knowing how soon they might be
called to it: so that they had little else to talk of but the life and
doctrines of that divine Person which was their hope, their encouragement, and
their glory.

WE cannot imagine, that there was a single person arrived at any degree of age
or consideration, who had not heard and repeated above a thousand times in his
life, all the particulars of our Savior's birth, life, death, resurrection,
and ascension; especially if we consider that they could not then be received
as Christians, till they had undergone several examinations. Persons of riper
years, who flocked daily into the church during the three first centuries, were
obliged to pass through many repeated instructions, and give a strict account
of their proficiency, before they were admitted to baptism. And as for those
who were born of Christians parents and had been baptized in their infancy,
they were, with the like care, prepared and disciplined for confirmation, which
they could not arrive at, till they were found upon examination to have made a
sufficient progress in the knowledge of Christianity.

WE must further observe, that there was not only in those times this religious
conversation amongst private Christians, but a constant correspondence between
the churches that were established by the apostles or their successors, in the
several parts of the world. If any new doctrine was stated, or any fact
reported of our Savior, a strict inquiry was made amongst the churches,
especially those planted by the apostles themselves, whether they had received
any such doctrine or account of our Savior, from the mouths of the apostles,
or the tradition of the Christians* who had preceded the present members of the
churches, which were thus consulted. By this means, when any novelty was
published, it was immediately detected and censured.

ST. JOHN, who lived so many years after our Savior, was appealed to in those
emergencies, as the living oracle of the church; and as his oral testimony
lasted the first century, many have observed, that, by a particular providence
of God, several of our Savior's disciples, and of the early converts of his
religion, lived to a very great age* that they might personally convey the
truth of the gospel to those times, which were very remote from the first
publication of it. Of these, besides St. John we have a remarkable instance in
Simeon, who was one of the seventy sent forth by our Savior, to publish the
gospel before his crucifixion, and a near kinsman to our Lord.

THIS venerable person, who had probably heard with his own ears, our Savior's
prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, presided over the church established
in that ci^y, during the time of its memorable siege, and drew his congregation
out of those dreadful and unparalleled calamities which befell his countrymen,
by following the advice our Savior had given, when they should see Jerusalem
encompassed with armies, and the Roman standards, or abomination of desolation,
set up. He lived till the year of our Lord 107, when he was martyred under the
emperor Trajan.

IRENAEUS very aptly remarks, that those barbarous nations, who in his time
were not possessed of the written gospels, and had only learned the history of
our Savior from those who had converted them to Christianity before the
gospels were written, had amongst them the same accounts of our Savior, which
are to be met with in the four evangelists; an incontestable proof of the
harmony and concurrence between the holy scripture and the tradition of the
churches in those early times of Christianity. Thus we see what opportunities
the learned and inquisitive Heathens had of informing themselves of the truth
of our Savior's history, during the three first centuries, especially as they
lay nearer one than another to the fountainhead; besides which there were many
uncontroverted traditions, records of Christianity, and particular histories,
that then threw light into these matters, but are now entirely lost.

WE cannot omit that which appears to us a standing miracle in the three first
centuries, namely, that amazing and supernatural courage or patience which was
shown by innumerable multitudes of martyrs, in those slow and painful torments
that were inflicted on them. We cannot conceive a man placed in the burning
iron chair at Lions, amidst the insults and mockeries of a crowded
amphitheatre, and still keeping his seat; or stretched upon a grate of iron,
over coals of fire, and breathing out his soul amongst the exquisite sufferings
of such a tedious execution, rather than renounce his religion, or blaspheme
his Savior. Such trials seem to us above the strength of human nature, and
able to overbear duty, reason, faith, conviction, nay, and the most absolute
certainty of a future state. Humanity unassisted in an extraordinary manner,
must have shaken off the present pressure, and have delivered itself out of
such a dreadful distress, by any means that could have been suggested to it. We
can easily imagine, that many persons, in so good a cause, might have laid down
their lives at the gibbet, the stake, or the block: but to expire leisurely
amongst the most exquisite tortures, when they might come out of them, even by
a mental reservation, or an hypocrisy, which was not without a possibility of
being followed by a repentance and forgiveness, has something in it so far
beyond the natural strength of mortals, that one cannot but think there was
some miraculous power to support the sufferer.

WE find the church of Smyrna, in that admirable letter which gives an account
of the death of Poycap, their beloved bishop, mentioning the cruel torments of
other early martyrs of Christianity, are of opinion, that our Savior stood by
them in a vision, and personally conversed with them, to give strength and
comfort during the bitterness of their long-continued agonies; and we have the
story of a young man, who having suffered many tortures, escaped with life, and
told his fellow Christians, that the pain of them had been rendered tolerable,
by the presence of an angel who stood by him, wiped off the tears and sweat,
which ran down his face whilst he lay under his sufferings. We are assured, at
least, that the first martyr for Christianity, was encouraged in his last
moments, by a vision of that divine Person, for whom he sufferd, and into whose
presence he was then hastening.

IT is certain, that the deaths and sufferings of the primative Christians had
a great share in the conversion of those learned Pagans, who lived in the ages
of persecution, which with some intervals and abatements, lasted near three
hundred years after our Savior. Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius,
Arnobius, and others, tell us, that this first of all alarmed their curiosity,
roused their attention, and made them seriously inquisitive into the nature of
that religion, which could endue the mind with so much strength, and overcome
the fear of death, nay, raise an earnest desire of it, though it appeared in
all its terrors. This they found had not been affected by all the doctrines of
those philosophers, whom they had thoroughly studied, and who had been
laboring at this great point. The sight of these dying and tormented martyrs,
engaged them to search into the history and doctrines of him for whom they
suffered. -- The more they searched, the more they were convinced: till their
conviction grew so strong, that they themselves embraced the same truths, and
either actually laid down their lives, or were always in a readiness to do it,
rather than depart from them.

THERE are predictions of our Savior recorded by the evangelists, which were
not completed till after their deaths, and had no likelihood of being so, when
they were pronounced by our blessed Savior. -- Such was that wonderful notice
he gave them, that they should be brought before governors and kings for his
sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles, Math. x.18. with the other
like prophecies, by which he foretold that his disciples were to be persecuted.

ORIGIN insists with great strength, on that wonderful prediction of our
Savior concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, pronounced at a time, as he
observes, when there was no likelihood nor appearance of it. This has been
taken notice of and inculcated by so many others, that we shall refer you to
what this father has said on the subject in his first book against Celsus. And
as to the accomplishment of this remarkable prophecy, shall only observe, that
whoever reads the account given us by Josephus, without knowing his character,
and compares it with what our Savior foretold, would think the historian had
nothing else in view but to adjust the event to the prediction.

THE ancient Christians were so entirely persuaded of the force of our
Savior's prophecies, and of the punishment which the Jews had drawn upon
themselves, and upon their children: for the treatment which the Messiah had
received at their hands that they did not doubt but they would always remain an
abandoned and dispersed people, and hissing and an astonishment amongst the
nations, as they are to this day. In short, that they had lost their
peculiarity of being God's people, which was now transferred to the body of
Christians, and which preserved the church of CHRIST amongst all the conflicts,
difficulties, and persecutions in which it was engaged, as it had preserved the
Jewish government and economy for so many ages, whilst it had the same truth
and vital principle in it, notwithstanding it was so frequently in danger of
being utterly abolished and destroyed. Origin, in his fourth book against
Celsus, mentioning their being cast out of Jerusalem, to which their worship
was annexed, deprived of their temple and sacrifice, their religious rites and
solemnities, and scattered over the face of the earth, ventures to assure them
with a face of confidence, that they would never be re-established, since they
had committed that horrid crime against the Savior of the world. This was a
bold assertion in the good man, who knew how this people had been so
wonderfully re-established in former times, when they were almost swallowed up,
and in the most desperate state of desolation, as in their deliverance out of
the Babylonish captivity, and the oppressions of Antiochus Epiphanes: nay he
knew that within less than an hundred years before his own time, the Jews had
made such a powerful effort for their reestablishment under Barchocab, in the
reign of Adrian, as shook the whole Roman empire: but he founded his opinion on
a sure word of prophecy, and on the punishment they had so justly incurred; and
we find by a long experience of fifteen hundred years, that he was not
mistaken, nay, that his opinion gathers strength daily, since the Jews are now
at a greater distance from any probability of such a re-establishment, than
they were when Origin wrote.

IN the primitive times, the Christian religion showed its full force and
efficacy on the minds of men, and many examples demonstrated what great and
generous souls it was capable of producing. It exalted and refined its
proselytes to a very high degree of perfection, and set them far above the
pleasures, and even the pains, of this life. It strengthened the infirmity, and
broke the fierceness of human nature. It lifted up the minds of the ignorant to
the knowledge and worship of him that made them, and inspired the vicious with
a rational devotion, a strict purity of heart, and an unbounded love to their
fellow creatures. In proportion as it spread through the world, it seemed to
change mankind into another species of beings. No sooner was a convert
initiated into it, but by an easy figure he became a new man, and both acted
and looked upon himself as one re-generated and born a second time into another
state of existence.

BUT we find no argument made a stronger impression on the minds of these
eminent Pagan converts, for strengthening their faith in the history of our
Savior, than the predictions relating to him in those old prophetic writings,
which were deposited amongst the hands of the greatest enemies to Christianity,
and owned by them to have been extant many ages before his appearance. The
learned Heathen converts were astonished to see the whole history of their
Savior's life published before he was born, and to find that the evangelists
and prophets, in their accounts of the Messiah, differed only in point of time,
the one foretelling what should happen to him, and the other describing those
very particulars at what had actually happened. This our Savior himself was
pleased to make use of as the strongest argument of his being the promised
Messiah, and without it would hardly have reconciled his disciples to the
ignominy of his death, as in that remarkable passage which mentions his
conversation with the two disciples, on the day of his resurrection, St. Luke
xxiv.13. to the end. Besides the Heathen converts after having traveled
through all human learning, and fortified their minds with the knowledge of
arts and sciences, were particularly qualified to examine these prophecies with
great care and impartiality, and without prejudice or propossession; so as to
establish in their minds the firm belief of the truth and excellency of the
Christian religion, beyond the least degree of a doubt concerning it.

FINIS.
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
WILLIAM Abbot, John B. Ackley, Jacob Adams, Baltimore. John Aitken, Hugh
Aitken, Baltimore. Lawrence Alwine, Joseph Anderson, James F. Armstrong,
Trenton. Joseph Ashbridge, William Ashmead, Frederick Ax, Germantown.
B.
William Bailey, Baltimore. John Ball, do. Godfrey Baker, Margaret Barclay,
Lavallin Barry, Baltimore. John Barnes, Thomas S. Bartram, Christleib Bartling,
John Batton, George Baxley, Baltimore. John Beck, Germantown. Thomas Bedford,
William G. Bell, Stephen Bennett, Richard Bevan, Baltimore. George Bickerton,
Mary Bickerton, Peter Bier, Baltimore. Thomas Biggs, James Blaid, William
Blair, Mary Bloomb, William Bombarger, David Bostwick, Baltimore. Adam
Breitenoder, do. Daniel Brewton, Thomas Britain, Jacob Brombarton, James Boss,
Thomas Brown, Francis Brown, William Brown, Baltimore. Daniel Broeutigam,
Joseph Brumly, Trenton. Anthony Butler, David Burtnitt.
C.
Ann Calderwood, Elizabeth Camern, John Carey, John Carey, Baltimore, Thomas S.
Carmalt, Caesar Carpenter, William Carpenter, Mary Carson, Solomon Carter,
Baltimore. Stephen Carry, Trenton. Cynthia Cash, Charles Cecil, John Chalmer,
Baltimore. James Chalmers, do. George Chambers, George R. Chapman, John Clark,
Ann Clay, William Cleram, Baltimore. David Close, John Coats, William Coats,
Benjamin Collins, Isaac Collins, Trenton. Charles Constable* Baltimore. William
Connen, James Coulling, Baltimore. John Cox, Mrs. Cox, John Crider, William
Crampton, Jacob Creamer, Samuel Crowell, Jacob Cruse, Baltimore.
D.
Benjamin Davies, 2 copies. Lot Davis, Noah Davis, Thomas Davis, Thomas Davis,
Bordentown. Richard Davis, Bordentown. Francis Dawes, Baltimore. John Dawkens,
Matthias Day, Trenton. George Decker, Baltimore. John Delavau, Lewis Demer,
Isabella Dexter, Morris Dickenson, Peter Diffenderss^r, Baltimore. Samuel
Dillworth, J. H. Dobelbower, 6 copies. William Dorsing, Baltimore. John
Dougherty, do. John Douglass, John Drean, Germantown. Dubery, Oliver Dubyg,
Baltimore. Henry Dukehart, do. Aaron Dunham, Trenton. Phebe Dunkin, Mary
Durberow, Christian Duy, Germantown.
E.
Adam Eckfeldt, Jacob Edwards, Mary Ellis, Charles Ellis, Burlington. Mecajah
Ellis, do. Benjamin Engle, Charles Engle, Germantown. Oliver Evans, Peter
Evans, Jacob Everhart, Baltimore.
F.
John Farrell, William Faris, Baltimore. Casper Farner, Christian Fater, Joseph
Fearon, Joseph Feinour, George Furguson, William Finn, Baltimore. Henry Fithz,
Baltimore. Elinor Florence, John Fornance, John Fowler, William Fowler,
Baltimore. Frederick Foy, Baltimore. John Frowert, Joshua Freeman, Jacob Fry,
William Furriar.
G.
James Gamble, Peter Gardener, John Garralt, Cornelius Garrison, Baltimore.
Samuel Gano, Germantown. Samuel Garrigus, Samuel Gartley, Gilbert Gaw, John
Geastler, Mary George, Mary George, Casper Geygar, William Giles, Samuel
Goldthwait, Baltimore. Frederick Grapevine, do. Robert M. Graham, Robert Gray,
Jesse Groves, Jacob Grubb, Andrew Grub, Baltimore.
H.
John G. Halzel, Frederick Halley, Baltimore. William Hahn, Matthew Hale,
Godfrey Hammet, Thomas Hammersley, Baltimore. Mrs. Hardy, Jane Harkins, Paul
Hartman, Baltimore. Lewis Heart, do. Timothy Harrison, James Hay, Henry Hegart,
Frederick Heimberger, Rev. F. H. Chapter Helmuth, John Helm, Baltimore. George
Hess, John Heyl, Thomas Hickson, Baltimore. Mrs Hinton, Peter Hill, Burlington.
P. Hoffman, Baltimore. Arthur Hodge, 8 copies. John Hognar, Baltimore. Jeremiah
Hornkett, Isaac Holmes, Mary Hopkinson, Isaac T. Hopper, Hornbey, Baltimore.
Mrs. Houston. Peter Howard, Caleb Hughes, Sarah Hunter, John Hutchinson,
I. and J.
Felix Imbert, William Innes, Thomas Jaquett, Richard Jones, Baltimore, 3
copies. William Jones, John Justice.
K.
John Keefer, Henry Keerl, Baltimore. William Kell, do. Abraham Keller, Andrew
Kennedy, Frederick Kinsell, Baltimore. Joseph Key, Derick Keyser, Baltimore.
William Keyser, Germantown. Charles Keyser, do. Mary Khmer, Emm^^ Kimber, Jacob
King. Abraham K^ntzing, Benjamin Kite, John Kunckel, Cornelius Kollock, James
Kooken.
L.
Ca^harine Lambeth, Mary Landle, John Lap. Germantown. Frederick Lauderman,
Baltimore. Thomas Lawrence Sen. Bordentown. Thomas Lawrence Junr. do. J.
Lawson, James Law, Baltimore. John Lee. do. William Leibert, Germantown. Samson
Levy, Wal^er Lyle, Phil^p Li^eburner, George Lindenberger, Baltimore. John
Lind^ay, John Linvill, Baltimore. Philip Litteg. do. Peter Little. do. Doc.
Miles Littlejohn, do. William Long, do. Henry Long, do. Joseph Lippencott, 3
copies. William Lowdon, Burlington.
M.
Peter Mackenhammer, Baltimore. Mrs. Ma^il, Rebecca Maguire, James Martin, John
Martin, Baltimore. Benjamin Marrott, Charles Massey, John M^ss, Baltimore.
Joseph Masters, Thomas Matthias, Susan Mayers, Rev. John Meder, 2 copies.
Wheeler Meredith, Peter Messer. Gilbert Middleton, Baltimore, John Miller,
Frederick Miller, Baltimore. Peter Miller, do. Michael Miller, William Miller,
Edmond Milne, James M'Alpin, Robert M'Clelen, Hugh M'Curdy, Baltimore. Donald
M'Donald, Thomas M'Elroy, John M'Euan, Jeremiah M'Ever, John M'Farren,
Alexander M'Ilvain, Baltimore. Samuel M'Intire, William M'Ilhenny, Alexander
M'Kim, Baltimore. Mrs. M'Nair, William M'Neiles, Robert Moffit, Jacob
Monnington, Burlington. Maurice Moynihan, merchant. Elisha Moore, Jacob Moore,
Baltimore. John Moore, Jane Moore, Hugh Morrison, John Morgan, Baltimore. Jesse
Morgan, do. Joseph Morgan, Trenton. Richard Mosley, John Moulder, Edward
Moystan, Stephen Moylan, John Murphy, Baltimore. Thomas Murray, Godolph Myer.
N.
Henry Newman, Baltimore. Jacob Newman, do. Ceagan Newport, Samuel Nightlinger,
John Nicholson, Charles Nice, Germantown. Susannah Nice, do. George Norton.
O.
Samuel Oakford, William Oakford, George Ogde^, John Oldham, Baltimore. John
Omensitter, Germantown. Hannah Osborne, Henry Overman, William Owen, Baltimore,
^^ copies.
P.
William T. Pa^^^er, -- Pearl, Henry Penner, Israel Pierce, Baltimore. Joseph
Psei^^or, Joseph Pilgrim, Baltimore. Ephraim Pitman, Burlington. David Poe,
Baltimore. James Points, do. James Pollo^k, John Porter, John Potter,
Baltimore. Isaac Price.
R.
John Rain, Nathaniel Rain, Emmanuel Randollar, -- Raser, Joseph Redman,
Conrad Reinicker, Baltimore. George Rein, do. William Reynolds, do. Mary
Riddle, Rebecca Riding, William Riley, do. Jacob Ritter, Rachel Robertson, A.
J. Robinson, Ephraim Robinson, Baltimore. John Robinson, do. Christopher
Raborg, do. Abraham Rog^^, John Rose, William Ross, Jacob Rothrock, Baltimore,
Jacob Rothrock, junr. do. Matthias Roush, Edward Rowley, Thomas Rutter,
Baltimore.
S.
William Saltar, Bordentown. Samuel Sanford, Baltimore. John H. Scattergood,
John Schnider, Henry Shroeder, Baltimore. Andrew Scott, Abraham Sellers,
Baltimore. William Sellers, Clement Sewell, Henry Sharpnack, Germantown. Doctor
Shaw, do. William Shepherd, William Shepherd, William Shippen, M^ses Shirley,
Henry Shroup, John Shults, Baltimore. William Slater, do. James Sloane, do.
Thomas Smarting, Baltimore. Edward Smith, do. Job Smith, do. William Smith,
Trenton, James Smith, junr. Frederick Smith, William Smith, Peggy Smith.
William Smiley, Joseph Snyd^r, Casper Snyder, George Snyder, George Span,
William Sp^lding, Baltimore. David Sparks, John Springer* Amos Stackhouse,
Melchoir Stein^^, William Stee^^, William Stewart, William Stenson, Baltimore.
Philip Stimel, Elizabeth Stockard, John Stock^on, Burlington. George Stout,
Baltimore.
T.
Robert Taggart, Joseph R. Tatem, Peter Teale, Trenton. Benjamin Th^w, David
Thompson, John Thomson. John Thompson, Baltimore. William Thompson, do. Robert
Thompson. d^. George Thornburgh, do. Benjamin Thornton, John Tinges, Baltimore.
Jacob Toy, Doctor Treat, Burlington. Barbara T^^huly, Baltimore.
V.
John Vandergrift, Trenton. William Vanneman, Philip Varner.
W.
John Walker, James Walker, Thomas Walker, -- Walker, Baltimore, Jacob Wall.
do. George Wall, Baltimore. George Wall, Jacob Walteber, Thomas Watkins, --
Way, Nancy We^ss, John Welsh, Baltimore. Godfrey Wheeler, David Whiteford,
Baltimore. Thomas White, John Wiggins, Trenton, Robert Wiley, Conrad Wiles,
John Williams, Trenton. Mary Wilmington, Jacob Wiltberger, Francis Wit,
Trenton. -- Wood, William Woods, Baltimore. Ogden Woodruff, Trenton. George
Wolf, Lewis Wolf, Henry Worthington, Baltimore. Fretwell Wright, Trenton,
Joseph Wright, Thomas Wright.
Y.
Engle Yeiser, Baltimore. Francis Yorkson, James Young.
Z.
William Zane.
Direction to the Binder, for placing the Plates.
FRONTISPIECE, to face the title Joseph receiving instructions from an Angel,
to fly with Jesus and Mary into Egypt PAGE. 20 The Flight of Joseph into Egypt
PAGE. 20 Christ overturning the tables of the Money changers, etc. PAGE. 35
Christ preaching to the people of Judea PAGE. 120 Christ restoring Bartemas to
fight PAGE. 131 The Prodigal son PAGE. 155 The parable of the rich man and
Lazarus PAGE. 159 Christ cleansing the ten persons affected with Leprosy PAGE.
162 The conference of Christ with the Pharisees, concerning the tribute money
PAGE. 187 Christ giving instructions to his disciples PAGE. 224 Peter denying
his Lord PAGE. 239 Peter's repentance for having shamefully denied his Savior
in the High-priest's house PAGE. 240 Judas throwing down the thirty pieces of
silver PAGE. 244 Herod having examined our blessed Savior, sends him back to
Pilate PAGE. 247 Pilate washing his hands in water, to show his innocence of
the blood of Christ PAGE. 249 The Roman soldiers scourging our Savior previous
to his being delivered to the Jews PAGE. 249 Christ crowned with thorns by the
Roman soldiers PAGE. 249 The body of Christ laid in the sepulcher PAGE. 261
Christ after his resurrection, appearing in the character of a gardener to Mary
Magdalene PAGE. 265 The four Evangelists PAGE. 289 The Angel presenting the
book to St. John PAGE. 298 The Angel delivering Peter out of prison PAGE. 360
St. Andrew, St. Bartholomew, St. Barnabas, and St. James the Less PAGE. 367 St.
Philip, St. Simon, St. Matthias, and St.Jude PAGE. 377

