ADVICE FROM A LADY OF QUALITY TO HER CHILDREN, IN THE LAST STAGE OF A
LINGERING ILLNESS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH, BY S. GLASS, D.D. F.R.S. Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Britannick Majesty.

VOL. I.

Printed and sold by S. HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, Boston. 1796.

TO THE QUEEN.
May it please your Majesty,
THE ambitious desire of seeing your Majesty's name prefixed to this little
work may perhaps, in some degree, be excused, on the following considerations:
The first is, that this circumstance will immediately excite that prejudice in
its favor, which there could be no hope of its receiving from the name of the
translator: The other is, that, appearing under the patronage of your Majesty,
its power of doing good will be considerably enlarged.

WHATEVER influence vanity may have on the former of these motives, the latter
cannot, I hope, be blamed. And if these pages should appear calculated to
inculcate the principles, or to encourage the practice of VIRTUE, no other
argument, I am confident, need be urged to induce your Majesty to suffer them
to come forth under the sanction of your illustrious auspices.

A LADY of high rank, instructing her children in virtue and religion, and
forming their tender minds to whatsoever may render them wise and good, seems,
for very obvious reasons, particularly entitled to your Majesty's gracious
attention. But though the resemblance betwixt your Majesty and the principal
character before you, so far as her parental solicitude extends, is too
striking to escape our notice; yet do we thankfully reflect, that in one
respect a very essential difference may be observed: this lady, MADAM, employed
only the uncertain intervals of sickness, and the anxious moments of an
expiring life, in the discharge of that important duty, which is well known to
engage your Majesty's best hours of youth, and health, and vigor.

MAY your Majesty happily persevere in so good a work! to the edification of
your amiable Offspring in every princely virtue -- to the great delight of your
loyal and affectionate subjects -- to the furtherance of their Royal
Highnesses' present and future happiness -- and, above all, to the glory and
praise of GOD!

SUCH is the prayer of thousands; and, among the rest, of one, who presumes to
subscribe himself, with all imaginable duty and respect,

MADAM, Your MAJESTY'S Most devoted, Most obedient, and Most humble Servant,
SAMUEL GLASS.
Greenford, (England) Nov. 16, 1778.
THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE TO THE READER.
IN one of Pope Ganganelli's letters, the following work is honorably
mentioned, as being a complete treatise on Education. From the moment of my
seeing it thus spoken of, I determined to examine its pretensions to so
favorable a character. The pains it has cost me, to render it of general use
to my countrymen, may be considered as the best proof of my opinion in this
respect.

I can truly say, I have read the book with inexpressible delight: the
involuntary tear has more than once been witness to my approbation of that
tenderness of affection, with which it abounds. And the hours, which I have
most agreeably, and I trust not unprofitably, passed in the society of this
incomparable mother, have made me ample amends for the trouble I have taken, in
endeavoring to do justice to the dignity of her sentiments, the warmth of her
affection, and the pathetic engergy of her expressions.

For myself, I claim no more merit from the following translation, than that
which is due to a good intention. It is possible, that many may profit by these
excellent instructions, who are unacquainted with the language in which they
were written; and some even of those, who are acquainted with it, may yet read
them with greater ease and benefit in their own tongue.

A close comparison with the original, I foresee, may be unfavourable to my
reputation as a translator; but it cannot injure it as an honest man. For,
without adhering with too servile an attachment to my author, I have
endeavored to express the sentiments before me as exactly as possible, except
only in a very few passages; where, for obvious reasons, it was necessary to
give a different turn to the expressions of this excellent woman. In all other
instances, I have cause to think meanly of myself, in proportion as I have
departed from the original; as nothing can be more pure, more instructive, or
more affecting, than the genuine dictates of that heart, which gave utterance
to these most interesting conferences.

If, upon the whole, the following work be read with candor, the translator
has no doubt of the reader's indulgence: if otherwise, he has little to hope
for, either with respect to the reader or himself. He who is desirous to profit
by the instructions here presented to him, will be more disposed to transcribe
them into his own conduct, than to criticize on the precise terms in which they
are conveyed.

There never was a period, in which such an address to the prevailing manners
of the age was more necessary than the present. It will be a matter of
unspeakable satisfaction to me, if the following pages should lay the least
restraint on any of the sons or daughters of pleasure; and if, withdrawing
their attention from the pursuit of a phantom, a bubble, and toy, they should
direct it to those objects, which religion recommends, which reason approves,
and which virtue and good sense universally applayd and admire.

S. G.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WE here present you with the pure effusions of parental tenderness: as filial
affection preserved them from being lost, so a desire to promote the benefit of
mankind has induced me to make them public.

THIS excellent woman having herself given us the history of her life in her
first discourse, we shall only add, that she had every advantage of person and
understanding; and that nothing can be more affecting, than that display of
female delicacy and manly sense, which appear in these conferences with her
children.

WE here see a mother, elevated as it were above herself, and insensible of the
miseries of sickness, and the horrors of the grave; while she is inculcating in
the minds of her children the duties which they owe to GOD, to their countr^
and to society. Her discourse is chiefly directed to those two of her sons, who
had engaged in a military life; in one of these conferences, she addresses
herself particularly to her third son, who had dedicated himself to the church:
another is confined to the instruction of her daughter. In all of them, her
admonitions are enforced with tears, and interrupted by sighs; they are the
natural dictates of the tenderest affection, which no bodily infirmities could
prevail with her to suppress. If the reader finds not in this work those
episodes, or that variety which distinguishes a romance, it is only because
Truth wants none of these embellishments: she needs only to be seen, to command
our attention and our admiration: the voice of nature is heard throughout the
work, and the eloquence here displayed is the forcible language of the heart.

THE evening being made choice of as the properest season for instruction, we
find the work divided into EVENING CONFERENCES. The whole was faithfully
collected by the industry of an AMANUENSIS, so placed as to be an ear-witness
of all that passed. Had not this care been taken, the world would have been
deprived of an invaluable system of education, which no one can read with
inattention, and few without improvement.

THE reader will at once perceive, that though the expressions of our admirable
instructress are divested of ornament and art, she was a person of superior
abilities, and great knowledge.

IT were a tribute justly due to the memory of such a lady, to transmit her
name, with all the respect which is due to it, to posterity. But as her
humility induced her to wish she might not be recorded after her death, we
think ourselves obliged to do violence to our inclinations, in compliance with
her last request.

NOR are we at all apprehensive, that this concealment will impeach the
authenticity of the work: it is conceived in such terms, as to convince any
judicious reader, that such sentiments could only be founded in nature. Here
are no brilliant conceits, no affected phrases; but the artless expressions of
maternal affection: he who does not yield to the force of such evidence as
this, must be considered as one who cannot distinguish what is really the
language of nature; or as one who never yet experienced the power of
sentimental affection.

PROBABILITY does not always go hand in hand with truth; but they are happily
united in this work. What indeed can be conceived more natural, than that a
tender mother, anxious for her children's welfare, should take advantage of her
gradually declining health to set before them the vanities of the world; and to
give them the best directions for the regulation of their conduct? Let any man
enter seriously into himself; listen to the language of his own heart -- he
will soon find, that those noble sentiments, which occur in the following
pages, could never have been the offspring of imagination. The life of this
incomparable mother was but too short, as it did not exceed thirty-nine years;
but she will yet live in these her genuine conferences, which no doubt will be
watered with the reader's tears.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.
VOLUME I.
Conf. 1. History of her own Life, Page. 1 Conf. 2. On Order, Page. 16 Conf. 3.
On true Patriotism, Page. 24 Conf. 4. On Social Duties, Page. 34 Conf. 5. On
Virtue, Page. 41 Conf. 6. Further Instructions on the same Subject, Page. 43
Conf. 7. On Pleasure, Page. 50 Conf. 8. On Ambition, Page. 59 Conf. 9. On
Generosity, Page. 67 Conf. 10. On Female Conduct, Page. 75
VOLUME II.
Conf. 11. On Study, Page. 84 Conf. 12. On the Clerical Character, Page. 92
Conf. 13. On Pride, Page. 97 Conf. 14. On Friendship. Page. 113 Conf. 15. On
the Court Page. 121 Conf. 16. On the Love of Truth, Page. 128 Conf. 17. On
Brotherly Love, Page. 134 Conf. 18. On Religion, Page. 139 Conf. 19. On the
Vanity of the World, Page. 152 Conf. 20. On Relative Duty, Page. 161 Conf. 21.
On Kindness to Dome^ic, Page. 163
ADVICE FROM A LADY OF QUALITY TO HER CHILDREN.
CONFERENCE I. The History of her own Life.
THE very weak state of health, in which I have now been eighteen months,
forbids me to hope for any long continuation of my life I have determined
therefore, my dear children, to call yo^ together, as well to discharge my
obligations, as to amuse my sufferings. By the loss of your father, my duties
as a mother seem to be redoubled; I am called upon to supply to you the want of
his excellent advice, and to labor to render you worthy inheritors of his
glory and his virtues.

YOU are not insensible of the obligations laid upon you, to show mankind from
what ancestors you derive your origin. Their history you are sufficiently
acquainted with, to know WHO they were, and HO^ they distinguished themselves:
but perhaps their example may less sensibly affect your minds, than my advice:
especially if you consider, that it is your best friend, who is now conversing
with you; one, whose instructions are the dictates of affection, and the result
of a tender regard for your happiness. The only books, from which my precepts
shall be drawn, are experience, a knowledge of the world, and the convictions
of my own heart.

DESCENDED from a family not less distinguished by its misfortunes than its
honors, I was left an orphan at ten years of age. My education fell under the
direction of my father's sister; whose inclination, as well as rank, drew her
frequently to court. No time was lost in furnishing me with masters of every
kind. I soon became an object of attention; and my friends took care to
announce me possessed of a considerable fortune. The world presented itself to
my view in the most brilliant colors; and with singular delight I inde^ged the
deception. A succession of amusements served to stifle reflection; and I seemed
to live for no other purpose than to pursue my pleasures.

SOMETIMES my soul, not quite as yet debased, seemed desirous to soar above
these enchanting trifles; but vanity and dissipation soon hurried me away, and
effaced the impressions of reflection. How far from real happiness is a life of
subjection to prevailing fashions; from which it has neither opportunity, nor
resolution to withdraw itself! In vain do we perceive the miseries, which
intrude themselves amidst the pleasures of the world; in vain do we receive
instructions, by which we might be both affected and improved: we still
continue enslaved to our passions, and eagerly embrace the phantom of delusion.
I resembled those travelers, who, knowing the right way, yet thinking to
shorten their journey, turn aside from it, and are lost.

ALL that were about me, conspired to fill my mind with false ideas; their
language was that of flattery and deceit (...) they either concealed from me my
faults, or they only corrected such as might serve to render me ridiculous.
Scarce had I begun the day, when my attendants made it their business to
inspire me with a love of idleness and pleasure: one part of it was spent in
decorating my person with all the ornaments of dress; and the other, in
receiving the rewards of my unprofitable industry. I was admired, in proportion
to my external appearance; and this admiration served only to feed my vanity.

I NEVER shall forget, that, being one evening quite overcome with that
satiety, which destroys the satisfaction of the votaries of pleasure, I opened
by chance a volume of moral essays, a few (...) of which silled my soul with
confusion and remorse: " Either, said I to myself. I am a dupe to the life
which I now lead, or this writer is an ^gious impostor."

THESE reflections began to disquiet me; when I was informed, that it was time
for me to go to a ball, to which I had been invited: my guardian, who took me
with her in her coach, observed that I was unusually pensive; for which she
seriously reproved me. Though she was in many respects an excellent woman, she
was almost wholly engaged in the pursuit of amusements: she repeated her
censures, when we entered the ball-room, in which every thing appeared truly
magnificent; the elegant taste of the D -- ss of -- had brought together
persons of the most eminent rank, beauty, and accomplishments.

TOO soon the instruments of music, and harmony of the voices, made me forget
my Monitor, and all his reasoning: my heart, again seduced by pleasure, quickly
persuaded me that such austere morality was calculated only to fill us with
melancholy: I danced with some degree of elegance, and the praises bestowed
upon me were excessive; in short, I returned home more enchanted than ever,
with the world.

WE crossed the park, which a judicious distribution of lamps had so
illuminated, as to give it almost the glare of noonday. The crowd of people
about us, the variety of faces and dresses, an unrestrained festivity, which
every where prevailed, all served to seduce my soul with stronger delusions.
One needs no more than such a scene as this, to ruin one's taste forever. It
fills the mind with the vast idea of the world and its pleasures; and when once
the heart has received these first impressions, it is next to impossible to
efface them.

SIX years passed away in a continual round of pleasure and diversions; at the
end of which, I was married to your much honored father. Some circumstances,
fortunate for me, gave HIM the preference in my regard to several young
noblemen, who had professed the strongest attachment to me. Had any one of
THESE succeeded in his addresses, I should have been wedded to folly and
repentance; it was my happier lot to be connected with discretion and
politeness.

WE must needs appear with eclat on our marriage, and i^ this respect my
natural turn of mind was of great service to me; it made me as splendid, as I
was vain: And as our income was such as enabled me to indulge my taste for
show, I gave the reins to it without restraint. I kept a sort of court, in
which I presided as a sovereign princess: My courtiers were lavish of their
praises, they were suppliant for favors, and my husband and I were considered
as beings superior to the rest of mankind in happiness and honors.

A WAR with the house of Austria deprived me of your father, for a time: He
parted from me with that heroic spirit, which distinguished his character to
the latest moment of his life; while in his absence I gave myself up to sorrow
and regret. His letters, however, comforted me; and no sonner was my peace of
mind restored, than my taste for pleasure returned. The opera of THETIS was
performed, at which I was present; and then it was, that my fondness for
public diversions resumed its dominion in my heart. I now put myself forward
to sit in judgment on every new theatrical performance; and was the first to
admire the decorations of the stage. The world is like a troubled sea, whose
waves always carry us away much farther than we at first intended to go.

HOWEVER, notwithstanding my allowed taste for whatever might gratify the
senses, or encourage vanity; I was generally considered as a pattern of
prudence and discretion: People were astonished to see a young woman, only
twenty years old, with any other passion than a love for dress, and show, and
diversions. The world cannot conceive it possible, that while we are gliding
down the stream of luxury and pleasure, we are, in the eye of reason, objects
of pity.

THE hints, which I had received from my friendly Monitor, whose writings I had
only cursorily dipped into, were perpetually obtruding themselves; but, like
those gentle breezes, which ruffle the surface of the waters, they only served
to glance upon my heart. What surprised me was, that a very discreet relation
of mine, to whom I had mentioned this author, strictly forbade me looking into
it. But this she did, as she many years afterward declared, merely to excite
my eagerness to read it, and attach me more strongly to my book. She well knew,
that prohibition serves only to stimulate; and that to interdict, is often the
surest means of fixing our affections on that which is forbidden us. Her
stratagem succeeded; I was never at rest, 'till I became possessed of these
essays, and 'till I had read them again and again. His reflections gave me some
uneasiness; but I was so far from being amended by them, that I only compared
this emotion to the transient effect of a tragical representation on the stage.
I was affected for a moment, and that was all.

AT length, your father returned from the war, covered with wounds and laurels:
The compliments which were paid to him at court, and the honors which were
heaped upon him, occasioned a second diversion of my thoughts, which plunged me
deeper than ever in the gulf of dissipation.

MY first study was, to be distinguished by the elegance of my entertainments;
and in this I was very successful; my exquisite taste was generally admired,
and every one expressed the highest satisfaction. What an encouragement was
this to a woman, whose only ambition was to shine in her sphere, to please and
be applauded! You will not wonder, that our expenses were excessive; and that,
to support our vanity, we diminished our substance, and consequently your
inheritance.

YOU see, my dear children, that I lay open to you, without reserve, all the
circumstances of my life; and that my language is that of one, whose heart
dictates nothing but tenderness and sincerity. Where my conduct has been
faulty, you will, I am sure, be the first to forgive: It may, perhaps, prove a
fortunate circumstance for YOU, that I, who have been first seduced into the
ways of vanity and folly, am the better enabled to point out to you that path,
which it will be your wisdom and happiness to pursue.

CERTAIN it is, that this abridgment of our fortune wrought some change in my
manner of life: Your father again left me in obedience to the orders of the
court, which sent him into ITALY; and I endeavored to amuse myself in his
absence by reading our best historians.

THERE with delight I found the name, which you bear, mentioned with honor in
the French and English history; there saw I those virtues displayed by your
ancestors, which I hope it will be the study of your lives to imitate.

ABOUT this time, my friendship commenced with the Countess of S --, an
excellent lady, of whom the hand of death has lately deprived the world; in
which she seemed to live for no other purpose, than to do good. Her
conversation charmed me; her prudence delighted me; there was no opportunity of
instruction, which she did not improve; and this she did with so much ease and
affability, and in a manner so natural and agreeable, that the most
inconsiderate could not but attend to her: She often urged to me the necessity
of uniting in the same character the Philosopher and the Christian. Here I must
acknowledge, not without taking shame to myself, that the pleasures of the
world left me nothing more than a fruitless desire of being what I ought to be.
It was continually interposing itself between the conviction of my judgment,
and the propensities of my will, 'till my mind was utterly distracted: I would,
and I would not; and my existence was nothing more than a life perpetually
interrupted with doubt and perplexity.

IN this strange situation did your father find me at his return. The King
received him with that gracious air, which often serves instead of more
substantial favors; and which is in fact equivalent to a recompense. Every one
partook of my joy; and dragged me out, as it were, in spite of myself, into the
midst of pleasures and diversions. Paris and Versailles, each in its turn,
beheld me wholly engaged in doing honor to my husband on account of his good
fortune. Pleasure and ambition are cruel tyrants; they leave us not a moment to
ourselves; and when they have filled us with hope, they almost always abandon
us to disappointment.

YOUR father, though much engaged in the business of the world, had his
intervals of solitude and retirement: He sometimes pleaded indisposition, that
he might apply himself to the study of his profession; and, as I imagined, to
amuse himself by a change of employment. He found, that the world has every
thing that is good in it, except true wisdom.

THE restless spirit of mankind renewed the war; and again obliged me to live
in a state of separation from a husband, who was dearer to me than myself. His
valor, which rendered him insensible of danger, procured him at the same time
the honor -- of being grievously wounded, and of being made a
Lieutenant General. Joy and solicitude by turns took possession of my heart;
and in this anxious state I continued, 'till I was fully assured of his perfect
recovery.

THIS advancement of my husband revived my passion for the vanities of the
world: I now again felt myself inclined to taste largely of the pleasures of
the court. I hired one house at Versailles, and another at Fontainbieau; and my
taste for luxury, together with my natural vanity, led me to fit them up in the
most expensive manner. I piqued myself on having more elegant furniture than
any woman of my rank, and on having my table more sumptuously supplied. I
became proverbial for the magnificence of my entertainments; and happy was the
man, who could be present at them. Persons of fashion assembled at my house
with eagerness; and each endeavored to distinguish himself by the utmost
exertion of pleasantry and humor.

I NEVER found myself so far removed from wisdom, as when I was surrounded by
the most celebrated wits: I heard nothing from them but sallies of mirth, which
interrupted all serious thoughts; and such flighty conversation, as served only
to stifle reflection. Our decisions were peremptory on every subject, and were
wholly influenced by fashion and by prejudice.

THUS was my mind entirely taken up in the pursuit of folly; instead of being
employed, as it ought to have been, in attending to your education.

THE prevalence of custom, my dear children, had taught me to think, that I
ought not to have you with me more than a few days in a year; with which custom
I could n^ comply, without doing violence to my tenderness and ^ion for you.
Instead of endeavoring to inform myself, what school was under the best and
wisest regulation, my inquiry was, which was the most genteel; and I was much
more desirous that you should form honorable connexions, than that you should
receive good instructions: Thus did I secretly encourage your vanity, while
your IMPROVEMENT ought to have been my principal care. When we cannot amend our
faults, the least we can do is to acknowledge them: And do not think that I
offer any violence to myself in thus confessing my folly, and indiscretion: It
is my greatest comfort, that I am giving you this surest evidence of my
repentance. If my affection for you were less than it is, I should speak to you
with less sincerity; it is the compunction I feel, for having listened more
attentively to the voice of custom than to that of my duty, which extorts from
me this undisguised profession of my misconduct; in short, my extreme
solicitude for you, banishes every selfish consideration from my mind.

THE conduct of your father distinguished him now more than ever. He was
deservedly esteemed a most accomplished soldier; insomuch that I dare venture
to assert, without fearing the imputation of partiality or ostentation, that
the dignity of Field-Marshal, to which he was advanced, was no more than a
distinction due to his superior merit as an officer. He saw himself elevated to
the highest point of honor in his profession; at a time of life, wherein he
was very capable of enjoying the fruits of his promotion; being at that time
not fifty years old.

I WAS too fond of gaiety and pleasure, not to surpass on this occasion all my
former instances of luxury and expense. Balls, illuminations and entertainments
of every kind, conspired to celebrate that happy event, which filled my heart
with joy; and nothing was now to be seen around me, but trophie^ erected to my
vanity: I was wholly taken up in going from one circle to another, eager to
receive congratulation and applause from every quarter. But how inconstant is
all earthly glory! alas! your father died within three years after his
promotion to the honor of a Marshal: And my heart, overpowered by this
dreadful stroke, seemed to go down with him even into the grave. He died like a
Christian philosopher; full of loyalty to his King, full of tenderness for his
wife and children; and most earnestly desiring to be admitted into the presence
of GOD. He would have been better pleased, had his last breath been drawn in
the service of his country; and had he been permitted to make compensation with
his life, for the honors which his sovereign had heaped upon him.

THE first year of my widowhood was wholly given up to the effusions of grief;
to an utter disrelish for every kind of satisfaction, and to an entire
indifference about myself and every thing around me. I thought of nothing, but
a most affectionate husband, who was now no more; and this sad idea served only
to fill my soul with the most melancholy reflections.

I COULD then have readily answered for myself, that the world would never more
take possession of my heart. But the world is not content with being a master
only: It is a TYRANT, which holds its vassals in fetters of iron; from which in
vain I endeavored to release myself: My former habits resumed their empire in
my heart; and though I did not forget my husband, I forgot all my resolutions.
I now appeared a fashionable widow; wholly taken up by the pleasures of the
world, and all its vanities. My greatest comfort in this moment of reflection
is, that I never could be prevailed with to listen to any proposals of a second
marriage. I had too much respect for the memory of your father, ever to consent
to lose his name; and I had too much regard for you his children, ever to
endanger your welfare and happiness by such a step. This double attachment was
superior to every other consideration; I felt myself altogether devoted to my
children; who I feared might be less the objects of my attention, if I
transferred my affections to any other: This single circumstance was sufficient
to determine me. Heaven grant, that you may make me the best return for this
sacrifice, not merely by your thanks, but by the tenderest regard for my
happiness. I have not a more sincere wish, than to excite your affection; and
as I am truly sensible of the full extent of my own, no one surely can blame me
for earnestly desiring, that our love for each other should be reciprocal.

WERE I so unhappy as to discover in either of you an abatement of affection
toward me, I should remind you, that there is not one of you, whose birth was
not almost the occasion of my death; and that the more I suffered in bringing
you into the world, the more closely is my heart attached to you: This only
knows to what degree you have hitherto engaged its affections; and I can truly
say, that, amidst the dissipations of a life of pleasure, I never felt any REAL
satisfaction but in seeing you thus sitting round me. Happy moment! the only
one which can afford me a gleam of consolation for a loss, which I can never
cease to lament.

BUT, to return to the world; which continually enslaved my affections, and
which, whilst I was engaged in the gratification of my passion for pleasure,
suffered me not to rest, day or night. I had sacrificed to it the best moments
of my life; the hours destined to calm repose were devoted to it; and, on the
return of every day, fresh snares were laid for me; and new temptations offered
to engage me in its service. I found myself absolutely subject to its caprice;
I was present at every public assembly; I had a high opinion of its
extravagancies; I studied all its refinements; I commended only what the world
approved; I rejected only what the world condemned: I was, in short, as much a
slave to its commands, as one who has no power to move or act, without the
permission of his master.

SOMETIMES, quite wearied with its importunity, I wished to shake off the yoke;
and to enter into a serious examination or my heart; of which it had too long
maintained an entire disposal: But such transient inclinations only served to
convince me of my weakness. This sufficiently appeared, when after some days of
strict retirement, which should have been the commencement of a new life, a
slight invitation called me forth again, to put myself under the power of my
tyrant; and made me foolishly repent of having ever wished to withdraw myself
from his dominion.

IN the mean time I began to perceive that the spring of my life was passed and
gone; and that it was time to break the charm, which thus seduced me: However
the lot was cast, and rather than have recourse to reason, I employed every
artifice to supply the deficiency of blooming youth. Thus did I at once
endeavor to impose on others, and delude myself; and nothing but the
astonishing incident which I am going to relate, was capable of overcoming this
dangerous illusion.

HAVING been informed that a new play was to be acted, I engaged to go with a
party of friends to the theater, and among the rest, with Lady --, whom I loved
with the tenderest affection. At the appointed hour, I called at the door of my
friend. Surprised, at my arrival, not to find any of the servants ready to
receive me, I immediately ran up into her bedchamber; I went to her, and
saluting her, I asked her the reason why she was not ready to go with me: Oh!
Heaven! She was dead! Her countenance still retained its beauty; her flesh was
yet warm, but her body was motionless and lifeless! Having shricked so loud as
to fill the whole house with my cries, I fell into a swoon, which lasted above
an hour and a half. The domestics, who in their consternation had fled
different ways, re-assembled at the noise of my cries; and used every possible
endeavor to bring me to my senses. After which, they informed me, that their
mistress was just dead of a quinsy, that had choked her. Conceive, if you can,
the horrors of my situation; I was almost suffocated with grief, which labored
to express itself; and in the utmost terror and amazement, I withdrew from this
scene.

BY this method it seemed that heaven thought fit to act upon my mind, to
dissipate imposture and delusion. I returned to my house, wherein I saw nothing
but emblems of pride and vanity. I now discovered for the first time, that
those specious charms, with which the world had so long deceived me, were in
reality no better than splendid miseries. I now reflected, that I had been only
a dupe to my own pride, and the fashions of the world: That I had been running
after a phantom of happiness, which had escaped me; that human life was most
uncertain in its tenure; in short, that my essayest, who had distressed me, had
told me the truth; and that one must be absolutely blind, not to see the force
of his arguments.

AS I had learnt from experience to distrust my own weakness, I felt no
inclination to make a public profession of my change of sentiments;
especially, as I knew that it is not easy to support a consistency of character
in extremes; that too great zeal is seldom lasting, and almost always
indiscreet; and that to discharge the duties of Christianity, it was sufficient
to be -- a Christian.

HOWEVER, I insensibly withdrew myself from the world and its pleasures; and
under a pretense of taking care of my health, as my constitution had been
always delicate, I began with living very much alone, and no more mixing in
large companies. I was considered as an invalid; and after a few censures from
my acquaintance, the world as easily resigned me, as it had formerly solicited
me. There is nothing sooner forgotten, than a person, who wishes to be so:
one's retirement from the world may afford a topic of conversation for a day,
and tomorrow nothing more is said about us.

MY solitude being neither the affectation of singularity, nor the effect of
ill humor, but the result of serious reflection; I continued to discharge the
duties which I owed to society: I made my appearance at court, when it was
thought necessary; I visited my acquaintance when civility required it: I paid
that attention to the duties of my station, which it appeared to demand; and
(...) it down as a maxim, only to abstain from such things, as religion and
reason forbade.

VERY soon the pleasure of reading serious books, and of studying myself,
convinced me, that true happiness consists in conformity to truth; and that
they, who give themselves up to a life of dissipation, have in reality nothing
more than the shadow of happiness.

THAT horrible spectacle before mentioned, continually presented itself to my
mind. I never can forget, that, whilst I fancied I was embracing a living
friend, I held in my arms only a lifeless corpse, on which GOD himself had
already passed an irrevocable sentence! At midnight the image of my friend very
frequently appeared to my disturbed imagination; whom I had been wishing to
drag to the theater, while heaven was pronouncing an irreversible decree either
of life or death everlasting.

THIS it was, my children, which opened my eyes to a sight of my duty; this it
was, which determined me to cultivate and improve your good dispositions, and
to sow in your hearts the seeds of virtue and religion.

MAY heaven bless and prosper my design! Indeed it is with the greatest
satisfaction I observe, that your sentiments appear to be such, as seem likely
to do honor to the memory of your father; and that you want nothing but a
little more knowledge and information, and a little more inclination to attain
it. It is with a design to assist you herein, that I have determined to call
you together every evening, when my health will permit; and to discourse with
you on some of the most interesting subjects. Having now given you the history
of my own life, I shall henceforth concern myself only about yours; and shall
endeavor to furnish you with the best instructions in my power, that you may
become acceptable to your GOD, useful to your Country, and worthy of the King
whom you have the honor to serve.

CONFERENCE II. On ORDER.
IN vain, my dear children, do my physicians flatter me on the subject of my
health. I perceive myself hastily declining, and am apprehensive, that if I any
longer deferred to guard you against the rocks and shoals which you may meet
with in your passage through the world, whether from the tyranny of custom, or
from the violence of your own passions, I might never be able to discharge that
duty, to which my own affection for you, and the dying request of your father,
so powerfully excite me. His last words still sounding in my ear, as if they
had been uttered by a voice from heaven, dwelt only on this great subject: The
recollection fills my soul with an inexpressible mixture of tenderness and
grief.

ALAS! our united tears will never be sufficient to deplore our loss: those,
which I see you shed at this time, are the strongest assurance that you inherit
his generous sentiments, and it is the only pleasure which at present I feel
myself capable of enjoying.

YOUR excellent father, just before his death, taking me by the hand, expressed
himself neatly in the following words: Let your first care, I most earnestly
entreat you, be the education of my children: Be yourself their principal
instructor; and fail not to inculcate with all imaginable earnestness this
great truth, that they are born for no other purpose, than to consecrate their
lives to the service of their GOD, and their King; and that they will then only
do honor to the memory of their father, when they faithfully discharge this
twofold Duty. You cannot conceive, my dear children, with what heartfelt
distress I recall to mind this last most affecting scene; it pierces my soul
with the liveliest sensations of grief. But my solicitude for your welfare gets
the better of every other consideration; and I had rather tear open my wounds
afresh, than conceal from you a circumstance, which cannot but affect you in
the strongest manner. I have always kept it treasured up in my breast, as a
valuable deposit; which I intended some time or other to produce, whenever you
should be enabled to judge of its value and importance,

I CALL heaven to witness, that neither business nor pleasure has ever been
able to efface the remembrance of your father: On the contrary, he is always
present to my mind; and indeed it is this lively representation of him, which
alone enables me to support his loss. Without this painful resource, my mind
would have absolutely sunk beneath the burden of my grief.

BUT now the hour approaches, when I shall be reunited to the tenderest of
husbands; when our ashes, mixed together, shall teach you, my dear children,
the instability of every earthly possession, and the wisdom of despising the
momentary vanities of life, when brought into comparison with the treasures of
an immortal state.

IT is by such reflections as these, that order and regularity are best
preserved in our minds; and that we are taught the necessity of doing nothing
contrary to the rules of prudence and discretion.

THIS practice is so essential to our happiness, and so conformable to the
designs of our Creator, that it cannot be neglected without a violation of the
laws of GOD. It is this regard to duty and propriety, by which peace is
preserved in kingdoms, and union in families: It is this which regulates the
conduct of the servant toward his master, and the subject toward his prince;
it is this which engages my love toward you, and your respect toward me: It
is this which makes YOU studious to mitigate my sorrows, and ME incessantly
solicitous to advance your happiness.

IT is this regularity of conduct, which makes us good parents, good friends,
and good citizens; which gives us a right judgment of things, and assists us
both in the choice of the fittest time and the properest method of doing
whatever is to be done. It is one of the greatest misfortunes in the world, to
live without any stated rule of conduct, in perpetual disorder and confusion.
Our life should be a transcript of the harmony of the universe; which could not
subsist, much less attract our admiration, were it not for that just
proportion, which is discoverable in all its parts. Take away order from the
world, and you reduce it to a frightful chaos: Leave man without any other
guide than his own passions and caprice; and there will be nothing but
perpetual discord betwixt his judgment and his will.

RUIN ensues, when a man exhibits in his own ill-governed mind the miseries of
anarchy: His ideas are confused; his imagination is bewildered; his conscience
is misled; his reason is obscured; and his soul becomes the seat of confusion
and irregularity.

IF you do not accustom yourselves, at your first setting out in life, to lay
down some regular plan of conduct; you will never attain to that rectitude of
judgment, which estimates things according to their worth: And which, in the
midst of errors and prejudices, will enable you to give the preference to truth.

YOUR father's inclinations were so wisely regulated, that his behavior was
always influenced by a strict regard to propriety: He knew, with the
philosopher, that we ought to weigh the motives of our conduct; and every
evening to enter into an examination of our actions.

THE man, who lives at random, is a slave to his own whims and caprice. The
world reprobates such an one, as a monster which disturbs its harmony; and
society rejects him, as a being incapable of friendship. We see, in short,
that, whoever is thus irregular in his own mind, is destitute of every quality,
which can contribute to the ornament or benefit of human life: His mannners are
disgusting, his expenses are excessive, and his whole conduct unaccountable.

Do not think that I am carried away by my imagination beyond the truth; which
I shall always strictly observe in conversing with you. The too sad experience
of many confirms what I say; and it may serve to teach you that it is
impossible rightly to manage your affairs, or discharge your duty without a
proper command of your mind and passions; every movement of which should be as
nicely regulated, as those of a well finished clock.

THE exact proportion observable in every work of GOD is intended to teach us,
that order is the greatest beauty in nature; and that to despise this, is to
counteract one of the great laws of the Creator of the universe. Endeavor
then, I beseech you, to imitate in your behavior that general harmony in the
creation, which, in the course of every year, supplies us with whatever is
either agreeable or useful: Let your studies be methodical, all conducted
rather with a view to instruction, than mere amusement. If you read without a
plan, you will overload your memory without improving it: And your knowledge
will be little better than an undigested chaos.

THE mind, in which disorder prevails, is, in the eye of reason, like a city
without government, or, a house without unanimity. But a person of this
disposition deceives himself; and fancies, that if he keeps clear of those
irregularities, which are offensive to society, he may make himself easy,
though he has all the reason in the world to be dissatisfied with his way of
life.

YOU will find many, who seem to delight in nothing but irregularity; who go to
rest when others rise; who eat, when others fast; who stay at home, when others
go to church; in short, whose chief employment seems to be, ^^ break through
every rule, without the least regard to metho^ in any part of their conduct.

ALAS! when I was one of these fashionable ladies, whose gaiety was an object
of envy; I confounded night with day* I knew no law but my own whim; I had no
time but for pleasure, no plan but to avoid every thing that was like
regularity.

BE assured, that there is nothing so bewildered, as the life of a person,
given up to the hurry and tumult of the world: Such an one has no sense of the
value of time; she knows as distinction of days, and pays no regard to duty;
she studi^s fashions, is wholly taken up with trifles; she delights in that
which debases the mind, and is contrary to reason; she is perpetually seeking
happiness where it is not to be found; and, though wearied with the pursuit,
renews it every day.

THE world is full of persons always engaged in new projects, and distracted
with new desires; who die without reflection, because they have lived without
any knowledge of themselves. When the mind is thus disordered, it is afraid to
look into itself; or if it ventures to examine things at all, it only does it
superficially. The senses are so many tyrants, from whose power we are unable
to deliver ourselves: And nothing appears really valuable, which does not
administer to their gratification.

MAINTAIN then the dominion over your own minds, that you be not overcome by
those passions, which will lay siege to your virtue; your thoughts will then be
regulated by wisdom, and you will be raised by those clouds, which obscure the
light of the understanding. Each of us may be considered as an epitome of the
world, which is subject to eclipses, changes of weather, to storms and
tempests. We all observe the strange revolutions, which happen in the universe;
but as Providence, in the midst of such a multitude of created beings,
preserves the utmost harmony both in heaven and earth, so ought reason to
preserve in the human mind the strictest attention to order and peace. Without
this we degrade ourselves below the meanest insect, or even the inanimate parts
of the creation; which only subsist to answer the purposes for which they were
made. Behold the be, or the ant; a thousand times wiser, each of them, than
the man who despises them. These never deviate from the laws of their nature,
nor from the course which Providence has assigned them: It is only by an
imitation of their conduct and foresight, that families are maintained, and
kingdoms preserve their power and splendor.

THIS may serve to convince you, that whatever state of life you are placed in,
it will always be full of disquiet, if your judgment and your passions are at
variance with each other: You must therefore frequently examine into the
springs and motives of your conduct, in order to regulate your affections. You
will then see, as in a picture, the tendency of your actions; and will soon be
enabled to rectify whatever is amiss in you.

WHEN a house is on fire, with what eagerness do we haston to put it out! And
shall we suffer our passions to burn with fury, in the midst of us; without
giving ourselves the least trouble to extinguish the flame? We seldom reflect
that the mind is a kingdom; which cannot be well governed, without a constant
care as well to defend it from its enemies, as to promote whatever may tend to
the establishment of peace and tranquillity. Consider the stars, which shine in
their courses over our heads; consider the elements which are the source of
life and respiration: Alas! what monitors are these to man, to be always ready
like them to execute the commands of GOD! This view of the creation perpetually
reminds us, that every rational creature also ought to move in his proper
sphere, and discharge his appointed duty. When we only act as we are influenced
by a capricious humor; we insult the wisdom of a GOD of order, and raise a
perpetual tumult in our own breasts.

I HAVE always observed, that persons of a dissipated turn are as much
disordered with respect to their affairs, as they are unsettled in their own
minds; and leave no inheritance to their children, but debts and lawsuits.
There is an easy kind of arithmetic, which every lover of method is acquainted
with; and which consists in computing our obligations and our necessities, and
our ability to answer both, in order to keep ourselves within due bounds, and
to pay a proper regard to that which may reasonably be expected from us. If you
have not this love of method, which I wish to recommend; you will never be able
to regulate your actions, or your families, or your own minds. You will either
behave with too great haughtiness, or with too great familiarity, toward your
domestics; you will not distinguish what is superfluous from what is necessary;
and for want of calculation, you will have nothing but creditors, or debtors
who have nothing to pay.

YOU are born, my children, to a considerable fortune; but what will become of
it, if its use is not regulated by economy? Riches are absolute ruin to a
dissipated owner: The same confusion which distracts his mind, produces an
inconsistency in all his actions; one while you see an astonishing prodigality,
at another time you are shocked with as unreasonable avarice. He can throw away
money, but he cannot give it: He sa^rifices every thing to pleasure or to
pride, but nothing to justice.

WHEN you are confirmed in this wise habit of acting methodically, every part
of your conduct will be happily adjusted: You will set apart proper seasons for
study and for recreation; you will manage your time and your income with
prudence; you will distribute exact justice to your neighbors, and you will
never engage in any important enterprise, without considering the end. Nothing
will ever make you forget the duties which you owe to your character and
station; no day will pass, in which you will not remember your duty to GOD. We
never lose sight of these duties, but when we give the preference to a life of
irregularity; when we go on without a single thought what we are, and what will
become of us: Hence it is, that the affections of disorderly persons differ
very little from the propensities of the brute creation.

YOUR good dispositions encourage me to hope that my advice will sink deep into
your hearts. Remember always, that it is the counsel of a mother, who would
gladly sacrifice her life to purchase your happiness; and of a friend, whose
heart is bound up with yours, and who would not wish to live a moment, but in
the most intimate connection with you. All the faults of my life have been
offenses against ORDER, which can never be absolutely neglected, without
frustrating the end of our creation; for GOD has doubtless made us for this
purpose, that we might moderate our desires, and keep our passions within
proper bounds.

BUT if your intentions are good, as I trust they are, enough has been said on
this subject; besides, my want of strength reminds me that it is time to
relieve myself, and dismiss you for the present.

CONFERENCE III. On true PATRIOTISM.
I DESIGN that the duties, which you owe your country, shall be the subject of
this day's instructions; but as this is above my ability properly to handle,
your father shall speak, instead of me. A little before his death, he left me
these reflections, desiring me to communicate them to you, when you were of a
proper age to receive benefit from them. Read them, therefore; and let us
listen to them with great attention.

THE eldest son received the manuscript from his mother, and thus began --

"PROVIDENCE, which directs the place of our birth, as well as every other
circumstance of it, has ordained that the country in which we were born, should
be dearer to us than any other; and that we may not have the least doubt of the
truth of it, this sentiment is so universally impressed on our minds, that
there is not a man upon earth, who is not naturally A PATRIOT. The whole world
may be considered as one great family; but the alliance is much stricter
betwixt those who serve the same master, and are subject to the same laws. They
have all one common interest; good and evil are indiscriminately dispensed; and
each partakes more or less of the prosperity or misfortunes of the state.

"THOUGH you owe the tenderest affection to your mother, you must never forget
that much is also due to the country which gave you birth; and which considers
you as its children, and its subjects: You must divide betwixt them those
sentiments of love and respect, which nature has implanted in your hearts. Nay,
I will venture to say, however jealous I may be of my rights, as your father,
that you ought not to hesitate in a case of necessity, whether you should leave
me or not, when your country demands your assistance. Then it is, that, with
the heroic self-denial of a Roman, you must sacrifice every other
consideration, and postpone every other interest to the duty which you owe to
your King and country.

"THE first character, you sustained, was that of citizens: The state then
recognized you as subjects, intimately connected with it. Religion adopts the
same language with reason: She will teach you that your industry and abilities
ought to be united in the service of your country; and that it is an absolute
robbery to deprive her of this assistance. She has a right to demand an account
of our engagements, and to expect the application of our talents to her
advantage. They, therefore, who only employ themselves in the gratification of
their own vanity, or who lie down in a state of torpid indolence, can only be
considered as burdens to the state; or as wasps, which come to devour the
labor of the bees.

"WE are much mistaken, if we imagine ourselves at liberty to engage in those
studies and employments alone which are most pleasing to ourselves; the
pursuits of one, who wishes to be called a patriot, ought to be directed only
by the love of his country, and an earnest desire to promote her welfare. What
would be the state of that kingdom, in which every one, being master of his own
actions, should do just what he pleases; and employ all his powers of mind and
body, only in the gratification of his own fancy? A cheerful submission to our
governors, and a readiness to stand forth in our country's cause, give us the
truest picture of a well ordered and happy government.

"YOU, who are already engaged in the public service, ought to be more
sensible of this than any others; you are invested with honors and advantages,
only on condition that you be always ready to assist your country. Woe be to
you, if ever ye forget, that the very blood which ru^ through your veins must
be dedicated to HER; that she has as much right to dispose of your life, as you
have to dispose of your fortune; and that you are no longer worthy to live,
than while you maintain the character of good subjects.

"HISTORY, sacred and profane, is full of examples of persons, ready to
sacrifice their lives for their country's good; even women, forgetting the
weakness of their sex, have become heroines, when the public welfare demanded
their assistance."

-- HERE the generous mother, carried beyond herself, in a kind of rapture,
interrupted her son.

Indeed, my children, I firmly believe this female heroism to be very
attainable. I myself actually feel resolution enough, notwithstanding my bodily
infirmities, to carry me even to the mouth of a cannon; and encourage you by my
exhortations to choose an honorable death, if my duty rendered such a trial
necessary: Reason, in that case, would make me altogether regardless of myself.
The consideration, that I had brought such worthy children into the world,
would dry up my tears; and render me rather an object of envy than of pity, in
the sight of my sovereign and my country. -- But go on.

"THE enjoyment of life is by no means equivalent to the honor of dying for
our country: For life is but a shadow; whereas the glory which accrues from
such a death, is a light which survives the obscurity of time, and shines with
everlasting brightness. You find that MARCELLUS and many other heroes are still
remembered, as if they were but just dead; they sacrificed their mortal part,
that they might become immortal. The renown, which accompanied their last
breath, seems to have perpetuated their duration; and where is the man of sense
and reflection, who would not be glad to share their fate?

"IT is not enough, my children, to wear the livery of men of valor; to live
in a corpse, whose examples encourage bravery: Fortitude must be ingrafted in
the heart; and it must be so disinterested, as neither to be influenced by
eyewitnesses, nor by the prospect of reward.

"EXAMINE yourselves on this head; and if your sensations unfortunately
contradict your profession, take shame to yourselves, and know that you are no
better than hypocrites, as to personal courage. It is the inward motive, not
the outward appearance, which stamps a value upon actions: If in taking up arms
we have more regard to our own interest, than to that of our Country, and if,
under a pretense of defending the rights of our King and Country, we think only
of enriching ourselves, we only wear the habit, without having any portion of
the spirit of a soldier. Many indeed have been found acting only under the
influence of avarice and pride, at the very time that they signalized
themselves externally by the most specious conduct. But the true soldier
desires no other recompense, than the pleasure of doing his duty; no other
witness, than his own conscience; he is just as ready to die in a crowd,
wherein he will be mixed with the multitude, as to fall, distinguished in a
single combat.

"THIS confidence is the effect of religion; which purifies the intentions, and
influences the will, and is the school of true magnanimity: Without the motives
which religion offers, nothing is to be seen but the shadow of virtue. Whoever
is actuated by self-interest, should take care to conceal the principle on
which he is acting: For the world, corrupt as it is, is not yet accustomed to
applaud those actions, which have no better principle than pride and
covetousness.

"YOU are descended from a line of ancestors, whom your country ranks in the
number of her heroes; their blood circulated in their veins for no other
purpose, than that it might be ready to be shed, in order to oppose the
mischiefs which the enemy devised against the state. With the price of their
blood they purchased those honors which you inherit; and of which you then
only properly avail yourselves, when you imitate ^eir virtues. Nobility is lost
in the eye of reason and integrity, when it only serves to encourage us in
pride and luxury, and gives us an air of arrogance and disdain.

"IT is a certain indication of a weak and ungenerous mind, to imagine that a
title gives us a right to despise the rest of mankind, and to do whatever our
passions may suggest to us. Nobility is at once both a recompense for past
services done to our country; and an engagement by which the party so
distinguished, binds himself to excel, not less in the dignity of his
sentiments, and the superiority of his virtues, than in his rank and situation
in the world.

"YOU can never therefore properly reflect on your noble birth, without being
touched with a sense of the duties which it requires of you. If your country
gives you credit on account of your ancestors; you ought to exert yourselves to
the utmost to discharge the debt, and do honor to their memory. From the first
moment of your being, the world has expected that you should be as great as
your progenitors, and it is your duty to answer these expectations: Otherwise,
the artisan or the labourer will surpass you in the eyes of your country; and
your titles and honors will only serve to make you contemptible.

"THE present age is not so barbarous, as to be ignorant, that all men are
naturally equal; that all ought equally to labor; and that, if some are by the
favor of their country distinguished above others, it is only with a design to
hold them up as patterns to the rest of mankind. It is right, that there should
be, in every kingdom, persons particularly called upon to vindicate the rights
of honor and virtue: When we would kindle emulation in the minds of men, we
must exhibit to them examples worthy of their imitation. What a ridiculous
mistake then i^ it, to suppose that we only receive the title of nobility, as
an encouragement to licentiousness and pride!

"IT is not a little pleasing to find one's self, in the midst of so many
different ranks and orders of men, particularly called upon to support the
character of generosity and valor. This pleasure is certainly worth all the
trouble of exposing ourselves to any dangers, difficulties, or inconveniences
to which our profession may be liable. True greatness consists in being ready
to resign our claim to that honor which we well deserve; and in generously
resolving never to be wanting to our King and Country, whatever we may be
exposed to, in the discharge of our duty. When you make your entrance on the
theater of the world, you must expect to be an eyewitness of the various
scenes which it exhibits; and think, with MARCUS AURELIUS, that there is no
part, however tragical, which you may not at one time or other be called upon
to perform.

"THE more attentive you are to your duty, the more you will be exposed to
invidious censure: But it is then that you must seek for comfort in your own
^^nd. Only make a point of doing what you ought; and then, whatever injury you
sustain, you will never be greatly disconcerted. For this also is a proof of
real magnanimity, to be superior to all events; nay, in some cases, even to
hazard our reputation, while we are doing what we are convinced is right. It
was thus, that FABIUS conducted himself; never altering his measures,
notwithstanding the murmurs occasioned by the slow caution with which he acted.
It is by no means impossible, that calumny and ingratitude should be the
recompense of your services; but this you will utterly disregard, whilst your
conscience bears witness that you have discharged your duty; virtue is equally
superior both to the smiles and to the frowns of fortune.

"THE reason why so many persons are found disaffected toward government, is,
because their patriotism is really founded in ambition. They consider only
themselves, while they pretend to have nothing in view but the public good:
And the least disappointment of their hopes leads them to rail against the
constitution, and determines them no longer to stand forth in the service of
their country. May such sentiments as these never enter into your minds! May
the public welfare so engross your attention, as to make you regardless of
your own! No man can ever be esteemed poor, who can boast of the advantage of
being serviceable to the nation to which he belongs.

"OBSERVE with what resolution the common soldier rushes into the battle; who
has no expectation of being distinguished by a triumph, or of enlarging his
fortune by conquest: He has nothing to expect but death. Learn from him that it
is your duty to perform whatever is required of you, with firmness ^^ without
considering what may be the consequence to yourself in particular.

"BUT to whatever advantage that person may appear, who is taught by his
profession only to estimate his life by the pleasure of sacrificing it,
whenever his duty calls upon him to do it; yet will the brightness of his glory
be entirely sullied, if he is led to despise other ranks of men on the
comparison. He ought to be told, that our country is a body, which has equal
need of all its members; all of which cooperate in different ways for the
general benefit. The strength of a kingdom would be very soon exhausted, if it
could only be maintained by the sword. The ploughshare of the husbandman, and
the instrument of the lowest mechanic, are the honorable means of serving
their country; such persons cannot therefore be despised, without degrading
humanity itself.

"I AM not here speaking of Magistrates or Clergymen. You have no need to be
told, that these functions (the one employed to preserve an intercourse betwixt
heaven and earth, the other to maintain the peace and good order of families)
are sacred and venerable; and that it is a mark of ignorance or folly in
either, to be insensible of their own dignity or utility. How many of both
these orders of men spend their whole lives in the discharge of their
respective duties! They die with less eclat, I allow, than he who falls in the
field of battle: But their death is so much more precious in the sight of GOD,
as it continued almost during their whole life: Every moment of which was a
kind of diminution of themselves, through the continual wasting of their health
and vigor.

"The generality of men, looking on persons of distinction, see nothing but
what serves to flatter their vanity, and excite the envy of their inferiors.
But these are only superfluities, with which a mind that is really great can
never be affected: It is right that our country should have rewards to bestow,
and it is natural for us to be pleased with receiving them; but we then show
they are unworthily bestowed upon us, whenever we suffer them to minister to
pride or luxury. Better were it to live in poverty and obscurity, than to apply
our riches and honors to the purposes of vanity. The more favors you have
received from the hands of your country, the more ought you to study to be
affable, modest, and industrious, in return for such distinctions: Otherwise,
you will expose her to the censures of the invidious, whose wisdom in
distinguishing you, you are engaged to vindicate by an exemplary conduct.

"O! HOW few are there, who are sensible of these duties! No sooner have men
rendered an important service to their country, and received the rewards of
such services, but they give themselves up to a dishonorable sloth, or to an
excess of pleasure. They wish to make amends for the time, which they have
passed in labor and fatigue; without reflecting that the seasons of honorable
toil are the happiest moments of our life; and that eternity will be long
enough for repose."

HERE the pious mother, having made a sign to her son to stop, said with a weak
voice --

"IT is time for us to finish this lecture: A vast field for reflection here
opens itself to your view, if you are capable of drawing those conclusions,
which present themselves to the mind. The wisdom of your father, you see,
enabled him to find means of instructing you, even after his death: For my
part, who have not his understanding and knowledge, I have nothing to offer you
but tenderness and affection; which indeed is so great, as to make me
insensible of my sufferings, that you may not be left a prey to ignorance and
passion. However weak my abilities may be, and however limited my apprehension
of things, I shall continue to communicate my thoughts to you on whatsoever
subject I think may be of use to any of you; your father's excellent
instructions being chiefly confined to the military life. My earnest prayer is,
that my strength may be spared so long, as to give me an opportunity of
accomplishing my design: I shall then close my eyes, and resign myself into the
hands of death, with as little reluctance, as I would retire to sleep."

CONFERENCE IV. On SOCIAL DUTIES.
HAVING, by the help of your father's invaluable manuscript, instructed you in
your duty to your country, I shall now proceed to those obligations which you
owe to society. Affection supplies me with fresh spirits; and I willingly
forget my own weakness, when your happiness is concerned. My physicians indeed
would fain dissuade me from such exertions of myself; but their apprehensions
only serve to quicken my zeal to discharge that office, which love and duty
toward you inspire.

THOUGH young, you already know enough of the world, to be sensible that there
are connections suited to every condition of life. And that, to confound the
distinction betwixt each of these, would be equally contrary to the rules of
decency and discretion. In your choice of companions, regard must be paid to
age, profession, and fortune. This distinction is not the effect of scrupulous
vanity, but the fruit of a wise discernment.

WHAT would you think of a man of quality, who should only associate with the
vulgar? Would you not justly consider him, as a contemptible character, and as
one who had forfeited the privileges of his birth and education? Providence has
appointed diversities of rank and condition, which we cannot confound without a
violation of its laws: The circumstances of your birth were intended to teach
you, that you should connect yourselves chiefly with persons of your own rank,
or at least with those who distinguish themselves by the worthiness of their
sentiments. A similitude of manners, and of inclinations, is the only sure
foundation of friendship among men.

SOCIAL intercourse is not an arbitrary commerce with each other, with which we
are at liberty to dispense, AS we will, and WHEN we will: The several classes
into which men are divided, are mutually bound to show respect, and friendship,
and good will to one another. If regard is paid to your rank, you must, on your
part, honor your superiors: This distinction serves to maintain harmony in the
world; and forms that interchange of true politeness, which cannot be too
nicely preserved.

HE who is really well-bred will show respect to his instructors, complaisance
to his equals, and condescension to his inferiors: He will endeavor to
accommodate himself to different characters and circumstances. You will never
see such a one running from one company to another, to carry tales, to broach
new opinions, or to slander persons behind their back. Always obliging, always
a friend to truth, he well knows how to reconcile his language with his heart;
and never says a word, which is inconsistent with decency or politeness. He is
utterly unacquainted with the art of setting himself off at the expense of
another: If he chooses to indulge a vein of humor, it is only in ridiculing
the follies of the age, without any personal reflections: If he chooses to
moralize, it is in so pleasing a manner, that at once he both delights and
persuades.

THE safety as well as enjoyment of society would be at an end, if every
libertine might freely utter his obscenities, and every atheist his
blasphemies; but good manners are a security against such offensive discourse:
And even the most abandoned is obliged, in spite of himself, to conceal his
vices, and assume the appearance of virtue. It is only in particular companies,
equally reprobated by decency and good sense, that we are insulted by filthy
jests; and the palm of wit is assigned to those, who ridicule religion and its
ministers: Such company as this you ought never to be made acquainted with;
true merit seeks a more advantageous residence, than in such society. Whatever
respect you may think due to the different kinds of people with whom you
associate; take care that you purchase not the company of others at too dear a
price. They have never rightly estimated what is due to social life, who
sacrifice their time, their liberty, and their virtue to it.

SUCH, as divide their whole time betwixt dress and amusements, are a sort of
beings which merely exist; and who, under a pretense of rendering themselves
useful to the public, only think of gratifying their pride, and dissipating
chagri^. It is impossible to be at rest in our own minds, when we give
ourselves up to the hurry of the world; private friendship must not be
supported at our country's expense: To the latter we owe much more than to the
former, we must not therefore sacrifice the one, out of too much complaisance
for the other. If there are some men who do nothing, it is because they have no
proper sense of their duty to GOD, or to their Country. Complaisance
degenerates into weakness, when we have not resolution (...) to resist the
importunities of an artful woman, o^ the solicitations of an idle man: Only
make a point of being constantly well employed, and you will easily get rid of
this sort of persecution.

THE greatest mischief is, when we do not distinguish betwixt the fashion of
the world, and the duties which we owe to society; whereas there is a wonderful
difference between them. The one engages us in a train of foolish expenses,
vicious intrigues, and a round of unprofitable idleness; the other makes us
useful and friendly, and offers to us only those amusements which are innocent
and proper.

A SOCIABLE man is really a friend to his country; a man of the world (in the
sense in which we have just now considered him) would sacrifice his country to
his interest and his pleasures. When this attachment to the world has taken
possession of the heart, its votaries only exist for the sake of gratification;
and what dependence can there be on a mind that is subject to the tyranny of
pleasure?

HE, who attends to the duties which he owes to society, is like a stream,
which diffuses itself through a beautiful meadow; but he, who gives himself up
to the world, is like a torrent, which hastens to empty itself into the sea: In
the one we discover nothing but delight, in the other nothing but noise and
violence. The love of society constitutes a part of our duty; the love of the
world makes us forgetful of every duty. I have been too well acquainted with
this dangerous world; and it is because I foolishly confounded it with ideas of
society, that I am at present so well able to distinguish betwixt them. Alas! I
thought once, there was no being sociable, without being present at every
entertainment, at every play, and at every assembly; and I had so thoroughly
reconciled myself to this notion, that I should have looked upon any one, as
the most stupid and unsociable of all creatures, that did not readily concur
with me in my ideas. So powerful is the love of pleasure, that it puts a false
interpretation upon every thing, and assumes the language of folly instead of
that of reason.

THIS delusion, one of the strongest that can be imagined among persons of a
certain rank, makes them attach themsel^ to the world, without scruple or
reserve: They dote upon it, under the pretext of being sociable; and they
persuade themselves that the unprofitable toil, which it imposes, is a duty
which it is necessary for them to perform.

IT is my earnest desire, that my own past imprudence should prove useful to
YOU; and that you would not make SOCIETY consist in any thing, but what it
really is; that is to say, in a polite intercourse, which unites us to each
other; -- in friendly visits, which cannot be dispensed with; -- in letters of
civility, which we ought to write; -- and in that necessary familiarity, which
we mutually stand in need of for the purposes of relaxation: All beyond this,
deserves not the name of SOCIETY.

AFTER determining, what it is to be really and properly sociable; it is
necessary for us to know, how we ought to conduct ourselves in the company of
others. Many rules have been laid down upon this subject; and they are plainly
reducible to these: Never to speak, but to the purpose: Never to rally, but
with good humor: Never to appear supercilious: Never to indulge caprice: Never
to show any thing inconsistent with a good heart. Strokes of humor may please
for a moment; but good sense is always agreeable, and always gives
satisfaction: We cannot endure that, which lets us down; and therefore we are
much better pleased with him who only says common things, than with him whose
turn of conversation is of a superior kind: Nature is always preferable to art.

LEARN to make use of your wit, without showing that you are vain of it; the
less you affect to show it, the more admirers you will find, and the more
friends. Equally avoid both raillery and flattery; the one is always considered
as ill nature, the other passes for deceit. In former times it was necessary to
praise in the most extravagant terms, in order to attract a smile, or even a
gracious look: The ladies of the present age know how ridiculous such
commendations are; and rather than be disgusted by flattery, they wish never to
be complimented at all. If you are so happy as to have a grave and studious
turn; you will find fewer of these losser duties on your hands. All those
important trifles, which the world calls little attentions (though absolutely
necessary within proper limits) seem in their extreme to belong only to PETITS
MAITRES; because every thing, that is insignificant, is suited to that
character. You are undone, if ever you propose such as these for your examples.
I never saw one of them, whose mind was not utterly ruined by his folly: They
are fit only to afford diversion, and they always do it at at their own
expense. When the arrival of one of these gentry is announced, only by the
scent of amber and musk, and when he brings nothing with him but impertinence;
it is impossible that any man of sense can be pleased with such company.

IT is by good manners and a genteel air, that others are prepossessed in our
favor. Every man has so much self-love, as to oppose him, who wishes to
trample upon those about him; we love to see the charms of sweetness in a
modest countenance: While you are possessed of these graces, my children, all
the world will admire you. It is not necessary, in order to be sociable, that
you be eloquent, or witty, or possessed of any rare or superior talents; all
that society demands of you is, that you be complaisant without meanness,
polite without flattery, steady without rudeness, and sprightly without
affectation. She requires that you cultivate her, as the friends of mankind;
and that you do her honor by an unblemished reputation, by decency in your
words, and purity in your morals.

A FARTHER knowledge of the world will teach you many particulars, on which my
weakness will not suffer me to enlarge. It will furnish you with that
gracefulness, that ease in your carriage, that politeness, that propriety of
behavior, which ought to distinguish a person of fashion. It will show you the
necessity of not publishing stories without caution, of not judging of any
performances but with modesty; and of not speaking of your neighbor's faults,
but with reserve. It will teach you that you ought to be neither the first to
set the fashion, nor the last to leave it; and in short, that you cannot too
carefully avoid the imputation of needless singularity.

BE careful not to slight any person; yet let your attentions be properly
regulated: Nothing is more improper, than to treat a stranger with the intimacy
of a friend; or an intimate friend with the distance due to a superior.
Distinguish merit wherever you find it, without troubling yourself about the
garb in which it appears: Court the company of the learned, and the
conversation of the aged; their discourse is often more useful, than any book
that you can read. Never argue on a subject, which you do not understand; every
one admires modesty; no one can endure conceit. If you are desired to play for
mere amusement, do not decline it; but never play for the sake of gain: If you
are unlucky, you will lose with good humor, when the stake is a matter of
indifference: He, that cannot command his temper, never fails to discover his
weakness, and gives offense to every one about him. Treat the female sex with
the utmost delicacy; they have a claim to the greatest attention. Avoid
intrigues; have a strict regard to modesty: And you will never have a quarrel
with any woman.

NEVER promise any thing without deliberation; but having made a promise,
implicitly observe it. Whoever joins the first party that comes in his way,
without regarding a prior engagement, does not deserve to have friends: Let
discretion constantly direct your conduct. And if, notwithstanding all these
precautions, you should meet with enemies, they, and not you, will deserve
blame.

THE more attention you appear to show to these instructions, my children, the
more dear you must necessarily be to me: and the less I shall lament the sad
separation which death is preparing to make betwixt us. In leaving you well
stored with good principles, and furnished with my best advice, I shall think I
only lose you in part; and that I shall be always in some degree in the midst
of you. It is thus you will be able to find me in your own minds, when you can
no longer see or hear me; and I trust, you will there find me faithfully
represented.

CONFERENCE V. On VIRTUE.
A SUCCESSION of fainting fits had exceedingly weakened this pious mother; but,
by an exertion worthy of her virtue, and magnanimity, she seemed to forget her
bodily weakness, that she might fully express the dictates of her heart. Her
children, full of attention, and impressed with the utmost tenderness, looked
upon her with a mixture of admiration and grief; while she communicated this
valuable lesson of instruction on the subject of virtue.

VIRTUE, my children, ought to be the ruling principle of all your actions: I
cannot but consider her as the offspring of heaven, without whom there would be
nothing in this world but iniquity and impurity. In vain have the most corrupt
ages of men endeavored to obscure her brightness: She forces her way through
the thickest cloud of passions; diffusing those rays of glory, which we never
can sufficiently admire. Even her enemies are compelled to praise her; and they
who themselves are wicked, if not utterly abandoned, would fain be accounted
virtuous.

BUT it is not sufficient to bear our testimony in favor of virtue, in empty
words; we must do her honor by a conduct which is irreproachable. The
eulogium, which we outwardly bestow upon her, must be confirmed by the inward
dispositions of the heart. You will never be truly great, but in proportion as
you are virtuous: The highest honors are no more than the pedestal; but merit
is the statue erected upon it. This it is, which distinguishes an individual
from the multitude; this it is, which renders him superior to all that birth
and fortune can bestow. Our talents do us honor; and wit gains us credit: But
Virtue exalts us even above humanity; raising us above the events of life, and
even above ourselves. With her, we secure the admiration of posterity: We live
in the annals of history; we never die: Without her, on the contrary, we are
degraded, we grovel, we only exist, to the dishonor of humanity.

THOUGH she has flourished above 4000 years, she is not yet grown old: We speak
of her, as if the great effects of her power were manifested even to this day.
The ROMANS are present with us, as though they were but just now dead; we seem
as it were eyewitnesses of their glory and magnanimity: So true is it, that --

HERE she was obliged to break off her discourse, that she might not sink under
her extreme weakness; and she had only just strength enough left to tell her
children, who were melted into tears, that she must defer the remainder 'till
another day.

CONFERENCE VI. Further Instructions on the same Subject.
FOUR days had now passed, within which this excellent lady had not been able
to converse with her children; but happily her sufferings abated, and she now
renewed her instructions.

YOU see me, says she, restored to you for a little time; and it is with the
greatest satisfaction I avail myself of this short respite, from the pleasing
hope of rendering the few remaining hours of my life as useful to you as
possible. Virtue, of which I was speaking, in my last conference with you, is
so fruitful a field, that one might compose large volumes upon this subject. O!
That I were able to represent her to you surrounded with that peace which is
peculiar to her, adorned with those charms which distinguish her, supported by
that true greatness, which is her characteristic! You would see that she was
formed to be the empress of the universe; that she alone deserves our regard;
that her sublime perfections would have altars erected in every heart, if man
were not a dupe to his passions: the higher she is raised, the more modest is
her deportment; the more charms she possesses, the more studious is she to
conceal them.

IN vain does vice oppose her attractions, and declare open war against her:
The remorse, which disturbs the soul of every sinner, comes to avenge her
cause, and to teach us that there is no happiness, but what is found in the
possession of Virtue. Attach yourselves therefore closely to HER, and you will
find that the perfection of happiness consists in the enjoyment of her. I never
knew what real pleasure was, 'till I became acquainted with the worth of
virtue, and the greatness of her beauty. As a proof of this, my dearest
children, I can with truth assure you, that notwithstanding I am on all sides
surrounded with the shadow of death, I feel an inward joy which I am not able
to express. This is the present happy effect of my love for virtue; which has
taken such possession of my heart, that nothing can materially affect me, which
has not some relation to HER: even You are only so far dear to me, as I trust
you will prove really good and virtuous.

THIS disposition, however, is the gift of GOD, and cannot be derived from
ourselves alone; it is therefore the subject of my constant prayers, that you
may be filled with that grace, which I have so often and so earnestly implored
for myself. No one will be richer than you, if you are in possession of this
treasure; you can then be placed in no situation of life, in which you will not
distinguish yourselves by some laudable action. In each of you, the indigent
will find a beneficent father; your family, an equitable and kind master; your
relations, an affectionate and generous friend; your country, a zealous
supporter; your king, a most faithful subject: In short, all men will consider
you as their brethren, who only live to comfort and assist them.

WHAT a blessing will riches and honors prove in your hands, if you are really
virtuous! You will then become a source of comfort, perpetually flowing to
communicate happiness to all mankind.

YOUR favor will be implored, as though ye were, in some degree, the ministers
of heaven; and men will bless you, as doing honor to the age and nation in
which you live.

VIRTUE is far from being unrewarded even in this life. What a satisfaction do
we feel, in awaking from sleep, that we have in our will, and in our power to
distinguish the approaching day, by some act of mercy to the wretched! How are
we delighted with such sentiments as these! What transport does the combination
of such virtues afford! These are the never-failing attendants on good men.

YOU must however beware of confounding natural disposition with the dictates
of virtue; we often mistake constitutional firmness, for heroic magnanimity:
Vivacity of temper produces courage, as phlegm occasions prudence. We can only
know, by a strict inquiry into ourselves, the true motive on which we act. If
it is really virtue which excites us, there will be neither affectation, nor
severity: Simplicity and moderation will every where appear. They, who carry
things to an extreme, know not, that even wisdom itself must be tempered with
sobriety.

I AM not fond of those outrageous virtues, which certain enthusiasts recommend
as the characteristics of human perfection. True virtue only shows herself by a
most obliging deportment; the more gracious her air is, the more strongly she
engages our attachment: We are offended at the sight of a countenance, which is
overspread with a cloud of severity.

TAKE care then to exhibit nothing in your outward behavior, but what is truly
amiable; for otherwise you will disfigure virtue, and make her appear different
from what she really is: All, that we add of our own, is only an alloy unworthy
of her purity. It is our misfortune that there is too great a want of sincerity
among us: Accustomed from our infancy to dissemble, we think nothing excellent,
but what is disguised; whereas there is no virtue where there is no truth.

LAY this down as a maxim, and you will detest every species of dissimulation;
there is nothing more odious, than a mind enslaved to falsehood, a heart in
which duplicity prevails. It is better to speak truth, though it should prove
to our own hurt, than to make use of the least equivocation to gain the
greatest advantage.

ALL the riches in the world, are not worth one single virtue: So that if you
were allowed to make your choice betwixt the wealth which you are to be
possessed of, and the virtues which I have recommended to you to practice, you
ought not to hesitate a moment, which of these you should prefer. A man, who is
truly virtuous, can never be really wretched. He finds in himself those rich
resources, which even princes are unable to bestow: Always patient and
resigned, he do^ not find his mind agitated with the vicissitudes of fortune.
His thoughts are raised above the sufferings of the present life, to the joys
of a much happier state; the sublimity of his sentiments renders him superior
to all the calamities, which fortune can inflict.

A SOUL, in which virtue resides, is the nearest representation of heaven
itself: All is serenity, and light, and joy: The troubles of the world cannot
interrupt its repose, the cloud of passions cannot diminish its brightness.

RELIGION is the only solid foundation of morality: This wisdom is the chief
ornament of the human mind, and the chief director of our life. Without this,
the heart is degraded, the whole soul is degenerate; we are dissatisfied with
ourselves, and we have only fools or libertines, for our companions and friends.

ASK any man who has preferred a vicious to a virtuous course of life; and, if
he is sincere, he will acknowledge that his uneasiness was continual; that his
joy was merely external: That his imagination was bewildered; that his passions
consumed him; that his actions brutalized him; and that his whole mind and body
were exhausted.

WE need not wait for the coming of that awful day, when GOD shall punish vice,
to know how odious she is: Even in this life she carries with her her own
condemnation. Her most eloquent and bold panegyrists, have never been able,
with all their endeavors, to cover that deformity, which attends her; and
always renders her the object of detestation. Go into any country that you
please; and you will find vice proscribed, and virtue honored.

IN what ignominious terms does history make mention of vicious princes! It
speaks of them with horror; and never so much as names them, but to make them
odious to every age and nation.

A VICIOUS man, is a ^tranger to prudence, decency, and honesty: He neither
reads, nor speaks, nor acts, but with a view to gratify the violence of his
passions, and bitterly to inveigh against virtue, which excites his indignation
so much the more, as he finds it impossible to hate her.

I WOULD not wish for more than the mere presence of a libertine, to fill any
reflecting mind with horror. He is a monster, that destroys all the pleasure of
society; that stifles every worthy sentiment; that rebels against every law of
reason; and that defies Heaven itself, with a shocking and intolerable
insolence.

FROM such dreadful excesses as these, Virtue, my dear children, will preserve
you: It will not only remove you at a distance from every sinful act, but also
from every occasion of sinning. It will inspire you with an utter aversion from
those presumptuous offenders, whose very breath is infectious; it will
encourage you to your several duties; it will prove the best security against
idleness, which is justly esteemed the parent of every kind of wickedness.

THERE is no circumstance in life, wherein virtue will not be found useful; as
there is none in which vice can be excused. This religious principle will make
us patient in adversity; humble in prosperity; prudent in business; moderate in
pleasures; undaunted in dangers; affable in conversation; judicious in the
management of our domestic concerns. A man is always acting amiss, when he is
not virtuous; his conduct is a satire against himself: And he finds only mean
and base minds, that will venture to applaud him.

WHILE we practice virtue, we belong, as it were, to Heaven: While we lead a
disorderly life, we are retained in the service of our passions. The observance
of our duty unites us with good men; the love of vice throws us into the
company of the wicked.

THE world will not fail to throw abundance of obstacles in your way, to hinder
your approach to virtue; but these difficulties will presently vanish, whenever
you enter into an examination of your own hearts: You will then find, that it
is impossible to be truly good, without all those qualities, which religion
demands; you will then find, that the inconstancy of the human mind has need to
be fixed by the authority of wisdom and justice.

THE vivacity of youth is too apt to form a self idea of religion, as throwing
a veil of melancholy over the world, and all its pleasures. But such young
people are greatly mistaken: Wisdom and goodness are very consistent with, if
they are not indeed the only source of cheerfulness. If you look into the
world, and attend carefully to the actions of men, you will find true enjoyment
only among those who are really virtuous: Others indeed may APPEAR with more
noisy jollity about them; but this is only a kind of intemperate excess, which,
in a few moments, will give place to an insupportable melancholy. When a man is
only joyous by fits and by compulsion, the heart remains a prey to dissipation
and remorse.

IF what I have said to you in recommendation of virtue, is not sufficient to
determine you in favor of her charms, recall to your minds your excellent
father; review the history of your illustrious ancestors! And by no means
dishonor their memory by a conduct so widely different from theirs. The life
which you derive from them, should pass as incorrupt as theirs: You ought to
bear their name, only that you may show to posterity, that you are so many
living representatives of their virtues.

I flatter myself, my admonitions will not easily be effaced; and that you will
study that moderation in all things, which constitutes true wisdom. Your minds
will never be truly great, except whilst, being steady without boldness,
prudent without avarice, liberal without profusion, you ennoble every action of
your lives. Take heed that you do not, even in secret, divest yourselves of
that prudence and caution which you outwardly profess; you must never forget,
that you ought to be virtuous, for the sake of Virtue, and for the sake of
Heaven. A truly good man is he, who acts, as if his whole conduct was open to
the sight and examination of GOD and men.

CONFERENCE VII. ON PLEASURE.
AS GOD, my dear children, is pleased to prolong my life, and to enable me to
continue my instructions to you; I shall take this opportunity of dwelling more
at large on the subject of Pleasure; the chief rock against which you are in
danger of splitting. Youth is the season, in which pleasures present themselves
to the imagination, to seduce and captivate it. They begin by dazzling our
sight; and when once they have succeeded in this point, they soon assume the
empire of the heart: There they establish their dominion, and choke every seed
of virtue.

AS soon as the inordinate love of pleasure takes possession of the soul,
virtue is obliged to retire; we are thenceforth wholly taken up with such
objects as gratify the passions, cherish effeminacy, and support vanity: We
seek for nothing but mischievous indulgencies, we listen only to the dictates
of our sensual appetites.

THERE is no man, who is not fond of ease and tranquillity: This principle is
so deeply imprinted in our minds, that we must divest ourselves of our nature,
before we can think otherwise. But by TRANQUILLITY OF MIND* I mean that pure
satisfaction, which has nothing in common with those gratifications, in which
the world chiefly delights: For you cannot be too often told, that the
pleasures which i^ pursues, as its sovereign good, are only phantoms which
mislead us.

I AM no stranger to these boasted delights: I have been sufficiently engaged
in their vain pursuit; and from my own experience I can with truth declare,
that they only serve to lull reason to sleep. It is, in short, a state of
stupefaction, which terminates in remorse; a dream, from which, when we awake,
we find a VACUUM, which we are not able to supply. I always fancied, that they
would fill my heart with the most perfect joy; and I found myself constantly
disappointed.

THOUGH the soul drink ever so largely of this cup, it never finds that inward
satisfaction, which leaves nothing further to be desired: We never can be
completely happy, whilst we are under the government of our passions.

IF I had time and ability to analyze those pleasures to which the world is
enslaved, I could demonstrate to you the insufficiency of public diversions and
amusements, to give real satisfaction to a rational mind. It is sufficient to
know that they are trifling, that they are fatiguing, that they are transient;
whereas the soul can find no real happiness in that, which is not substantial,
peaceful, and unchangeable. We always therefore offer violence to our better
part, when we launch forth into that tumultuous ocean of trifles, which
constitute the life of people of fashion. It is only by stifling reflection,
that the lovers of pleasure can support themselves: they well know that a
little serious consideration would give them a distaste for the pleasures which
they are pursuing, and therefore they do every thing they can to get rid of it.
Thus do they live in a wi^ ^norance even of their own minds.

HOW often does the theater, which we are fond of calling the school of true
politeness and just sentiments, carry us away from ourselves, and render us the
slaves of passion! It is generally love, which performs the principle
character, and which is represented in the most alluring manner: We seldom
attend, I believe, to what is passing there, without returning more enamoured
with the world, more passionately fond of dress, more strongly inclined to
dissipation. The glaring appearance of the stage, the sentiments there
delivered, and the objects exhibited, all serve to enchant the senses, excite
the passions, intoxicate the mind, and encourage the love of pleasure.

THINK not, I assume the language of a preacher; mine is only that of reason
and experience. The theater is very frequently the ruin of young men, whom the
sight of an actress seduces, and carries headlong into every species of
mischief. From that moment, all domestic attachments are at an end; all
relative duties are neglected; a total disorder in their affairs succeeds, and
they become the subject of public conversation, and the authors of ruin to
themselves and to their families.

I DEFY the advocates for these entertainments to deny the facts, just
mentioned. Alas! what I have said is too frequently verified, to question the
truth of it. In vain are we told, that the tears, which we shed in the theater,
teach us to be compassionate; the momentary tenderness, excited by romance,
seldom, if ever, materially affects the heart. Some, who are just come from a
scene, at which they were almost dissolved into tears, could with dry eyes
behold the wretch, who, in want of every comfort, implores their pity and
relief.

ASSEMBLIES have so often proved the occasions of intrigues and duels, that I
cannot venture to recommend them to you. It is certainly very proper, that a
young man of fashion should know how to introduce himself, at such places; and
particularly that he should be able to dance gracefully. But it is also also
very necessary, that he should know, that of all qualifications, dancing is the
least considerable: That a man of science looks on it with an eye of pity; and
that an officer ought neither too curiously to study it, nor too earnestly
engage in it: It is the property of persons of a trifling character, to be
wholly occupied by trifles.

AS to play; there is no species of it, which does not stand in need of some
apology to excuse it. At best, it shows a feebleness of mind, which is
incapable of proper application; and occasions a loss of time which it is
impossible to redeem: You must never consider it, but as a necessary
recreation, and an act of civility which you owe to society. But lay this down
as a maxim, that the money, which we win, seldom does us the least good; and
that the loss of our money seldom fails to disconcert us.

OF games of hazard I say nothing; they are so dangerous that I am persuaded
you will most carefully avoid them: In these, men either lose their reputation,
or their fortune, or both. And however rich they may suppose themselves; from
the moment they commence gamesters, they can never insure their being worth a
shilling: A single throw often reduces an opulent man to absolute beggary.

I AM, perhaps, wrong, in reckoning play in the number of pleasures; it
certainly has much more the appearance of study, than of recreation. The eyes
fixed, the attention engrossed, a deep silence, a restless inquietude arising
from the fear of losing or the hopes of gain, exclude the most distant idea of
pleasure. This is the state of all who lose. They are ^ull of care, they are
(...) of complaints, they torment themselves; and when they are seen PLAYING,
to say the truth, they do every thing but PLAY.

AS for feasts: They are only our ordinary meals, embellished by elegance and a
variety of meats. They may serve to remind us, that this body of ours is a
slave, that has a great many wants to be supplied, and that all these kinds of
food, with which our vanity is fed, were originally designed merely for a
remedy against death. It is a sure indication of a degenerate mind, when any
man makes his happiness to consist in the pleasure of eating.

DO not imagine, my dear children, that I have the least desire of making you
unsociable, or morose. My intention is only to inspire you with elevated
sentiments; to teach you the true value of things; that you may not mistake
tinsel for gold; but that you may use this world as not abusing it: And that
you may be assured, that a conscientious discharge of your duty, is the only
source of real pleasure; that to reach forth comfort to the miserable gives the
truest satisfaction; and furnishes the mind with that enjoyment, which no
entertainments or diversions can afford.

CAN there be a more pitiable object than one whose whole happiness depends on
a fox chase, a concert, or a play? Should either of these fail him, he is
undone: Or, if by chance he should be so circumstanced, as to be out of the
reach of them, he is so miserable, that his existence is a burden to him.

WHO, on the contrary, is more happy than he who, furnished with the means of
amusing solitude, can sit down and relish the pleasures of reading and
contemplation? Such a man goes out into the world merely for recreation, and to
discharge the duties which he owes to society: He considers the public
amusements as incidental means of relaxation; but can never be induced to set
his heart on such useless trifles.

AS your military life may often oblige you to live in countries very ill
supplied even with common necessaries, you must accustom yourselves to be well
satisfied, wherever you are. In order to which, reflect, that the mind is the
principal object, which deserves your attention; and that if you cultivate the
growth of virtue in your hearts, you will have within yourselves a never
failing source of satisfaction.

THE diversions of the field are certainly amusing; the charms of music are
unquestionably great; but our attachment to either, falls little short of
madness, if we suffer them to engross our whole time, or our best affections.
It is temperance, which must give a relish even to our pleasures; and which
alone renders them worthy of a rational soul. When we would be always amused,
we lose the idea of amusement; even what is most delicious becomes insipid, by
being constantly within our reach. Every thing grows dull to that heart, which
is a prey to voluptuousness; every unnecessary refinement made use of to whet
the appetite for pleasure, produces a painful satiety. If you only consider
recreation, as the remedy of fatigue, it will be very easy to find amusement:
Studied pleasures are only for those, whose appetites are in a manner exhausted.

AS you are now arrived at an age, in which your passions begin to show
themselves; guard with the utmost care against every thing which may corrupt
your morals, or disturb your tranquillity. Youth is the torrid ^ne of life; and
the irregular love of women the source of inquietude and misfortunes. History
abounds with instances of those ravages which it is continually making: It
presents itself to us under the attractive idea of pleasure; but it soon
becomes a torment, which disorders the imagination, distracts the mind, and
tyrannizes over the heart.

WHOEVER is thoroughly subject to its power, is always ready to violate the
most sacred duties: He forgets his friends, his country, and his GOD; he sees
nothing but the object of his passion; he hearkens to nothing but the voice of
his unbridled desires.

IN this dreadful situation you will be sure to find yourselves, if you know
not how to fill up your time in a proper manner. The passions must be subdued
by the stubbornness of labor; and temptation must be resisted, by avoiding the
occasions of it: We are sure of being lost, whenever we seek for danger. The
miseries of lust may be read in the very faces of those, who give themselves up
to it. Nothing exhausts and enervates like debauchery; it destroys at once the
understanding and the health.

YOU will tell me, perhaps, that by my system of morality ALL pleasures are
forbidden: No, my children, there are many recreations, which virtue allows;
and in which you will find sufficient satisfaction, when you only seek them for
the sake of amusement.

A SOCIAL game at cards, cheerful conversation, an evening walk, an interesting
book, a game at tennis, or a day's hunting, a dinner with your friends, and
innocent mirth -- these should be your amusements. And these will have charms
enough, if you know the nature of true pleasure; I mean that, which is not
purchased with pain or remorse; and which, leaving the mind at all times in the
same easy state in which it found it, is under no apprehension of shame, nor
fears the censures of mankind.

IF a libertine would venture to calculate all the difficulties and
embarrassments, which he is under, to disguise his conduct from the eyes of
men, and to conceal his shame from his parents or his friends, he would see
that his life is a continual torment: And that the wretched privilege of
ruining his constitution, and destroying his life, is purchased with endless
vexations. In vain does he shelter himself from the reproaches of men; GOD sees
him and his crimes, in the very moment of commission; and they are written in
that everlasting book, in which all our actions are recorded.

FREQUENTLY reflect, I beseech you, on what I have said; and you will find,
that true satisfaction consists only in an upright attention to your duty. A
mind so composed will receive pleasure even from a sight of a flower beginning
to disclose its beauties, or from a murmuring stream; or even from viewing the
formation of the smallest insect. A reflecting mind improves every
contemplation of the wonderful works of the Creator; it finds numberless
beauties in those objects, which pass unnoticed by persons of a dissipated turn.

WHAT delight is the prospect of a flowery meadow capable of affording to a
mind unsullied by vice! What satisfaction does a tender and a virtuous heart
feel, from the conscious sense of a good action! Such as these are the
pleasures, which I wish you to experience: We are always independent, when we
have the resources of entertainment within ourselves. He, who is always running
about in search of happiness, seldom finds any thing more than the shadow of it.

LET your minds then open themselves to the pleasures, which virtue offers to
your acceptance; and think, that, as effeminacy is the parent of chagrin, you
will no longer be able to support yourselves than while you are fond of labor,
and know how to diversify it. This variety tends admirably to hinder distaste;
nothing being so tedious as an uniform sameness of employment.

WHILST you carefully avoid the company of libertines, I am sure you will be
safe; but if once you associate with them, you will infallibly become a prey to
vice: Their conversation tends only to seduce, and their examples are
infectious. Accustomed to receive, from the most plausible writers, whatever
can inspire them with the love of pleasure; they praise, extol, and recommend
them wherever they go; as a cloud scatters hail, or rain, over every country
through which it passes.

I AM sensible that you have need of resolution. But what is a man, that is
driven about with every wind? Who can be good with such as are good, and a
libertine with such as are dissolute; in short, who has no inclinations or
purpose of his own. If you think my advice tends only to render your life
melancholy; you will neither do justice to my affection, nor to my discernment.
Adopt the measures which I recommend; and you will very soon know, by
experience, that as your happiness is the only earthly object of my care; so I
am neither mistaken in the end, nor in the means which I point out to you, of
effecting it. The voice of a mother, so deeply interested as I am in your
welfare, is not the voice of treachery. Death, approaching, begins to open my
eyes; and imparts to me new rays of light: It destroys indeed my bodily
strength, but it increases the powers of my understanding. It redoubles my love
of those, whom I consider as a part of myself, which will soon survive me; and,
as it were, secure to me a continuance on that earth, on which I shall no
longer personally exist.

IF any thing can afford me comfort in death, it will be the confidence, that
you will conscientiously observe my precepts. Promise me, therefore, my beloved
children, with such expressions as a sense of duty will suggest; promise me on
the truth of a soldier, whose word of honor is most sacred; promise me that
you will conform your lives to the rules which I have here laid down, and that
you will not dishonor my memory by an irregular and vicious conduct.

HERE the children of our excellent mother cast themselves at her feet: And in
the midst of tears and sighs protested, that their lives should be exactly
such, as she had marked out to them; and that they had rather die in her
presence, than make her such promises, as they did not mean to perform. Each of
them embraced her in the tenderest manner; after which the generous parent
finished her conference by saying, in a steady, but interrupted tone of voice
--

I RECEIVE your protection with the utmost comfort: I would make it known, that
it might be a witness against you, if you should ever counteract your own
solemn engagements. The world, corrupt as it is, would then show, that it has
virtue enough to set itself against you, and vindicate my rights: But in so
doing, I should think I dishonored you by my unjust apprehensions. Only
remember, that no one, without GOD'S assisting grace, can attain to any thing
which is good; and that you stand in need of succor from Heaven, to enable you
to put in practice what you have promised.

CONFERENCE VIII. On AMBITION.
THIS evening shall be employed in ^ing the manuscript which your father left
you; let us give it that attention, which it deserves............

THE love of honor being the passion of persons of rank, and especially of
soldiers; it is very necessary that you should be taught the best means of
regulating it. If it has no bounds, it becomes an headstrong vice; which is
ready to sacrifice families, provinces, and kingdoms, nay, even the whole
universe to its own interest. Massacres, wars, depredations of every kind, take
their rise only from a false ambition: When this affection of the mind is
improved into a system, we no longer regard the law, our country, or our GOD.

I HAVE never been able to read the history of those wretched people without
horror; who, to satisfy their inordinate desires, have effected the utter
subversion of a whole nation, and feasted their eyes and their hearts with the
dreadful spectacle. They are monsters, which deserved to have been buried in
oblivion: History ought not even to have transmitted their names to our
remembrance. Immortality is the reward of virtue alone; as for wickedness, it
is worthy to be consigned to that darkness, whence it proceeded.

THERE is a kind of ambition, which we call emulation; and which, having
nothing in its view but the public good, or its own advancement, according to
the strictest rules of equity and honor, must needs be considered as a virtue.
Without this species of ambition, our faculties would be benumbed, our talents
would remain buried; there would be no enterprise, or discovery in the world:
Men, reduced to a level with the brute creation, would live without rule and
without reason.

IT was the design of Providence, that our own private interest should be
intimately connected with that of the public; and that the general good should
be promoted by the exertion of each man's particular abilities. Every one seems
to be laboring for himself; and yet this labor, though SELF appears to be the
immediate object, soon unites with the common mass of industry: And thus is
composed that useful body of men, who maintain the strength and magnificence of
the state, at the hazard of their lives, or by the sweat of their brows.

WE are no where forbidden to keep our own advancement in our view; but we are
at all times required to prefer the public good before our private interest:
And while we are less concerned about our own advantage, than about that of our
country, we shall never desire any thing, but what is just and reasonable. When
either arrogance or avarice so far prevails, as to make us with to appropriate
to ourselves the praises and rewards, which are not our due, we then become
usurpers, and cease to be worthy citizens.

AMBITION is a passion, which runs into every extreme: One while it debases
him, who is enslaved to it; at another time it exalts him above measure: It is
the parent of pride on one hand, and of meanness on the other. Of this sort are
those obsequious wretches, who bow themselves at the feet of such as are able
to promote them; while they treat those with contempt, from whom they have
nothing to expect.

WE must be well acquainted with the ambitious, if we would be competent judges
of the miseries they endure. We should then see what variety of projects, what
a succession of uneasinesses, fills their imagination: How their minds are
distracted with hopes and fears; how continually they are deluded with the
phantom of glory, which suddenly vanishes away; and which makes the ambitious
man think himself perpetually on the brink of happiness, without ever actually
attaining to it. Scarce is one of his desires gratified, when a second presents
itself: His heart, like the vessel of the DANAIDES, can never be filled; he is
like another TANTALUS, whose thirst is never to be quenched. What a lamentable
state is this!

WHETHER it is the design of Providence to stop the ambitious in his career, or
whether he is exhausted by his own desires; I have seen a multitude of young
people, hurried away by this passion, perish in the midst of their projects of
grandeur and advancement. Alas! will there not be earth enough to supply us
with a grave; and must we be incessantly reminded, that this life is so short
and transitory, that there is not time to form designs, and to see them
executed?

IT should seem, that the honors with which men feed their imagination, must
needs be eternal; and yet -- a single moment is sufficient to put an end both
to them and their possessors. The earth is covered with inscriptions, which
announce the transitory condition of human grandeur: We spend our whole lives
in desiring that promotion, at which we never arrive; or, at least, not before
the eve of death. Truly it was well worth our while, to torment ourselves night
and day, about what is so full of uncertainty, and of so short duration!

THERE is only one sort of ambition, which I can venture to recommend to you;
that of imitating your ancestors, and of serving your country with a zeal which
nothing can diminish. In every thing else, let moderation set bounds to your
desires: He is worthy of every thing, who thinks he deserves nothing.

THEY who are continually complaining of the injustice done them, because their
merit is not properly attended to, are men of a most ignoble spirit: We adopt a
very different language, when we feel in our minds that generosity of
sentiments, which raises us above the caprice of fortune. The mere satisfaction
of having honorably served the public, is of more value, than every kind of
recompense. We must put ourselves in a situation to hope for every thing from
Heaven; this will prove the best ground of comfort, amidst all the injustice of
men.

I SHOULD be very miserable, if I thought you could only rise, by means of
intrigue. Show on all occasions a generous greatness of mind, which raises you
above all the little artifices, and base compliances, which ambition studies.
Habituate yourselves to desire no other advancement, than that which may arise
from the performance of your duty; choose rather to live in obscurity, than to
shine with a borrowed luster. If we would be really honored by the dignities
conferred on us, we must never be ashamed to declare, by what means we attained
to the^: True honor consists not so much in obtaining promotion, as in having
deserved it. Those titles, with which a man of fashion is distinguished, no
longer afford him any real satisfaction than while they are confirmed by the
public approbation.

IF you love the truth, as I trust you always will, you will be utter strangers
to flattery and duplicity; but you must expect in return, that fortune, who
bestows the chief of her favors on compliance and deceit, will not reckon you
in the number of her favorites. You will then be great, only in the way which
is proper for you; true glory will never leave you. You will find, in
yourselves, those honors and riches, which are not to be found in courts; and
you will have this satisfaction, that neither injuries nor death itself will be
able to take any thing from you.

IT is time for you, my children, to show to the world an example of true
magnanimity: The hearts of too many are so debased, that they only think how
they may arrive at honors, without concerning themselves whether the means are
generous and lawful. Envy, which always forms an atmosphere round virtuous
characters, will perhaps consider you as proud; but what does calumny avail,
against a conscience void of offense? It is then we wrap ourselves up in our
integrity; and are contented to defy malevolence Whoever resolutely devotes
himself to the practice of virtue, will not fail to have enemies; so invariably
is it the lot of real merit to be persecuted, that it is laid down as an axiom,
that it must be so.

IT is not sufficient to be possessed of military courage. You must have a
strength of mind, which extends itself to every part of your conduct; which
raises you above all the rumors of malice and envy; which makes you despise
reports and cabals; and which renders you invulnerable to the shafts of
ingratitude and revenge.

DO not imagine that, under the pretext of elevating your minds, I wish so to
debase them, as to make you indifferent to every insult which may be offered to
you: All I have to say on so delicate a subject, is, that your own prudence
must be your chief defense. By being affable and well-bred, you will avoid
those dreadful rencounters, in which we know what we ought to do, but do not
know what we shall be compelled to do.

WHATEVER may happen to you, never forget, that every subject owes his life to
his king and country; and that YOU doubly owe yours, both as citizens and
soldiers. You are appointed by the state as sentinels, to watch in its defense;
the preservation therefore of your own lives is a necessary part of your duty.

IF a trial must be made of your personal courage, war will furnish you with
abundant opportunities of showing it. You never will be accused of want of
bravery, whilst you are seen the last in a retreat, and the foremost to engage;
it is in such situations, that a noble ambition ought to influence your
conduct. When you have only desires of this kind, virtue will secure them, and
crown them with blessing and good success.

THE duties of a soldier are the properest to excite emulation; they never want
opportunities to distinguish themselves. Even peace furnishes them with ^ans of
exercising their faculties both of mind and body. It is then they make
themselves masters of their profession, and become accomplished through study
and practice.

WHEN your rank requires you to make your appearance at court, you will not
fail to attend (...): Not for the sake of offering the incense of adulation to
the great; nor to solicit more lucrative employments, but merely to form
honorable connexions with noblemen of the best character; and to cherish in
your hearts that respectful and filial love, which you owe to your King. Let
merit alone speak in your behalf; and leave it to those who wish you well, to
give it its proper weight. Your attendance at court will not then be irksome to
you; and courtiers will not look upon you with a jealous eye. As you will not
have any pretensions, you will have no inducement to act a part; and this
simplicity and ease being something uncommon, will perhaps more strongly
recommend you than dissimulation. We had once an Colbert.
ambassador, who surprised those of every other court; and obtained every thing
he wanted, by always speaking the truth. Behold, in him, the perfect model of a
worthy minister!

THE minds of men are so corrupt, that I should not be at all surprised, if
these hints for your future conduct were considered as romantic notions; but if
you consult truth and experience, you will think very differently of them. They
will convince you, that it is not from the republic of PLATO, that I derive
these admonitions; and that you will never be truly happy, but when you reduce
them into practice. Follow after virtue; make a grateful return for the love
which I have shown you; honor your mother, listen to her instructions: And
remember, that there are no people upon earth, with whom the advice of a dying
parent is not accounted as sacred as an oracle.

THIS conference made such an impression upon them, that they kept a profound
silence; 'till their mother, whose very soul was filled with a tender anxiety
for her children's happiness, thus addressed them: Such, my dear children, are
the truths, of which your hearts must be the faithful depositories; and which
you must have continually before your eyes, as the most lively image of your
father, l would to GOD he had survived me! You would have found in the strength
of his understanding, and in the greatness of his sentiments, every thing that
is capable of improving and perfecting your own. But alas! this is a vain wish:
He is departed as a shadow. You have only had a father -- to regret your loss
of him; and the hour is at hand, when you will have nothing left you but -- the
remembrance of a mother.

CONFERENCE IX. On GENEROSITY.
I HAVE often thought that amidst all the different modes of educating young
people, they have never been sufficiently instructed in the nature of true
Generosity. To supply this defect, I intend to show you, that there is nothing
which raises us to a nearer resemblance to the Deity, than the practice of this
duty. We become imitators of that Providence, which dispenses its bounty with
profusion; and we resemble those beneficial clouds, which distill plenty on
every part of the earth.

THE spendthrift is as far from generosity as the miser: They are both of them
beings, who have nothing in view but their own gratifications, without any
regard to the necessities of their neighbor. The one throws his money away,
and the other locks it up; but misery receives no consolation from either.
There is no virtue, where there is neither discretion, nor any regard for the
public good: Whatever has nothing better than vanity for its principle, is
certainly far from being worthy of praise.

WHAT indeed would become of us, if our sentiments were wholly under the
influence of caprice! Nothing but folly and singularity would be found among
men; and that attention to the public welfare, which ought to direct our
sentiments and conduct, would insensibly come to naught. It is the law of
prudence and of reason, which determines the use we ought to make of our
talents and abilities; and it is only in following this law, that we advance
toward perfection, and do honor to humanity.

RICHES are either an honor, or a disgrace, to those who possess them; it is a
real misfortune to be rich, when we know not how to use our riches. I had
infinitely rather leave you in a state of indigence, than know, that you were
either covetous or extravagant. Avarice renders us the objects of public
indignation; prodigality carries us headlong into a thousand difficulties. It
is generosity alone, which observes the happy medium betwixt both; which
renders us worthy partakers of earthly and heavenly blessings; provided it is
the work of the heart, and not the effect of humor or ostentation.

WHAT delight does it afford one, to see a generous nobleman, who, giving every
thing to beneficence, and nothing to vanity, finds resources in frugality, for
the supply of the necessities of his friend, the assistance of an indigent
widow, or the consolation of the unfortunate! Such a sight as this addresses
itself to the heart; and with a power ten thousand times more affecting than
any theatrical representation, awakens all the sensibility of the soul, and
raises it above humanity itself.

EXHIBIT to the world, my dear children, such a character as this; consecrate a
part of your income to the benefit of your distressed fellow creatures. Let
your liberality extend itself, wherever the miseries of others are urgent;
adapt your bounty to the different degrees of wretchedness: When circumstances
demand it, be generous according to the extent of your ability, and the
exigency of the case.

TRUE generosity consists in giving with propriety: The manner of dispensing is
oftentimes more pleasing than the gift itself. A man, who gives with an
ungracious air, destroys all the merit of his benefaction: If you would oblige
by your generosity, you must show the party whom you serve, that you think it
more blessed to give than to receive. A liberal man sets a greater value on
gold, chiefly because it enables him to relieve the necessitous.

I HAVE often seen your father give large sums of money to the truly distressed;
and perceived that he was more delighted with such an act, than he could have
been by any favor conferred upon himself. He felt, in his heart, that there is
no satisfaction equal to the pleasure of obliging others. Oh! if he were now
instructing you in my stead, with what earnestness of affection would he
encourage you to adopt his sentiments, and imitate his practice! How often has
the generous tear of pity fallen from his eyes, at the sight of a miserable
object! Many a time has he led me to the habitations of the wretched, to teach
me a proper regard for the poor, and to excite my desire to comfort them. He
sought the company of such as needed relief; he conversed freely with them as
with brethren: He became a party in their sufferings by a friendly sympathy,
and filled their hearts with consolation and joy.

SO bright an example must needs engage your reverence and imitation. You are
under the strongest obligations to show those persons, who have experienced the
goodness of your father, that his virtues have descended to you, and that you
are not degenerate: Otherwise, you will only be despised, and will be
considered as unworthy of that inheritance which he has left you.

YOU live in an age, wherein luxury dries up the source of liberality: That we
may give full scope to our vanity, we have nothing left for the relief of
misery. We do not inquire, how much we can spare for acts of mercy; but what
will enable us to gratify our passion for the most expensive pleasures? As for
generosity, it passes with some for a romantic virtue: and yet I will venture
to assure you, that it is as essential to a man of quality as courage; and that
it even makes a part of honesty itself.

YOU will never be truly great, but so long as greatness is the principle of
your actions. Every thing is little in a nobleman, who is not generous: His
ideas are little, his sentiments are mean. The soul grows narrow and confined,
when we are thinking only of economy; we must know how to spend, and how to
give.

GENEROSITY is a virtue, which foresees evil, and endeavors to prevent it;
which embraces every opportunity of doing good, and is awakened by the first
complaint of the miserable. Listen only to her dictates, and you will liberally
recompense those who serve you; you will be ready to lend, and will know no
greater satisfaction, than when you are relieving your neighbor. It is
shocking, to see men prefer so worthless a possession as money, before the life
of their brother; or to see them make use of their riches, only to feed their
vanity and pride. I had rather your house were without furniture, and your
wardrobe without clothes; than that you should be insensible of the miseries of
the poor. But generosity, which runs not to such excess, and is duly mindful of
measure and proportion, will suggest to you the means of reconciling what you
owe to your rank, with what you owe to your neighbor: It will give order to
your domestic affairs, and an air of greatness to all your actions: So as to
enable you to be oeconomical, and yet magnificent on proper occasions.

ABRIDGE yourselves as much as possible of those superfluities, which the world
esteems fashionable; To be the slave of vanity and folly, argues a weak and
pusillanimous spirit. A soldier is not allowed to be subject to those trifles,
which engross the attention of a PETIT MAITRE: Nothing is more incompatible
with the indulgencies of luxury and pride, than a military life; nor does any
thing better support the dignity of that character, than a noble, unaffected
external appearance. We often have recourse to the world; only because we
esteem what is fashionable and specious, in preference to what is really
meritorious and praiseworthy.

THE different masters, who have hitherto had the care of your education, have
only taught you to read and speak with propriety: They have instructed you in
the elements of some of the sciences; and enabled you to appear with an air of
ease and elegance. But MY business is to furnish your minds with such
sentiments, as may render you worthy of the country in which you live; the rest
is no more than mere varnish. When your souis are filled with the love of GOD,
your king and your country, and with a true sense of your several duties; your
character will be complete, your conduct will be exemplary: You will then give
every man his due, and live in such a manner as to render virtue respectable.

THE generosity which I recommend to you, being that virtue which particularly
belongs to people of quality, is not simply confined to lending or giving: It
extends itself much farther, rendering the mind sensible of every thing that is
interesting to humanity. What indeed can be more truly great, more worthy of
your illustrious birth, than to be touched with the sight of the miseries of
others? You will not only sympathize with those who suffer; but you will make
every one about you happy. If you have a detachment to command, you will render
the soldier's duty as easy to him as you can: You will listen to his
complaints; you will comfort him in his sorrows, you will be his protector and
his friend. Your father has often told me, that the great VENDOME could have
led his troops even into the midst of the sea; so warmly were they attached to
their General. They were ready to sacrifice themselves for the sake of a
commander, who treated them with humanity; and who knew how to be good to his
soldiers, without being familiar with them.

OF that multitude of young persons who are ruined by extravagance, none are
capable either of friendship or compassion: Their life, which is a continual
succession of pleasures, of debts, and embarrassments, puts it out of their
power to serve and oblige others. Their vanity and their passions demand all
they have; and besides what tends to the gratification of these, nothing more
is to be expected. You will see the world filled with this sort of people; who,
being distressed in the midst of large NOMINAL estates, enrich only those who
plunder them, or who lend them money at an extravagant interest. They insult
the wretched; they despise the common people; they make a jest of the public
misery; and pay attention only to the instruments of their pleasures, and the
ministers of their passions.

THESE are the men, with whom you must never be connected: The company of the
wicked is truly pestilential; we insensibly grow familiar with their vices, and
we soon begin to imitate them. Engage virtue to find you true friends, and she
will procure them for you. There are yet generous minds to be found, whom the
world has not corrupted; and who, knowing how to distinguish betwixt the
demands of fashion, and those of right reason, would rather abridge themselves,
than leave the wretched without consolation and relief. We cannot, to be sure,
assist all who suffer; but a well disposed mind makes amends for this
inability, by those expressions of pity and regret, which render its
generosity, unquestionable.

IT only remains, that I recommend it to you not to imitate the folly of those
mistaken devotees, who, to make a greater show with their alms, divide into a
great number of small portions, what is scarce sufficient to relieve a
twentieth part of those among whom it is distributed. By confining your
benefactions within a narrower compass, you will be enabled to do more real
good; you may perhaps save some distressed families from ruin: Whereas alms
scattered here and there are like medicines which palliate, but never heal.

GIVE the reins to your natural disposition, which has hitherto appeared
excellent; and in the case of generosity I know no better guide. Fear not, that
you shall lessen your fortune by assisting the necessitous; we only ruin
ourselves by being vicious: Virtue keeps every one within proper bounds, who is
attentive to her precepts.

WHAT I have neglected to do in this respect, I charge YOU to supply; filial
affection engages you to do it: And my love demands it of you in the most
earnest manner, as the means of enabling me to live, even after my death. You
cannot but see how nearly it approaches: My eyes are already grown dim; my
voice is weakened; and nothing remains to me, but that spirit which a sense of
duty inspires. I will keep it alive as much as possible, even to my latest
moment, that I may omit nothing which can possibly improve your understanding,
or exalt your sentiments. As an equal share of attention is due from me to all
my children, I shall discourse tomorrow evening with your sister: She is of an
age to understand the language of reason; and she is so apt to learn, that I
have great cause to hope my advice will not be thrown away upon her.

I AM obliged to summon together all the information I have ever received, that
I may be the better enabled to furnish you all with the means of conducting
yourselves aright. My heart is constantly filled with anxiety on your account;
it urges, it conjures me to unfold to you all that it can think of, and all
that it desires to secure your happiness.

WHAT a comfort will it be to me, if death should leave me time fully to
declare my sentiments to you all! There is a wonderful difference betwixt the
instructions which we receive from a master, and the advice which is delivered
by the mouth of a mother; whose words are, every one of them, expressive of the
tenderest affection. Could you but know what passes in my mind every time I
speak to you! It appears, as if you actually resided in my heart; and as though
my blood, which can hardly any longer circulate through my veins, served only
to be employed for your support.

NO: Nothing can equal the tenderness of sentiment, which your presence excites
in my heart: I have told you so a hundred times; and I shall tell you so again
and again, even to my last breath. The more ardent our affection is, the more
it delights to repeat its tenderness and transports. Alas! every thing
conspires to affect me, whenever I behold you: I see your father in every line
and feature: When you speak, it is his voice I hear. In short, I see my own
heart represented in yours; and this assures me, that when I shall cease to
live, I shall be renewed in you: Ah! Dismal moment of separation both to you
and me.

CONFERENCE X. On FEMALE CONDUCT.
I HAVE long wished, my dear Daughter, for this opportunity of freely
conversing with you on subjects of the utmost consequence to you. Your youth,
the world into which you are going, the snares which it lays, and the few days
which I have yet to live, all induce me to open my heart to you, and to give
you some instructions relative to your dangerous situation.

IF you could possibly entertain a doubt of my affection, the effort I am now
making, when my soul is bowed down with sickness and sorrow, and sees nothing
before it but the horrors of the grave, must needs convince you how earnestly I
wish to secure your happiness. My wishes will never be realined, but while you
are careful to lay down proper rules for your conduct, and suffer nothing
afterward to tempt you to break through them.

IF you are so unhappy as to give yourself up to the distraction of the world,
you will no longer be able to maintain the dominion over your own heart: You
will live an utter stranger to yourself; and there will not be a single day,
which you will know how to dispose of in a proper manner. The world is never to
be satisfied; the more we bestow upon it, the more unreasonable are its demands.

YOUR sex requires the utmost circumspection; what among MEN is reputed a
venial fault, is an absolute crime with us. There are a thousand things said
and done in their company, which a woman ought neither to hear nor see. I would
wish that a young woman should be silent and modest; and the world, dissipated
as it is, expects the same. Its judgment of us is very severe; and it often
fixes our character for life.

IF you are over-solicitous to please others, you will run into a ridiculous
affectation; You must make yourself agreeable to every one you converse with,
without letting them see that you are thinking about it. Nothing pleases which
is not natural. A woman, who sets herself to draw the attention and admiration
of all upon her, will soon become an arrant coquette, if she is not one already.

IT is only a natural and virtuous behavior, which will secure to you esteem
and approbation: If this should not succeed, so much the worse for those you
meet with. Whatever happens, this truth is indisputable; that one of the
brightest ornaments of the sex is modesty. And that a young lady can never
appear to greater advantage, than when she is utterly divested of affectation
in her behavior.

DO not confound the ideas of modesty and timidity: The one pleases, the other
distresses; we cannot avoid being hurt, when we see a young person confused and
disconcerted. There is such a thing as an ingenuous confidence, which should
make you not unwilling to speak, when the subject requires it; and to sing or
dance, when a proper opportunity presents itself. If you are not vain, you will
not be timorous to a fault.

I SHALL be very sorry for you, if ever vanity takes possession of your heart;
for then, instead of being agreeable and communicative, you will be always
unhappy in yourself, and your boldness will only serve to make you ridiculous
to others. A disdainful carriage is that of a person of mean talents, and a bad
heart; people of quality are less apt to assume it, than those of an inferior
rank. We seldom endeavor to set ourselves off by pride, but when we have no
other means of distinguishing ourselves; this is a ridiculous affectation,
which the world always laughs at, but never forgives: The more humiliating our
behavior is to others, the more pleasure do they take in letting us down.

AFFABILITY will supply the want of those qualities, which you do not possess:
It is the best apology that I know for little imperfections. Great allowances
are always made for one, who has no pride or pretensions to superior merit: But
self-love naturally raises in us an opposition to arrogance and presumption.
Many women have become the subjects of satire, only by their haughty behavior.
Your figure is not without its share of elegance; and the handsomer a lady is,
the more ready people are to suspect that she is vain.

THE education I have hitherto given you convinces me, that the toilet will not
engage your chief attention; you ought to spend as much time at it, as is
necessary for your decent appearance in company. We must not fly in the face of
fashion, or make ourselves remarkable by our singularity: But there are certain
trifles in dress, which we ought to despise. Those which make a woman a slave
to her dress, are fit only for such weak minds, as the present age, with all
its attachment to trifles, has not yet learnt to esteem.

LET your hours be properly regulated; and you will find time to worship GOD,
and to pursue some useful study. You will then have no imaginary complaints;
and will be an utter stranger to the miseries attendant upon idleness: A life
well employed, is always an agreeable life.

DO not think of amusing yourself with reading romances: It is a real malady to
have one's brain filled with such ideas as they furnish. We never see things in
their true light; they give us a taste only for ridiculous extravagances,
extraordinary adventures, and mavelous sentiments: We insensibly adopt the
language of self-importance and affectation, and become ourselves the heroines
of romance.

THE books you read should be as pure as your heart, and be reduced within a
narrow compass. It is a mistake, to pretend that our sex ought to STUDY. We
have no offices of trust to fill, nor any dignities to be invested with; and
therefore we have only need to learn what is necessary to form the mind, and
improve the understanding. Almost every learned woman shows that the sciences
do not belong to us: I have seldom seen one of them, that was not vain,
decisive, and affected in her manner of thinking, speaking, and acting.

YOUR attention should be directed to works of ingenuity; and you should learn
the best methods of regulating a family, whenever you shall be settled in the
world. You may perhaps be told, that this is not the fashionable mode of
education; but fashion must not be allowed to supersede duty. A woman, whose
life is a perpetual round of trifles, is only fit to be made the subject of a
comedy.

PRIDE persuades persons of a certain rank, that they live only to enjoy
themselves. How should I be grieved, if you entertained such sentiments as
these! Pleasure ought only to be considered as a relaxation from fatigue; and
must always be regulated and approved by virtue. Observe this rule, and you
will see what sentiments we ought to entertain of the generality of public
diversions. I have so good an opinion of your understanding, as to think you
would one day despise me, if I recommended them to you, as the means of giving
you any solid satisfaction. If ONE innocent mind has been corrupted by them,
that alone is sufficicnt to prove them dangerous; besides this, libertines
speak highly enough of them, to make us suspect that they are rather of a
mischievous, than useful tendency.

AS to cards, played merely for amusement, and under the restrictions formerly
mentioned, I see not why you should totally reject them. They ruin no one, they
prevent idle conversation, they promote a social intercourse; and provided you
use them with moderation, this is as allowable as any other relaxation. The
same may be said of music; it is with great propriety considered as an
accomplishment in a lady; and is often found of great use in those hours,
wherein we wish for amusement.

REMEMBER, my dear child, that an obliging behavior is the very life of
society. There is no one who is not pleased with a smiling countenance; a want
of good humor would render you insupportable to yourself and every one about
you. A reasonable soul ought always to be under the guidance of reason; the
behavior of a capricious mistress is a great discouragement to her attendants:
If you would secure their affection, endeavor to deserve it.

MY weakness, which daily increases, will not allow me to hope that I shall
live to see you settled in the world: But it is GOD'S will that it should be
so; and to his good Providence I submit. Yet let me previously observe to you,
that an amiable and obliging wife may almost always insure to herself a kind
and indulgent husband. Let your affection be confined to him, whom you have
engaged to love: Seek only to please him, and peace shall dwell in your house.
If, in spite of all your care and prudence, things should not always go
smoothly on, you will find a conscience void of reproach, the greatest comfort
in the world.

KEEP yourself an utter stranger to intrigues; when we are faithful in the
discharge of our duty, we have no need to have recourse to artifice and
falsehood. The conduct of a virtuous woman never shuns the light: The more her
character is inquired into, the better she is satisfied. It is a pitiable
situation to live in a state of perpetual apprehension; and to have no better
security against public shame than the prudence or fidelity of a domestic, whom
one has made a confidant. Nothing is so dearly purchased, as the confidence of
low and venal minds: Be connected only with women of the strictest virtue; it
is our acquaintance, which fixes our reputation.

IF you should have children; do not part with them at that time, when the
light of reason begins to dawn in their minds. Then it is, that the soul is
capable of impressions, which can never afterward be effaced; then it is, that
it must be filled with whatsoever can inspire it with the love of truth. How
very imperfectly do they discharge the duty of a mother, who only see their
children, either to admire, or to chide them! Reflect on the conduct of the
fowls of the air; always engaged in the care of their young, they never leave
them 'till they have taught them to fly. Are we less wise than these irrational
creatures? One would think, by the difference in our conduct, that reason was
inferior to instinct.

WHEN you appear thoroughly impressed with a love of your duty, you will have
fewer admirers of your person, than of your virtue. There is nothing more
disgusting than the character of a woman, who listens only to fulsome
compliments; who only lies in wait for flattery, and whose behavior on
obtaining it is truly ridiculous. A well disposed mind treats every one with
proper respect; and never loses its dignity, even when it is most familiar.

BE always upon your guard against a professed wit: He is a critic, who often
does us great mischief: If he is not satirical, he is at least very forward,
and his repartees are to be dreaded. Modesty is no objection to any person: And
few have ever yet complained of it. To give your own opinion with diffidence,
to hear that of others with attention, and heartily to defend your neighbor's
reputation where it may be defended, is a sure way to be loved and esteemed.

ABHOR luxury and idleness; these two, which are the sources of many other
vices, weaken and destroy the powers of the mind. Study nothing more than a
delicacy of sentiment and behavior; speak without affectation, and write
without disguise; nothing is so pleasing as the truth. The letters of Madame DE
SEVIGNE, which you cannot read too often, have never been without admirers,
from their being so exactly conformable to nature; it is a sure sign of our
want of wit, when we are always endeavoring to show it.

SUCH is the advice, my dear daughter, which my own experience and my heart
suggest; a knowledge of the world will supply the rest: This is a science,
which never is forgotten, and which prevents our being deficient in any
necessary point of behavior.

YOU are doubtless surprised that, in a series of instruction, which
comprehends the whole life, I should have said nothing on the subject of
religion. But you will cease to wonder, when I tell you, that I reserve a
subject, so interesting to your brothers and yourself, for another conference;
when I have an opportunity of speaking to you all together.

YOUR father, whom you scarce remember, charged me to be particularly attentive
to your education. Though he is no more, he ought to live continually in your
heart, by a constant love of virtue; this is the best way of recalling him to
your mind, and of showing your respect for his memory.

THE hour is at hand, when you will be an orphan; but you will be in the hands
of GOD; he is more especially the protector of the fatherless. In other
respects, you may depend on the goodness of your uncle, whose sentiments I well
know. He loves you, and he is a man of the strictest integrity. He will
consider you as his daughter; and will settle you in the world, so as to make
you happy. With all my heart I wish you to be so; for it is impossible to love
you more tenderly than I do. But enough for the present, my dear child; it is
time for you to retire; and I am too much agitated by talking thus tenderly
with you. Your presence excites those tears, which my grief will not suffer to
break forth: -- I feel myself almost suffocated; -- I would wish to recover my
spirits, but I am not able: -- Oh! amiable child! -- Oh! mother, deeply
afflicted!

THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
ADVICE FROM A LADY OF QUALITY TO HER CHILDREN, IN THE LAST STAGE OF A
LINGERING ILLNESS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH, BY S. GLASS, D.D. F.R.S. Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Britannick Majesty.

VOL. II.

Printed and sold by S. HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1796.

CONFERENCE XI. On STUDY.
THOUGH the presence of your sister caused in me such emotions of tenderness,
as almost entirely overcame me, yet I am not willing any longer to defer my
admonitions on the love which you ought to have for STUDY. I perceive that I am
hastening to my end; and I desire nothing more sincerely than that, being
reduced to eternal silence, I may find a place in your remembrance. This is the
portion of a being, who has only a borrowed and most precarious life.

I SHALL not enter into a detail, which supposes a knowledge of the sciences,
and of the learned pvofessors of them. For besides that it was always my
opinion, that a woman ought not to study mathematics, or philosophy; that
round of dissipation in which I have spent so great a part of my life, has left
me little more than common experience, and some remembrance of what I have
heard others mention on this head.

I SHOULD imagine that you can never do better, than devote to literary
pursuits the moments which are at your own disposal: A mind, which we neglect
to cultivate, is like a body which we do not feed. By reading, the faculties
are enlarged, the memory is strengthened, and the imagination is enriched: But
the principal point is, to distinguish what is worth reading, in the midst of
so many works, as are continually making their appearance in the world; this
choice is a matter of real difficulty.

MR. --, to whose merit you are no strangers, and whom I have consulted upon
this subject, is of opinion, that you should immediately have recourse to such
writings, as tend to regulate the morals, and to form the mind. He advises your
beginning with books of such a nature as will furnish you with sound principles
on the most important obligations of life; such as will show you the delusions
of sensual conduct, and the destruction occasioned by the indulgence of our
passions; such as will elevate your minds, by making you acquainted with GOD
and with yourselves.

WHEN you have first taken care to furnish yourselves with virtuous sentiments;
you will diligently consult such authors, as have written on the subject of
your profession: It being an unpardonable ignorance not to be well acquainted
with whatever is the business of our lives. Your uncle, who has been engaged in
military service all his life, and who has studied all the arts and exercises
of war, will be the best director in this respect; and will furnish you with
the properest books on the subject: Apply yourselves diligently to this study,
and you will soon reap the fruits of it. A soldier, who goes on only in the
beaten track, without making himself thoroughly acquainted with the nature of
his business, i^ little better than a piece of clock-work; which must be set in
motion, and never deviates from the path assigned it.

AFTER this, you will learn to know the world; BRUYERE'S characters, and
ROCHEFOUCAULT'S maxims, will be found useful to you; in these writers you will
see the portraits of all sorts of men, both in their public and private
capacity.

HISTORY is another picture, which you should carefully examine: All the
operations of the heart and mind are there described in the most interesting
manner. BOSSUET'S treatise on this subject is considered as a masterpiece.

BOOKS of mere amusement, which do not take their place 'till after those of
instruction, are however necessary, by way of relaxation, to prevent fatigue. I
know no romance worth reading, except Don Quixotte, and Telemachus; almost all
the rest are either trifling, or mischievous: Fiction is seldom made use of
with safety; it either serves to embellish vice, or to ridicule virtue.

IT is very right, that you should read the best poets: Poetry elevates the
mind, warms the imagination, and makes us perfect in the art of expression; but
care must be taken to study the poets with discretion. Prose, being less likely
to seduce the mind, is more proper for young persons who suffer themselves too
easily to be imposed upon: We can never be too much on our guard against the
glaring appearance of what is falsely accounted beautiful. I have known many
people, whose taste has been spoiled by reading poetry only: The rhyme seduces,
harmony of numbers bewitches; and what is often only fiction, passes for truth.

NEVER purchase books, without consulting learned and judicious friends; and
remember that it is not the number, but the choice of books which really adorns
and improves the mind. The library of a military man is large enough, if it
contains two or three hundred volumes; they who have more, either keep them for
the use of others, or to flatter their own vanity. How many noblemen are there,
who make no more use of their library, than of their green-house, seldom, if
ever, entering into either!

I HAVE heard it affirmed by a celebrated writer, that almost all modern works
are only copies; and that we ought only to study such, as are originals. I am
sorry this author is now no more; because he would have given you the best
information on this head; but you will easily meet with other learned persons,
who will readily direct your studies. If you pursue the plan here proposed, you
will divide into four classes all the books which you have any need of: The
first, will include books on the subject of religion; the second, books of
instruction in your profession; the third, those which are proper to introduce
you to natural and moral philosophy; and the fourth, books of mere amusement.
We seldom read to advantage, but when we read methodically.

THERE are other works, which we may run through; such as, the daily, and
periodical publications; which may serve to give you a superficial knowledge of
what is passing in the literary world; and will prevent your being a stranger
to what is talked of in company on these subjects. But always show wisdom and
discretion enough, not to confound this kind of writing with those numerous
publications which good sense and religion equally disclaim.

IMPROPER reading is the ruin of young minds; forbidden books ought to be
considered in the light of evil company. Neither the style of a work, nor the
name of an author, can excuse your reading either what is satirical or impure:
Vice is always vice, under whatever colors it presents itself. There are
theatrical performances, so decent that we may venture to go through them, and
so interesting that we cannot help wishing to do it. Be prudent without
affectation, and you will never have any vain scruples.

THE books, which you have hitherto read, are little more than the elements,
and as it were the alphabets of science; those which you should hereafter read,
ought to contain the knowledge of things, and sound reasoning upon them. There
are different kinds of study appropriated to all ages and stations. The mind of
an ecclesiastic demands a very different sort of cultivation from that of a man
of the world.

THE generality of marked are satisfied with being able to write and to speak
well; but this is not sufficient for persons in your situation. Your country
requires that as soldiers you should be well instructed, so as to be able to
give a satisfactory reason for whatever you do: You will moreover find in study
the happy secret of not being burdensome to any one; and will have a perpetual
source of entertainment in yourselves.

WELL chosen books are our best friends; we find them always ready when we want
them: And, when judiciously chosen, they always speak the truth to us. It is a
great happiness to be able sometimes to endure solitude: We must learn how to
withd^aw ourselves from the converse of men, as well as how to bear with it. We
must lay in a store of knowledge against approaching old age: By reading, we
enlarge the sphere of our understanding; and we afterward feel much greater
pleasure in the midst of society. All these advantages will attend you, if you
love study, and cultivate your intellectual faculties.

YOUR father -- alas! I would to GOD, he were now supplying my place on this
important subject! Your father has often told me, that in great towns a love of
study preserved him from a thousand dangers, and that in little villages it
served him instead of company. Be possessed of this resource; for knowledge is
a treasure which no thief can steal: Yet do not seek this treasure at the
expense of your health. Immoderate application to study exhausts the spirits,
and fatigues the mind.

TAKE heed also, that learning do not make you positive or pedantic; the more
men really know, the less they affect to show it. We make every man our enemy,
whom we humiliate by an affected superiority: But he, who regards his own
interest, seeks to make himself friends. If it be true that ignorance is
despised, it is not less true that presumptuous knowledge is generally hated:
An ostentatious display of learning never succeeds.

YOU must not expect to find study always agreeable: Like the rose, it has its
beauties, but is not without its thorns. The beginning of every science, as M.
de Fontenelle observes, is difficult; and nothing but assiduity and labor will
enable you to taste the pleasures of it. I should recommend it to you to devote
three hours, at least, in every day, to study: Two in the morning, and one in
the evening. You are never to forget that you owe something to your rank in
life, as well as to society; and that it is with the soul, as it is with the
body: Excessive hunger and repletion are both injurious to it; by the one it is
famished, by the other it is overloaded.

THERE is another inconvenience in an indiscreet love of study; that it makes
us too cold, and philosophical; it makes men behave in company with an air of
too much gravity, and absence; and gives them the appearance of old men at the
age of thirty. Accustom yourselves to leave your books, as we leave the company
of our friends; seem to forget them, 'till you take them up again. The world,
perhaps, is very little interested in what you read; so that probably what
nearly affected YOU, might to THEM be perfectly indifferent; every one has his
own particular manner of considering things. Our conversation with the dead,
demands recollection, and application;, but that which we hold with the living
should be full of ease, and sprightliness.

IF you are really fond of study, you will every where find an opportunity of
gratifying your taste: The very grass on which you tread, and the insect which
you despise, will serve to display the wonders of divine wisdom. Accustom
yourself always to travel with a common-place-book; a landscape, a monument, a
ruin, every thing of this sort, finds a place in the journal of a person of
reflection.

THE knowledge of customs and manners is another science, which deserves your
attention. You will doubtless have opportunities, in the course of your
profession, of seeing the different nations which surround us: War lays open
every country to the observation of the soldier. You will then be able
yourselves to mark the difference betwixt a Spaniard and a Frenchman, an
Italian and an Englishman. But remember at the same time, that in this variety
there is something not unlike the parterres of a garden; in which each flower
has its merit and perfection: It is a great error, to expect that all the world
should be just such as ourselves.

I HAVE nothing more to say on this subject: My knowledge of it is very
confined, and my strength too much exhausted to be able to prolong this
conference. You live in an age in which you will not want for directors, if you
know how to choose them: As for me, my chief study at present, is the
contemplation of death. I perceive nothing but shades of darkness, which
surround me on every side. My tender regard for you indeed serves from time to
time to disperse them, and opens to my view a gleam of light, by the help of
which I behold you, as the delight of my soul, and the very joy of my heart.
Nothing moves me, where you are not concerned; but I am immediately rouzed,
when your welfare is in question, and I at once forget all my pains and all my
infirmities.

IF my attachment is too strong, GOD, I hope, will pardon it; for he sees the
very bottom of my heart, that it has at present only one desire, viz. that you
may be truly virtuous. I will not say, I would sacrifice my life, to obtain
this blessing; for alas! what would that be worth, at the hands of one, who has
only a few wretched hours, or perhaps minutes, to live? But this is most
certain, that I never yet desired any thing more earnestly, than I now wish for
your happiness, both in this world and the next.

I HUMBLY hope, that GOD will open the kingdom of heaven to receive me; and I
trust, I shall hereafter see you with me there. The short enjoyment I have had
of you upon earth, is not sufficient to satisfy my affection for you; I
perceive it yet too much alive to die with me.

ALAS! how much do we suffer, when the heart is so full of sensibility as mine
is! But I must even divest myself of nature, if I would get rid of my
sentiments of love and tenderness for my children.

CONFERENCE XII. On the CLERICAL CHARACTER.
THE disorder of this excellent lady increasing, they despaired of her being
any more able to discourse with her family: But it pleased GOD, that the
symptoms abated, and her strength returned for a little while. Ever filled with
the tenderest concern for her children, she embraced this oppportunity of
calling her son, the ABBE, and thus addressed him --

YOU, my son, have made choice of a state of life very different from that of
your brothers; the advice therefore, which I would wish to give you, ought to
be personally directed to yourself. My great comfort, with respect to the
profession you have engaged in, is, that I have not overruled your choice;
this encourages me to hope, that GOD will bless you in it. You have more need,
than any other, of the gifts of heaven; because you have more duties to
discharge: No instance of misconduct in an ecclesiastic is trifling or
inconsiderable.

I AM but little acquainted with divinity, or with the books which you ought to
study: But I know that your life ought to be a life of application; and that if
idleness is a fault in us, in one of your profession, it is a crime.

I KNOW also that the books, which should engage your principal attention, are
not merely books of amusement; but those which treat of christian perfection,
and the means which lead us to it. For how will you be able to direct others,
if you have not yourself learnt the way?

BE careful not to be occupied too much with secular affairs: Those
ecclesiastics, who have been so engaged, have never yet found it the way to
procure esteem. They are indeed sought after, and consulted; but they are not
really respected: We think, with reason, that their function should be sacred.

EXTERNALLY to renounce the world, and afterward eagerly to pursue the
concerns of it, is to assume a character truly ridiculous: The life of an
ecclesiastic, immersed in worldly concerns, is inconsistency itself.

I SAY nothing to you of your morals. The most unsullied virtue is so essential
to your profession, that he who is destitute of it, is an object of detestation
in the sight of GOD and man: In spite of the corruption of the age, a vicious
priest is insupportable. Even the libertine is shocked, when he hears of the
misconduct of a person, invested with your sacred character: All men expect,
that they, who are required to set an example to others, should themselves be
really exemplary.

WHAT can be more offensive, than the sight of a clerical PETIT-MAITRE, whose
whole life is spent in ridiculous trifles? There is a certain decorum, which
you cannot too scrupulously observe. I never saw an ecclesiastic, who affected
to be a man of the world, that did not make himself contemptible: The company
generally amuse themselves with such an one, as a bauble or a toy.

IF you would wish to be respected, your outward appearance must not contradict
the nature of your profession. Let all your purposes be honorable and prudent,
and all your words be the interpreters of your mind: It is a certain indication
of a depravity of heart, when we are not circumspect in our conversation.

SHUN hypocrisy, and affected singularity; your situation is too considerable
to have a part to act. Appear to be such as you really are, and every one will
respect you; affected manners suppose weakness or duplicity.

AS for public diversions, consider them as prohibited to persons of your
profession: An ecclesiastic is to be pitied, who cannot find sufficient
employment and satisfaction in the duties of his function. I do not mean to
exclude innocent domestic amusements among your friends, but an immoderate
attendance on places of public resort. And above all things, what is called
PLAY in public, I look upon as criminal in a clergyman: One half of the company
ridicules, while the other is offended at such behavior; and all agree, that
it tends to the injury and discredit of religion.

IN your apparel, be neither careless nor finical: A graceful simplicity should
distinguish a person, whose duty it is to recommend moderation to others. He,
who endeavors to set himself off by an undue conformity to the world in his
dress or manners, appears to be ashamed of his profession: He is a kind of
amphibious creature, who being neither fit for the church, nor for the world,
has something monstrous in his appearance. We are not fond of inconsistencies,
either in men's outward behavior, or in their minds: He, who is not consistent
in his conduct, is like an actor on the stage.

THE fashions of the world are not designed to be adopted by priests or
magistrates: The gravity of their character must be shown in their manners, and
in their dress. Impertinence is despicable in any one; in persons consecrated
to the priesthood it is odious. What must one think of a clergyman running from
morning to night, from one scene of pleasure to another? The world laughs at
him, religion weeps for him.

I NEED not say, that you cannot be too circumspect in every thing which
concerns the ordinances of religion; one doctrine of which, you well know,
cannot be attacked, without materially injuring the whole. A priest, who should
himself be wretch enough to treat them with contempt, must be considered as one
who holds himself up to ridicule and just reproach.

CONSIDER it as your duty, to frequent the society of the most learned and
virtuous men: Their conversation reflects light upon us; and we insensibly copy
after their manners. Be cautious in your behavior to the female sex, avoiding
all offensive levity: It fares with the reputation of an ecclesiastic, as with
a mirror; the smallest blemish destroys its beauty.

LET your library consist of the most celebrated books, and delight in reading
them: An ignorant clergyman is a man, who makes sport for the public; one who
dishonours religion, aed whom all men despise.

RATHER be afraid, than ambitious, of heaping up benefices and dignities; at
least never try to obtain them by adulation or intrigue. He, who purchases by
mean compliances the highest preferments in the church, loses oftentimes his
honor, if not his soul. Merit alone ought to recommend an ecclesiastic, who
knows what his profession demands of him, and is disposed to conform himself to
the duties of it.

BE always ready to open your heart and your purse to the truly wretched: And
especially, if you are largely provided for, consider your riches as intended
principally for their benefit. There is nothing so opposite to the tenor of the
gospel, as a covetous or ambitious priest. Your own patrimony will be
sufficient for you, if you are not addicted to luxury and excess; it is this,
which almost always reduces men to poverty.

AIM at simplicity in your furniture, and in every thing that is external: Let
your virtues be your principal ornament, and be indifferent about the rest.

LET not pride ever take possession of your heart; it is the characteristic of
a weak mind, and the surest way to become hateful to others. There is no one,
who is not charmed with condescension and sweetness of behavior: But if this
were not the case, how is it possible to reconcile a haughty disposition with
the precepts of the gospel?

SUCH, my dear son, are the instructions, which I thought it my duty to give
YOU; every one of them is dictated by love, and an earnest desire of promoting
your happiness. The seminary, in which you have been educated, must needs have
inspired you with the love of study, and a veneration for religion. Never
forget the principles there imbibed; and often reflect, that a person of your
character ought only to appear in the world, for the sake of improving it. His
faults are by no means confined to himself; they furnish all who see them with
a pretense for strengthening themselves in their wickedness, and persisting in
it.

YOU must remember, that the conduct of your brothers ought not to be a matter
of indifference to you; your profession engages you to point out to them their
duty, and to remonstrate, if you find them negligent of it. But, to give weight
to your admonitions, you must set them a good example; and you must administer
reproof with tenderness and discretion: Reprehension is always ill received, if
the severity of it is not wisely tempered with expressions of affection and
humility.

YOUR father, who was always intent on the welfare of his children, would have
taken every method of enabling you to do the highest honor to that profession,
which you have chosen. May GOD, who has taken him from us, be himself your
conductor and guide! Cleave steadfastly to HIM, in the faithful service of whom
consists all our glory, and all our happiness.

CONFERENCE XIII. On PRIDE.
PRIDE, my dear children, being frequently connected with an exalted situation
in life, I think it my duty to set before you the folly and danger of it. Be
assured it is this, which has carried every species of luxury to its present
height; and has made that the idol of almost every rank. We impoverish
ourselves, merely for the sake of outward show; and every possible shift is
made to CUT A FIGURE in the world.

WE are anxious to conceal our common original; and that common destiny, which
puts us all upon a level. We endeavor, if possible, to persuade ourselves,
that a rich man is quite a different creature from the rest of mankind; and
that there is no such thing as real greatness in the world, inseparable from
riches and honors.

THE effect of such a persuasion is, that virtue has no charms to engage our
affections; it is a shade which we avoid, that we may bask in the sunshine of
fortune, whom with idolatrous veneration we adore.

WE have seen the luxury and pride, which abound at this time in our cities,
begin and increase in such a manner, as to ruin the most opulent families: We
have seen that simplicity exploded, which distinguished our ancestors, and
rendered their manners so amiable and respectable. Their descendants very soon
began to be ashamed of THEIR plain attire, their humble accommodations, their
venerable portraits; nothing was any where to be seen but a profusion of
expense, in building magnificent houses, in purchasing the richest dresses, and
having the most costly furniture.

WHAT extravagance do you not see, in this respect? I am sure it often
astonishes you; and you are thoroughly sensible of the folly of it; and cannot
but perceive, how greatly our morals suffer by it, and how bitterly virtue
laments the effects of it.

WHEN we grow familiar with vanity, and make it the object of our love and
pursuit; the soul is regarded as a thing of naught, and the body is in a manner
idolized: We torment and even ruin ourselves, only for the sake of this; and
think of nothing but dazzling our eyes with ornaments, gratifying our ears with
concerts, and our taste with all kinds of meat, however luxurious and expensive.

IT is pride, which produces effeminacy, and which prevents our ever moving but
in equipages, even sleeping but on beds of down: It is continually inventing
new pleasures; it enervates the mind; and renders even the stoutest men, little
superior to women, both in their dress, and in their general turn of life.

O! MY children, place this picture often before your eyes; and let it prevent
your giving yourselves up to pernicious luxury: My former propensity to this
foolish vanity is the cause why I am not better able to speak to you on the
subject; but it has also enabled me thoroughly to discover its emptiness and
folly. My own reflections convince me, that we forget we are rational or even
human creatures; and fancy that our wealth is only given us to procure whatever
tends to the gratification of our passions. Luxury is an abyss, which swallows
up the greatest estates, and which we seldom are able to fathom: The fashions
which it studies, and the trifles which engage its attention, are so many
occasions of our ruin.

BE truly great, and you will never be vain; you will know, that there is a
certain propriety to be found between the two extremes of avarice and
prodigality; and it it this, which ought to regulate your table, your dress,
and your equipage. You will know, that pride, in making us vain, renders us
ridiculous; and that when this prevails, we see young men effeminately devoting
themselves to the toilet, and passing half their time under the hands of the
hair-dresser. You will find them as seriously engaged in determining the color
of their clothes, the size and shape of the shoe-buckle, and other such
trifles, as if they were matters of the most serious importance.

IF you give yourselves up to pride, you will be slaves to these idle vanities;
and you will thereby weaken the force of that manly virtue, which you naturally
inherit from your worthy father.

BESIDES this, you will have every kind of whim and caprice to gratify; you
will find numbers ready to supply your demands, by advancing you sums of money,
You will be told, that to be in debt is no reflection upon the character of a
man of quality; and you will be encouraged to multiply debts, and to ruin your
fortune. Every day furnishes us with examples, which confirm this truth. How
many persons of immense estates outlive their income; and find themselves
surrounded by domestics, whom they cannot pay; by creditors, who are frequently
worrying them: Filled with remorse, which perpetually torments them; and
reduced at length to a state of extreme indigence and necessity!

SUCH are the effects of pride: It carries us headlong into every kind of
extravagance; and presents to our view a house, the furniture of which is not
yet paid for, the domestics full of discontent, and the master of the family
himself at his wit's end, being no longer able to find creditors to trust him.

THESE, my dear children, these are the miseries which you must expect to
suffer, if you give way to the suggestions of pride. But even supposing it did
not carry you to this extremity of distress, I need not say more to dissuade
you from it, than that it will tend to rob you of your virtue; make you
regardless of the miseries of your neighbor, and fond of all those effeminate
indulgencies, and that ridiculous parade, which the world encourages, and so
passionately admires.

I SHOULD not do justice to your father, if I did not observe to you, that he
was generous and even magnificent according to his circumstances; yet a noble
simplicity, and a prudent economy peculiarly distinguished his character. His
uncorrupted manners rejected all those expensive trifles, which an unreasonable
fondness for luxury has rendered fashionable. The love of his country so
engrossed his affections, as to leave no room for vanity in his heart.

EVERY wise and virtuous person considers luxury as the source of all kinds of
iniquity: He knows it is in the school of pride that we learn to despise the
poor, to harden our hearts, and to seek after every refinement of pleasure. We
cannot bear the sight of an object that is disagreeable to behold, we cannot
breathe but among perfumes; we cannot exist, but in the midst of softness and
pleasure.

IT is a great misfortune not to be able to distinguish betwixt the
superfluities and the necessaries of life; our passions are so many tyrants,
who allow us no rest 'till we have found the means of satisfying their demands.
Hence we see, that those among the great, who listen to the dictates of pride,
are really in a state of slavery: They are absolutely dependent on fashion, in
the most trifling circumstance of their lives. If any article is defective in
the midst of all their splendour, they are distracted, they lose all patience;
they appear to be so entirely taken up with external ornaments, with finery and
parade, that they seem to live for no other purpose, than to gratify a restless
appetite for trifles.

WHEN we visit persons of this turn of mind, we do them THE HONOR to be
utterly regardless of themselves, that we may give our whole attention to their
furniture. We speak to them only of what is every where around them; we attend
only to that which dazzles our eyes: As if we meant to give them to understand,
that if they had nothing to exhibit, more worthy of our notice than themselves,
they might be contented to live in perpetual solitude.

SURELY, my dear children, there is nothing very captivating in such empty
characters as these; yet such is the glory of those who live in subjection to
luxury and pride, (...) they are not regarded on their own account, but merely
for the sake of their table, and their show. As a proof of which, if they love
their riches, they instantly sink into contempt; it is hardly remembered that
such persons ever existed. How different is the state of those, who are really
virtuous! Whatever misfortunes befall them, they seldom want a panegyrist or
admirer, but are gen^rally regarded and esteemed. History furnishes us with a
t^sand instances of persons, whose merit, without any other support, has been
respected even in the lowest obscurity: Such is the power and influence of
truth!

WHICH of you then, my dear children, would not rather embrace a virtuous
poverty, than be satiated with luxuries, and be destitute of virtue? I am
persuaded, that neither of you would hesitate a moment, in the determination of
your choice.

IF my health would suffer me to enter more particularly on the subject, I
could show you other evil effects of pride; and particularly, that it attracts
to itself persons of the most trifling and insignificant character. Look at the
house of such an one as I have been describing; and you will find it filled
with those pretty gentlemen, whose whole life is spent in ruining their fortune
and their constitution. You will find it to be the rendezvous of gamesters;
(for gaming is an inseparable appendage to persons of that turn of mind, which
I have been describing:) In short, luxury has there displayed her utmost
charms, to ruin those very people, who are studious to support her empire in
the world.

AN elegant simplicity will deliver you from the society of men of such
licentious conduct, among whom virtue almost always suffers ship-wreck. Where
pride prevails, religion is despised; an immortal spirit cannot accommodate
herself to those perishable objects, which tend only to chain her down to the
earth.

DO not imagine, that luxury is instantaneous in its growth: It has its
beginning, and its progress: At first, it is no more than a desire of having
our houses more elegantly furnished, or our persons more fashionably dressed,
than others of our rank. The love of fashion insensibly gets the ascendency
over us; 'till we think nothing agreeable, in which there is not an air of
elegance and novelty. Scarce is this first step taken, but simplicity becomes
insupportable: We despise a man, whom we see indifferently clothed; and we
annex the idea of supreme felicity to idle and fantastic pleasures.

WE cannot but hold pride in the lowest contempt; when we reflect, that every
one of this disposition enjoys the blessings of society, without contributing
any thing toward its advantage -- he deprives the community of many useful
members -- does not properly discharge any duty whatever -- and dies, without
leaving any memorial, except of the riches which he has wantonly consumed.

LUXURY engages all the world in her service: You would think there would be no
artificers or manufacturers without her; and that the arts, the elements, and
the seasons, must become tributary to her. This it is, which overwhelms the
luxurious man with pride; and makes him believe, that he is lord of the
creation.

I EARNESTLY hope, these considerations will make a due impression on your
minds. Look on her without prejudice, and you will see that the pride which is
so idolized, is more transient, than the cloud which passes away; you will
see, that there is nothing good to be expected from a man enslaved to vanity,
and sunk into effeminacy.

THAT swarm of PETITS MAITRES, whom every man of sense despises, owes its
origin only to pride; which fills them with the love of themselves: And
thenceforth a new race of being makes its appearance on the stage, exposing
their vanity to all around them; and burthening society with all the charges of
their existence.

BUT there is another dreadful effect of pride; which is, that it gives birth
to those idle and mischievous books, which are continually publishing to the
world: And which, however harmless they may be thought, tend to vitiate the
taste, and corrupt the morals. How many young people have been utterly ruined
by improper books! If idleness and the love of pleasure had not taken
possession of their hearts, they would never have quitted that happy simplicity
of manners, which inspires us with a love of truth, and teaches us to shun evil
and pursue good.

THERE is yet another thing which I wish you to observe; namely, that you will
insensibly lose your strength of mind, whenever you give yourselves up to the
influence of pride: And what a ridiculous character is a soldier, dissolved in
luxury, and totally enervated? There remains nothing more of him than the
shadow of a body, and an effeminate mind, to which the slightest hardship is a
most insupportable evil. Accustomed to sleep under a richly-decorated pavilion,
to feed on the most delicate food, to be attended by a number of servants, he
is either disqualified for the necessary duties of a soldier; or he carries to
the camp a train of luxuries, which are ruinous to himself, and render him a
bad example to others.

SURELY, my dear children, you would not wish to be soldiers, merely to live in
ease and splendour: Were this the case, you would be loaded with reproaches; and
your pride, far from procuring you respect, would only bring you into contempt.
A PETIT MAITRE is entirely out of his place, when he is called into the field
of battle: His whims, his particularities, his delicacy, all serve to render
him unhappy in himself, and ridiculous to others. He is pointed at as one, who
rather acts a part, than is really such as he ought to be.

YOUR good Father has told me a thousand times, that those fine gentlemen who
are taken up in admiring themselves, running continually from one circle to
another, and absolutely devoted to the business of the dressing room, were
always considered as officers of no consequence or authority, whom the meanest
soldier held in contempt. They can dance indeed, and they can sing; but they
cannot fight; both because the art of war demands something more than mere
personal courage, and because courage itself is weakened by the love of
pleasure.

LOOK at the portraits of your ancestors; take notice of their suits of armor.
Think ye, that the delicacy of the present age would have had any charms for
them; and that they would have admired an officer scented with perfumes! Alas!
How ingenious are we, only to make ourselves despised!

LEAVE pride to those who being suddenly grown rich, and struck with seeing
themselves become men of consequence, and encircled with flatterers, place all
their merit in gilded furniture, and splendid equipages. Neither a virtuous
man, nor a man of quality, has any need of luxury to see him off. It is a great
reflection on the present age to suppose, that it only esteems men according to
outward show: Whereas he alone is worthy of respect, whose character is
distinguished by a noble simplicity.

BESIDES, how many real inconveniences do we suffer from this expensive turn
of mind? Every part of our life ^avours of an uniform profusion: We are subject
to a thousand forms and ceremonies; we are forced to pass our whole ^e in
acting a part; we are surrounded by false friends, insolent servants, and
almost always with anxiety, with debts and diseases.

IT is very seldom that a man, given up to pride and luxury, knows what
sobriety is. Physicians have observed, that all, who live to the full, are
subject to indigestions and apoplexies; and that it is this abundance, which
generally shortens their lives. We no longer regard our conduct, than while we
live in a state of sobriety: As for pleasures, they are the chief executioners
of the human race.

I THANK Heaven, that my health has enabled me to talk with you to day with
less difficulty than usual: You must have observed that my days are not all
alike; and that oftentimes my spirits are depressed by the weakness of my body.
I have now dwelt largely on my favorite subject of prudence, sobriety and
moderation: And if I have appeared tedious in my reflections, impute it to that
tenderness, which makes me insensible of my sufferings, and which gives me new
life, whenever I am endeavoring to instruct you.

IN vain is death making daily advances on my emaciated body; in vain does he
every day rob me of a considerable part of my substance, I think myself in
perfect health, while you are with me: My concern is, to know how to endure the
instant of our separation. I perceive the advances which it makes; yet I find,
at present, no resources in my own strength to fortify me against that
affecting moment.

BUT perhaps -- alas! I only deceive myself; I feel nothing but death
approaching.

THE physician coming in, the children withdrew; and gave way to those
effusions of grief, which the presence of their mother had suppressed.

THE lady, having been at church in the morning, returned about eleven o'clock;
and having summoned her children, she said, I am just come from visiting my
burial place, and from looking with my dying eyes on the sepulcher of your
father. O! what pain has it given me to go through this solemn ceremony! But I
was willing to humble that pride, which conceals from us what we are; and which
would prove your ruin, should you not be careful to guard against its
illusions. When we are brought up in the midst of human grandeur, it is very
difficult to persuade ourselves, that we are like other men, and that the
brightness which surrounds us will soon be dispersed like a vapor. In the mean
time what have we, whereof we can justly glory? Alas! though you were nobly
born, you came into the world weeping, helpless, and naked; and you must go out
of it not less destitute of riches and honors. In vain will the world then
offer you whatever is magnificent, and flattering to our vanity: All this will
pass away like a dream; and the grave will swallow up all your riches, and
pride, and greatness.

IN my visit to your father's tomb, I saw nothing of all that glory which
accompanied him on earth, and of all that homage which was paid him. Consigned
to a little spot of ground, where silence and horror prevail, he has only a
marble monument; which already begins to be effaced, and which would scarcely
be seen, if we were not purposely directed to it.

IS this, then, said I to myself, all that remains of the busy tumult of the
world? Is it to this, that nobility of birth, and the most brilliant fortune
lead us?

YES, my children, this is the sum of all our expectations, as to any thing
earthly, whatever riches and dignities you enjoy. Death will place you on a
level with the meanest of our fellow creatures; it will reduce you to dust
similar to their's, both in weight and value: Keep then your eyes ever fixed on
this period of human greatness.

IT is this which will teach you, that you are nothing but frailty; and that
the pride, which is almost inseparable from an exalted station, is the
perfection of folly. Notwithstanding all the privileges of your birth, all your
titles, and all your advantages, you cannot command a moment's existence:
Amidst all your grandeur, you are in the power of the lowest men, of the
elements which govern you, of the diseases which threaten you, and of a
thousand accidents, which you cannot foresee. Your soul is as subject to
sorrow, and your body to pain, as that of the meanest slave; and the poor
peasant, whom perhaps you despise, enjoys the same sun, the same climate with
yourself, and has the same faculties of sight, taste, and perception.

WHY then, my children, should such a difference be made betwixt persons alike
in so many respects? Is it because there is such a disparity in their birth?
No: Every one knows, that we all have one common father, that our origin is
from the earth; and that many a man owes his eminence of station to instances
of meanness, if not of downright wickedness.

IS it because they are consigned to live by the labor of their hands? In this
they only fulfill the obligation universally laid upon mankind. Is it because
they are meanly clothed? Alas! what objects of pity are we, if we value
ourselves upon being covered only with the spoils of brutes and insects!

WHAT connection is there, betwixt that silk which is the produce of a worm, or
that gold which we dig out of the bowels of the earth, and an immortal spirit?
Surely we cannot make that splendour, which is only borrowed, the subject of
pride and vanity. The poorest of our fellow creatures has a body, a soul, and
a spirit, as well as we; from whence we ought to conclude that he is our
brother; and that we are much inferior to him, in spite of all our grandeur and
ambition, if he has more virtues, or nobler sentiments, than ourselves.

HENCE learn, that you ought never to despise any one; and that he, upon whom
you look down with disdain, may perhaps be endued with a more generous mind
than all those great men of the world, who, while they value themselves on
account of their superiority, are real objects of pity. How many are there,
who, if they had an opportunity of showing their abilities, would, by their
genius and seize, eclipse those men of fortune, who look down upon them
with disdain! And whom the patronage of one man of rank, or one fortunate
circumstance, might have raised to that degree of honor to which their
abilities entitled them!

IT is therefore neither obscurity of birth, nor poverty, which lowers us in
the eye of reason; but it is pride; because there is nothing which is in
reality so abject, as this vice and its effects. It is always an indication
either of a mean spirit, or a corrupt heart. How can we despise others, without
casting at the same time a reflection on ourselves? But were this not the case,
what, I pray you, do you think we lose of our riches or our quality, by
receiving with a gracious air all who approach us, and by addressing ourselves
with condescension to our inferiors?

ALAS! the man, who is foolishly puffed up with a sense of his own importance,
loses eve^ thing by his haughty air, and his imperious mode of behavi^* For he
loses the confidence and esteem of mankind, which is the most valuable
possession in the world.

MEN of inferior rank are generally a match for those among their superiors,
who treat them with contempt; for they are scarce out of their sight, before
they ridicule their whims and pride, and make them the subject of their
pleasantry and satire.

O! MY children, if ever you should despise the least of your brethren, if ever
you should treat them with disdain; you would dishonor the memory of your
father. He never thought himself great, but when it gave him an opportunity of
obliging others; and in him the weak and indigent found kindness and relief. He
removed their sorrows; he answered them with gentleness: And if he found
himself constrained to refuse them what they asked, he plainly showed how much
concern it gave him.

REMEMBER, that your elevated station stands in need of the assistance of men
of inferior rank to support it; and that if you had not people in subjection to
your commands, you would lead a life of the most dreary solitude, and of
extreme indigence. Some labor to supply you with food, others offer you their
personal service; and it is their presence and assiduous attendance which form
your train, and render you an object of public notice.

WE are therefore enemies to our own interest, when we despise those, on whom
we are so dependent for assistance. The generality of great men are respected
only in proportion to their retinue; so that they owe almost all their
consequence to the very persons, whom they do not regard. O! how happy is it
for us, when we know how to do justice to ourselves; when we have judgment
enough to estimate ourselves according to our real worth!

NOTHING can be more dreadful than this arrogance of mind; which, carrying a
man beyond the limits of an earthly being, renders him the scourge of every one
about him. Might not you, my children, have been born the children of a
peasant, or mechanic? And if this was not your lot, can you assume any merit to
yourselves on this account? As to mental endowments, however penetrating, or
extensive you may suppose them, they are no more than a glimmering light, too
often ready to mislead you: And which oftentimes shines only, at the expense of
sound wisdom. Men of the greatest genius frequently commit the greatest faults:
Where wit is predominant, discretion is seldom found.

THE more closely a man examines himself, the more ready he will be to
acknowledge his weakness and infirmity. It is only with respect to our immortal
part, that we are truly great: But in order to deserve this character, we must
be raised above our passions, and especially above pride. It is a vice which we
ought not to know, except that we may avoid it: It mars our best actions; and
leaves to him, who is possessed of it, nothing but what is mean and ridiculous.

ONLY observe the man, who is wrapped up in himself, and is full of the
admiration of his equipage and his gaudy clothes; and you will perceive a
degree of emptiness in him, which you cannot but pity. The poor vain creature
labors for no other purpose, than to make himself contemptible; while only a
smile, or an obliging look, would conciliate the affections, and win the hearts
of all with whom he converses. An air of affability, and a word of kindness, is
sufficient to gain a thousand praises, and a thousand thanks. From which you
may conclude, that every man of quality, who incurs the hatred of others,
through the neglect of that, which would cost him so little, either a look or a
word, or an air, is in effect a dupe to his own pride, and really a very
despicable being.

O! MY children, to whatever rank fortune may hereafter raise you, never forget
to show a pleasing condescension in your whole deportment. Men generally vow
vengeance against those, who think themselves raised above their
follow-creatures, only to aggravate the miseries of the wretched; to overwhelm
them with the weight of their pride; to make them the sport of their capricious
humor; to oblige them to a painful attendance in antechambers, where they are
wearied out with impatience and disgust. Every species of greatness, which is
thus assuming, is nothing better than absolute tyranny.

TO one who contemplates, as I do at present, the majesty of GOD, how foolish
as well as criminal does the pride of man appear! How sensibly should I be
afflicted, if I foresaw, that you would hereafter behave yourselves with
insolence, and become distinguished by your haughty and imperious deportment!
But I am persuaded, this will not be the case: You will rather endeavor to
imitate the courtesy and affability of your father. And I trust you will acquit
your mother of arrogance, if she should venture to urge her own example, as not
unworthy of your imitation in this respect.

HEAVEN, which knows my most secret thoughts, knows that I desire neither
riches nor honors for you: If ye are only good men, you will be always
sufficiently great.

O! MY beloved children, if you could penetrate into my inmost thoughts, you
could not doubt of my sincerity; I consider this union of hearts, as the only
means of being always together. Death may indeed destroy the body, but it has
no power over our affection: This is my comfort, when the idea of our
approaching separation depresses my spirits. It is then, I have recourse to my
intelligent and immortal principle; in whose love and affection, as it were in
a sanctuary, you are to live forever, and make part of my happiness. It is
then, I console myself with reflecting, that I shall not be absolutely deprived
of you; but that in spite of all the ravages of death, I shall retain you in my
mind and affections. The triumph of the cruel tyrant will only be partial:
Under this persuasion, that our union is indissoluble, wonder not that my
prayers to GOD are incessant, that he would preserve you, and pou^ down his
choicest blessings upon you.

THE more I think of you, the more I find myself interested in all you have,
and do, and are; and it is this, which heightens my affection to an
inexpressible degree, that you are my own flesh and blood. What stronger motive
can there be, most tenderly to love you?

I MAY truly say, I forget almost every other thing for your sakes: Scarcely
any thing, except my children's welfare, has any longer a place in my heart.
It is natural therefore for me to avail myself of the little time I have to
remain upon earth, by seeing as much of you as possible.

EXCUSE me, I pray you, to my friends, when I am departed hence. Tell them,
that the duties of a parent so far surpassed every other, that I confined my
attention entirely to my family; to give ease to my mind, and discharge my last
duties. Assure them, that they had nevertheless a share in my regard; and that
the remembrance of their kindness dwelt on my mind to my latest moment. ^hank
them for the attention, which they have ever shown me; and which, I am very
sensible, was more than I deserved.

THE sad commission, which I am giving you to deliver to my friends, is like
conversing with you after my death: Ere long, you will hear your mother spoken
of, as a shadow that is departed; you will then recollect all my tenderness,
and do justice to my love.

CONFERENCE XIV. On FRIENDSHIP.
I EXPECT the return of every evening, with all the impatience that can be
conceived. Neither the temporary relief of medicines, nor the cheering light of
the sun, affords me any consolation; nothing can do this, but the happy
opportunity afforded me of seeing and conversing with you. You will hardly
believe, that I reckoned every hour of the last night; only grieving that they
did not pass with greater expedition, in order to hasten this pleasing
interview. Surely my tenderness for you exceeds the bounds of reason; otherwise
I could not presume in my present situation, to wish that the time should pass
with more rapidity than it does, when so very little remains for me: But let us
improve that little; and let us discourse this evening, on the necessity of
prudence in the choice of Friends.

IF we are right in saying that a true friend is a treasure; we may be equally
sure, that a false one is a monster. He abuses the confidence we place in him,
to our injury; and makes sport of the affection, which we show him: There are
hypocrites in friendship, as well as in religion.

BUT there is nothing, my children, more agreeable or useful to mankind, than
friendship: Without this, the happiest life leaves a vacuum which can never be
filled.

THERE are a thousand cases, in which we have need of counsel or assistance; a
thousand situations, in which we derive comfort from the sight of a friend: He
is a support in our adversity; a MENTOR, to recall our wandering steps.

GENTLENESS of manners, and a compliance of disposition, will secure to you all
the blessings of friendship: But if you are not upon your guard against
external appearances, you will run the risque either of having false friends,
or of having no friend at all.

YOUR choice must not be determined either by an agreeable countenance, or a
lively turn of conversation, or a brilliancy of wit; we are often ensnared by
these exterior accomplishments. But experience will teach you, that there is
nothing so deceitful as words, and looks.

YOU must penetrate into the very soul of him, whom you wish really to know: If
you listen only to the public voice, you will find your judgment equally
divided betwixt satire and panegyric, and you will not know which side to take.
I never knew a person, who had not his share of good and evil report. While
some commend him, others blame him; and it is almost always prejudice, which
determines both the one and the other.

BUT how, you will ask, shall we get at the heart of him, with whom we seek to
be united in friendship? Your own understanding will teach you the way: That
will make you attentive to those words and actions, which are purely natural,
and unpreme^^^ted; and which unfold the inmost recesses of the heart. That will
teach you to watch the prevailing inclination of the person, whom you wish to
take into your bosom; and to attend to his different pursuits, and connexions:
That will show you in the mirror of the mind, I mean the eyes, whether there be
sweetness, anger, or pride in him.

IT is easy to study others, when we have been accustomed to study ourselves;
but unhappily this self-inquiry is too much neglected. We read, with eagerness,
books on every subject; but we do not give ourselves the trouble to search into
that instructive volume, the human heart: Thus it deceives us every moment; and
makes us pay dearly for our negligence in this matter.

BUT, how great advantages would arise from this inquiry! We should know the
origin of all the evil that we do; we should learn by what means our prevailing
passions are most easily attacked; and we should have none but real friends.

LIBERTINES and gamesters have those qualities, which would only serve to ruin
us. Not to mention, that they are levity and inconsistency itself; they
communicate a love of vice, and take a pleasure in making proselytes, like
themselves. Every vicious man seeks to justify his conduct by the authority of
others; and this he hopes to effect, by making converts: As if it were in the
power of a multitude to determine virtue to be vice, or vice virtue.

IT is not in the circle of irregularity, or in the lap of pleasure, that you
will meet with minds susceptible of true friendship: For she is prudent and
discreet; and young men enslaved to their passions are intemperate and
precipitate. You need not see them more than once, to know them thoroughly;
they commend nothing but pleasure; they admire nothing but dissipation; they
speak of nothing but what is injurious to religion and morality; all which are
the strongest arguments against the admission of such persons into your
friendship.

IF you should make choice of one that is fond of play; he would soon persuade
you, that his passion is a certain resource against dullness and misfortunes;
that the gaming table is the rendezvous of the best company; that it is very
agreeable to make such great interest of one's money; 'till, in short, he
prevails, and you are undone. Connect yourself with a man of pleasure, and he
will tell you there is no happiness but in sensual gratifications; and in the
end will pervert your understanding, and corrupt your affections: One
insensibly becomes wicked, by conversing with such as are wickedly disposed;
this is an opinion, which is confirmed by reason and sad experience.

AN ill-disposed friend involves us in every kind of misfortune; and the wounds
which he gives us are so much the more dangerous, because he often goes down
with us into the pit which he has dug for us. His kindness ensnares us; and
though we see we are the dupes of his folly, we have no longer resolution to
oppose it.

I HAVE already exhorted you to leave the choice of your friends to Virtue,
which will preserve you from these dangers. She is intelligent, without
suspicion, and has the best means of discovering the truth; such a choice is
too important to excuse our inadvertency and neglect.

HOW many are there, whose fortune or whose virtue would have been ruined, had
it not been for the assistance of a friend! He becomes their guide; he shows
them a safe and easy way, and his directions are attended with the most happy
effects. We easily suffer ourselves to be persuaded, when it is Friendship that
speaks: She knows the dispositions of the heart, and discovers herself in spite
of every cloud and every impediment.

HOW happy will you be, if ever you are blessed with a real friend! He will be a
living book, in which you may read your duty; and your own affection being
joined with his, there will be only one mind, and one will betwixt you. When we
are united by generous sentiments, we mutually encourage each other to every
thing that is good: There is something sacred in friendship, when it is
animated by virtue.

BUT we must not expect to find true friends, if we do not use our utmost
endeavors to deserve them: There is nothing more common than to hear people
complain of the scarcity of friends, and nothing more rare than to see them
studious to cultivate friendship. We are not apt to think, that friendship is a
commerce, which must be carried on at a mutual expense.

DO not accustom yourselves to call any man your friend, whom you have not
proved, and whom you do not know to be such: Be honest, sincere, and agreeable
yourselves; and I will be answerable for it, that the blessings of friendship
shall be yours. We form connections too hastily, to have real friends; and we
change them too often, to know their value: There is too much levity to be met
with every where, and only the shadow of friendship to be seen.

WHAT a dismal state is it, to wander about the world, without a creature in
whom we can safely confide! to live always in reserve with those, whom we
converse with. A true friend delivers us from this restraint: He is of more
value to us, than all the world, without him. While we see, and converse with
him, we think of nothing that is removed at a distance from us.

I MYSELF experienced the blessing of a friend, in one, whom Providence threw
in my way, when I was young: Her counsels, and her excellent virtues, first
began to show me the folly and vanity of a dissipated life. I trust her
goodness toward me has not failed of its reward! Were she now alive, she would
supply my place to you; my eyes have a thousand times bestowed the tribute of a
tear upon her; and to my latest breath, I shall not cease to regret her loss.

IT was in the friendship of this excellent woman, that I learnt to raise my
mind above the trifles of the world; and that I found by experience that our
happiness chiefly depends on the choice of a friend.

INDEED, my children, a virtuous person, to whom we can at all times with
safety unbosom ourselves, is of more use to us, than either books or
conversation; when we are agitated by our passions, we seek an asylum in his
breast, and find that tranquillity, which we so much want.

ONLY make your observation on two faithful friends; listen to them, and you
will find in their language and their sentiments, a degree of candor and
benevolence, that will charm you. If they descant on the emptiness of earthly
honors, it is the voice of reason; if they give an account of their affairs,
it is done with the utmost openness and integrity. They adhere closely to the
dictates of virtue; the strongest supports the weaker; the wiser instructs the
more ignorant; each is content with his own measure of knowledge: And in this
little society, neither wishes to have the pre-eminence.

I SHOULD not say so much on the subject of friendship, if it were not so
absolutely necessary in human life. Of what service may you find a friend,
amidst the perils of war! It is very possible that he may save your life; we
see instances of it every day: Your uncle can inform you, that after a bloody
battle, he was found fallen among the dead; and that the Count de * * *,
instigated by friendship, came to see if there were any signs of life in him,
and delivered him from the hands of those who were preparing to bury him.

YOU are now arrived at a proper age to think of making such friends: A
friendship, begun in our youth, is a band not easily broken. Experience will
teach you, that the generality of persons, whom you meet with in the world, are
only fit for the intercourse of common civility; and that the number of those,
among whom a friend is to be chosen, is very small. Let this choice be directed
by reason, as well as the affections; and you will never then have cause to
repent of it.

WE are never more sensible of the true value of a friend, than when we labor
under any sickness or misfortune. The courtier passes by, and does not remember
that he ever saw you; the man of the world sends to enquire after you, and
proceeds no farther: But the real friend risques every thing; nay, quits every
thing, to assist and comfort you. He divides himself, he multiplies himself; he
knows no greater pleasure, than in opening his heart, and discovering the
sincerity of his affection: We are always ready to disclose our hearts, when we
have nothing but virtues to show.

HEAVEN grant, that these reflections may imprint on your minds, those
sentiments which friendship inspires. This is the wish of your best and dearest
friend, who delights in seeing you; whose heart is transported with pleasure in
conversing with you! I am already absolutely dead to the world; it is only in
you, that I seem to live and breathe. O! my too tenderly beloved children! To
what an orphan-state are you now about to be reduced! Where are the persons,
whom you will hereafter call by the sacred name of friends? How happy should I
be, to know them! How extremely dear would they be to me! I should consider
them as supplying my place in your affections. I should conjure them to be
forever attached to you; both out of tenderness for you, and compassion for me.

ALAS! my whole soul is disordered by such reflections as these: All my
thoughts are thrown into confusion. And nothing remains to me, but the pain of
losing you; a pain, which has yet a mixture of pleasure, even while it
overwhelms me: And which, indeed, I would not but feel, for all the world.

THAT ever I should be destined to experience such a contrariety of sensations!
My heart seems to be divided, and my soul is in a state of distraction; my
tenderness is agitated at the same time by sentiments of a quite different
nature: What a strange situation! My love of my children, whilst it heightens
my joy, embitters my sorrow. If my affection is properly returned by you, I
shall have abundant reason to be satisfied: Yet do I still lament your fate.

CONFERENCE XV. On the COURT.
AS it is my design to give you some instructions in relation to every
circumstance of your life; I think I ought to say something to you on the
subject of the Court. The spot, which you will have occasion most frequently to
visit, is the most respectable part of the kingdom, as being the residence of
the sovereign. There it is, that the hearts of all his subjects should be
fixed; thence it is, that favors and benefits are wont to flow.

BUT you must know that self-love, and our own interest, being the first mover
almost in every action, they who frequent the court are carried thither by
motives of ambition, and a thirst for promotion: This is the center, to which
every thing tends. It is here that the vehemence of desire, and the flame of
passion are kindled: Here it is, that courtiers pine away with envy and
impatience; and there is scarcely any one, who does not feel himself in an
uneasy situation. One is afraid of losing his place, another is apprehensive
that he shall put nothing; and as neither of them will venture to utter his
real sentiments, either that he may not expose himself, or that he may not
reveal his secret, they both live in a state of perpetual dissimulation.

THIS accounts for our finding more suspicion and mistrust at court, than any
where else; and hence it is, that it is the place in the world in which men are
least apt to express their thoughts and inclinations. When this precaution does
not exceed the bounds of prudence, we cannot but commend it; but when it
degenerates into duplicity, it is doubtless a very great fault.

EXPECT then to find, within the precincts of a court, only persons of very
great prudence or dissimulation; and to see only looks, whose meaning you
cannot understand. They often laugh, when they have great cause to weep; and
sometimes weep, when they have occasion to rejoice. They publicly praise their
enemies, if they happen to be favorites at court; and they censure even their
friends, if they chance to be out of favor. Fortune is the compass by which
the course of their friendship is directed; the thermometer, which shows the
degree of warmth or coolness, with which people are to be addressed.

YOU will see, that neither openness nor freedom are the current coin of this
place; and that the only way to maintain your ground there is to pay a proper
respect to all, but to place confidence in none. Never to say the least evil of
any, because the weakest has power to hurt; to confine yourselves within your
proper sphere; and to have nothing to do with intrigues or cabals. To ask no
favors, or at least to use the utmost discretion in asking them; to give no
occasion either for panegyric or satire. Equally to avoid the haughty
appearance of pride, and the mean artifices of flattery; to preserve at all
times an evenness of temper, and never to show too much sensibility. People are
apt to mistrust a man of wit and humor; they suppose that he is always
designing: And they suspect, that what he says is not sincere.

LAY down these maxims for the direction of your conduct; and I will venture to
assure you, that whatever dangers may attend the court, it will have none to
ensnare you. It is not the path of ambition, which I am pointing out to you,
but that of an honest man; who seeks to get the better of his own faults, and
only aspires after true happiness. The ambitious man hazards all for all: If
his exaltation may render him conspicuous, his fall may be utterly destructive
to him. Whereas, with virtue, and a generous moderation, we leave fortune to
act as she pleases; neither coveting her favors, nor dreading her frowns.

IT is doubtless a very pleasing situation to be honored with the confidence
of a royal master, and to be employed in his name to partake of the concerns of
government. But how much trouble and disappointment must you expect, before you
arrive at such a post of honor! And what perpetual inquietude must you suffer
to maintain it! You will not have a moment, that you can call your own; your
time must be wholly devoted to public affairs. And you must be intent on
justifying the choice which your sovereign has made of you, by incessant
industry, and by an unwearied anxiety for the general welfare.

I HAVE seen enough of the court, and of the manner of courtiers, to be able to
assure you, that no one there is happy, but he who desires nothing. Is it not a
sufficient honor and privilege to be permitted to approach our prince; to be
known by him, and to have it in our power to show by our assiduity, how much we
love him, and how desirous we are to serve him?

WHEN we are only engaged in consulting the interest of our King, we find a
court the residence of true greatness and virtue; but when we think only of our
own interest, we find there nothing but intrigues, and jealousy, and
dissimulation. It is not the sovereigns, or their family, which render the
court a place of danger; but the faulty passions which we carry thither, and
which an ambitious desire of advancement puts in a state of fermentation. A
prince cannot see every thing himself; and as the greatest part of his
courtiers are accustomed to disguise, his court does not appear to him such as
it really is.

YOU must, above all things, beware of learning there that political
refinement, which has not the least connection with truth; that fondness for
luxury, which plunges us into idle expenses; that effeminacy, which enervates
both the body and mind; that haughtiness of spirit, which knows no pleasure,
but that of depressing others. A good disposition will imitate nothing but
virtues; bad examples serve only to render it more circumspect and attentive to
its duty.

IF it be true, that a court has its inconveniences, it is no less true that it
has also great advantages: It is the center of true politeness; it is the
residence of the purest language; a certain mode of behavior there prevails,
which is not elsewhere to be found, and which characterises persons of quality.
It is there we become acquainted with the necessary forms, and what is usually
called ETIQUETTE: The manner of behaving ourselves with gracefulness, and of
expressing ourselves with propriety; of receiving others with dignity, and of
writing with elegance and ease. You will not have continued there long, without
learning the art of being polite without impertinence, reserved without
stiffness, steady without rudeness, and grave without affectation. Courtiers
say many things in few words: They know every thing, yet pretend to know
nothing; that is, they are so guarded, that yet can neither guess what are
their real sentiments, nor quot^ their authority for what they say.

CHOOSE those characters for your examples, which are most generally esteemed:
There are always to be found at court, venerable peers, whose company is the
school of honor and integrity; respectable ladies, whose example is a lesson
of virtue. These are the persons, to whom you will do well most intimately to
attach yourselves: You will gain their good will by listening to them with
attention; by frequenting their company; by a well supported conduct, and by
modesty and discretion. The court is only dangerous to those, who give
themselves up to pleasure or ambition; we can every where find bad examples,
when we give ourselves the trouble to look after them.

IF you should have a place at court, you will do well to remember that it is
only borrowed; and be always ready to resign it: This will be the surest means
of confirming you in it, and of securing you from any fear of revolutions.
Courts are like ground that is undermined: When we think ourselves most secure,
we are in the most imminent danger of falling in.

IF you only appear there to pay the respect, which is due from you; if you are
only anxious to procure esteem; behave yourselves with politeness to all the
world: And above all things avoid the character of news-mongers, or banterers;
the least degree of raillery is always ill received. The court is the residence
of extreme discretion; they are always talking there, without affirming any
thing.

THERE is no place in the world in which there is more wit, and in which it is
more dangerous to show it. Show nothing there but plain good sense; that, you
will find, is the way to commit no faults, and to have no enemies: We cannot be
too circumspect, when we live in the midst of a world, in which every thing is
seen, and every thing is blazed abroad.

NEVER boast that you have interest, if fortune should give it you: Either you
will be beset by dependents, whose applications you must refuse, and which a
good heart suffers greatly in refusing; or you must be always asking favors,
and thereby weakening your own interest.

AVOID the society of intriguing women; they almost always ruin those, whom
they appear to protect. Their counsels seduce; they fan the flames of ambition;
and all they aim at is to form parties, of which you will at length become the
victim.

PAY no regard to the friendship, which they profess for you, or to the
questions, which they will not fail to ask you. Their friendship may be
sincere, but it may perhaps be insidious; and in a matter of doubt, prudence
prescribes, that we steer clear of danger. There are too many jarring interests
at court, to think that people there are disinterested.

WHAT I am now recommending to you is not craftiness, but prudence; you will
not be less the friends to truth, for knowing how to hold your peace, and act
with reserve: It is a kind of policy which religion allows, and which it calls
by the name of discretion.

WE find fault with the court, as being the region of toilsome attendance and
fatigue; and not without reason, when we give ourselves up to idleness and
pleasure. But if you are fond of reading, and make temperance the rule of your
conduct; you will find you^selves as happy there, as in any other place.
Satiety belongs only to those who pursue sensual pleasures alone, and who wish
to be always enjoying them: Let YOUR happiness center in your own minds, and it
will always then be at your command.

BUT enough, my children, on this subject; experience will teach you the rest:
She is an admirable instructress; and it is to her I refer myself, every time I
converse with you. But it is impossible for you to conceive what agitation my
mind sustains, while I am giving you these directions for your future conduct.
I cannot help wishing to look into futurity, that I might know whether the
counsel which I give you, is exactly such as will be of use to you hereafter;
or whether you will be disposed to follow it at all. I am always thinking, and
therefore it is no wonder that I am incessantly repeating, how dreadful is the
situation of that mother, who wishes to attend her children through their whole
life, but is obliged to leave them: Who is earnestly desirous to know in what
manner they will hereafter conduct themselves, what will become of them: And
yet cannot, with all her efforts of foresight and tenderness, go one step
beyond the present hour.

IT is a melancholy reflection, that I am at this time anxious to give you
advice for the regulation of a life, which perhaps will very soon be taken away
from you. Who knows, alas! But that the first campaign may carry you off, in
the midst of all your hopes; and in the flower of that youth, of which you are
at present in the full enjoyment. Some unexpected accident may perhaps open
YOUR tomb, almost as soon as mine is shut. Such are the sad reflections, which
distract my mind; arising, doubtless, in part, from the increasing weakness of
my outward frame. They hang over me like a thick cloud, which I am unable to
remove.

TO my own lot I am no stranger; my present solicitude arises from my ignorance
what will be yours. O! that death would execute all its power upon me, rather
than torment me with these melancholy thoughts, which cast down my soul, and
fill me with disquiet.

HEAVEN has ordained, my children, that I should be taken away from you at a
time, when I am deeply impressed with a sense of my duty, and am exceedingly
desirous to discharge it. Alas! how many mothers are there, who live in perfect
indifference about their children! How many mothers, who only regard their
pleasures; while I have this great reason for wishing to live, that I might be
of use to you: And that I might be instrumental in preserving you from those
dangers, to which your youth is about to be exposed!

GRIEVOUS indeed was the stroke, when it was the will of heaven to deprive you
of your father; it now seems good to the same unsearchable wisdom, to double
your affliction. Submit therefore in all humility to that dispensation, which
not the most costly sacrifices, nor all that your affection could possibly
prompt you to bestow, will be able to avert.

BUT, what do I say? You may perhaps imagine, that the prospect of death
disquiets me; whereas death has utterly lost its sting. You will not, I hope,
suspect that I am unwilling to submit to the will of Providence, all whose
designs I humbly and reverently adore. Pardon, gracious Lord, the expiring
efforts of parental affection; which overcomes me, in my present state of
languor and decay.

CONFERENCE XVI. On the LOVE of TRUTH.
THE subject of this evening's conversation shall be that infallible
characteristic of a generous mind, the love of Truth. You cannot but know, that
nothing is more detestable than falsehood; and that whoever ^tes from truth is
held in utter contempt.

BE assured, my dear children, you will no longer be esteemed, than while you
strictly adhere to truth. The world, corrupt as it is, never yet spoke of a
liar with respect; it even protests against those flattering compliments, which
lead us to commend those that are unworthy of praise: So certain is it, that
truth is always acceptable, and that her rights are never to be invaded with
impunity.

WHAT would you say of me, my children, if you found that the affection, which
I profess to bear toward you, was all dissembled; and that my words were the
language of imposture: That the regret which I have expressed at being removed
from you, and seeing you no more, was merely the effect of artifice and
insincerity? Doubtless you would be offended to see me trifle with truth, and
prostitute parental affection. But be assured, the contrary is true; each word,
that I utter, is the dictate of sincerest love: Nor do I think it necessary to
justify myself in this respect.

ALAS! of what use would it be to me, to assume the character of an anxious or
afflicted mother? This would be far enough from giving you pleasure; nor can I
have the least interest in imposing upon you. If I wished to do it, in order to
make myself of some consequence in the world, death is about to remove me from
it; and I have nothing here below to expect, but the stroke it is about to give
me.

CONSIGNED in a very short time to the regions of eternal silence, I shall
neither know what is said, nor what is thought of me. None of the concerns of
this life will any longer affect me, except perhaps the love which I bear you;
and which will, I hope, be perfected in endless joy, on seeing you again,
received into the region^ of eternal life.

THAT truth, which is so amiable and conspicuous upon earth, is no other than
an emanation from, and as it were, the image of, the Deity: And the reason why
we hold it in such high estimation is, because we know that it proceeds from
heaven. How great is its beauty, how clear its light, when it penetrates the
heart and soul! From the moment of its entrance, the mind becomes the seat of
equity and candor: All writings, which are destitute of truth, are calculated
only to mislead; all men, who disregard it in their manners or discourse, are
objects of our pity or contempt.

LET truth then be the guide of your conduct, the first principle of your
actions, as hereby a very material point will be gained: You will not then
suffer yourselves to be seduced by evil customs, or bad companions: Your
character will not then be marked by dissimulation and duplicity; your words,
and looks, and actions will be uniformly true.

YOU have happily chosen those stations in life, in which truth is more
particularly indispensible: A soldier without the strictest honor, and an
ecclesiastic, without the most rigid veracity, are men so truly infamous, that
they are looked upon with indignation. Honesty knows but one kind of language.
When we have recourse to equivocal expressions, we no longer deserve to be
esteemed st^ictly honest: we are not indeed obliged always to speak all kinds
of truth; but we are never allowed to say any thing, which is not true.

IT is because men are too apt to lose sight of these maxims, that the world is
full of flattery and insincerity. You may observe, that unfortunately there
seems to be a kind of emulat^on in the art of deceiving one another; and that
almost in every company the shocking custom is but too prevalent, of praising
people to their faces, and censuring them the moment their backs are turned.
This species of treachery has always been exceedingly offensive to me;
especially because the party so treated, being absent, is unable to defend
himself: It is cutting a man's throat, without allowing him the possibility of
crying out for succor.

YOUR father, whose example I always propose to you with pleasure, because I
well knew his excellent qualities; your father, I say, had an utter abhorrence
of liars and evil-speakers. He considered them as birds of prey, which only
seek to surprise and devour: The liar lays his snares, the slanderer stab^ you
with a dagger.

O! HOW amiable is truth! Her empire ran parallel with the Golden Age: The
tongue was then the faithful interpreter of the heart; then mutual love
prevailed, and each party expressed it without disguise. The world, as it grows
old, grows more corrupt; the very nature of truth is changed; and falsehood too
often dwells on the lips even of those who have had every advantage of
education. -- What in fact are all idle compliments, but the art of saying
agreeable things which mean nothing, and of lulling people into an utter
insensibility of their faults? I would by no means have you rigidly severe; but
I would never have you sacrifice truth to complaisance. Truth is an
inexhaustible spring, from which innumerable streams are derived, whose purity
may be defiled many different ways. Some depart from it by equivocation; some
by mental reservations: Neither of them recollecting, that to be a lover of
truth is the greatest ornament of man.

SUCH language, I well know would be incomprehensible to mere courtiers; but I
hope I am not giving instructions to persons, who are ambitious of that sort of
life. The principles, which I am inculcating, will never introduce you to it;
if they do, my instructions must be strangely misunderstood. Nothing would
affect me more, than to know that my children would be mean flatterers, capable
of deceiving their master, and of betraying the interests of the public. The
very idea fills me with horror. No: Heaven, I trust, will not suffer ambition
to take such possession of your hearts, as to lead you to any unwarrantable
excess. That you may never run into it, shall be my constant prayer; and your
good dispositions give me cause to hope, that my wishes will be accomplished.

IF you improve in knowledge and virtue, as I hope you will; you will be
sensible of the importance of keeping your word, and never contradicting your
real sentiments: What is it but to act in two opposite characters, when we
outwardly approve what we inwardly condemn?

IF he, who is regardless of truth, knew what he loses by his want of
uprightness and integrit^, he would account himself unworthy of society. It is
impossible to esteem such a person; no one ventures to entrust him with the
most trifling secret; and even when he speaks the truth, he is not believed.
Other vices may be concealed, but falsehood is almost always discovered; and
oftentimes the liar is betrayed by himself.

RECEIVE instruction on this point from those old officers, whose names are an
honor to their profession; and you will know how to regard truth as she
deserves. It is in their school we learn, that our life itself is not too dear
a price to lay down in her behalf; that esteem is the companion of integrity;
and that every promise which we make, without performing it, is an instance of
falsehood which deserves to be punished.

IN proportion as I enter more deeply into reflections upon death, I discover
how necessary it is to regard truth. No person in my situation can avoid most
highly respecting her, and renouncing every species of falsehood and
dissimulation. They may indeed be found in books, or in society; but in the
eyes of those who stand on the brink of the grave, they are lighter than vanity
itself. Such persons esteem nothing more than veracity. Adhere to it, my
children, as long as you live, and the blessing of heaven will rest upon you.
Hate evil speaking; and be as slow to believe, as you are backward to utter any
thing to another's disadvantage.

TRUTH affords the greatest delight to a person of a liberal mind: He finds it
in himself, and among all his friends; because he is connected only with such,
as are pure and upright, like himself.

ALL I have to add, is, that, if a single instance of falsehood would establish
your fortune, you ought to prefer a life of indigence before wealth so dearly
purchased. Honor and religion unite their influence in recommending this love
of truth: It may not perhaps be altogether fashionable to think, and act thus;
but your lives are not to be regulated by the dictates of fashion.

THE exertion of my spirits, in conversing with you on these interesting
topics, may perhaps hasten my death a few days: But what is such a loss to a
mother, who would freely sacrifice ages for your good, if she had them in her
own disposal? I know I can only remain upon earth, so long as I continue to
live in your hearts; and that the way to do this, is to store them with my
sentiments.

RESTRAIN your tears, I beseech you; and let me not suffer what is worse than
death, by seeing you overwhelmed with excessive grief: It is enough for me to
die myself, without seeing you in danger of being the victims of immoderate
sorrow on my account. It is true, you will very soon be orphans; but you will
be the objects of the divine protection: His Providence never fails to watch
over those, who apply to him for succor, with an honest and upright heart.

I HAVE lived about nine and thirty years; and there have been thousands, whose
lives would have been more useful than mine, that were not permitted to live
near so long. I should have been too happy, if I had lived to see you settled
in the world; and had chosen myself the parts, which you were destined to
perform. Gracious heaven! Whither does this reflection carry me? O! painful
affection, which adds to the weight of my sufferings, and imbitters the d^egs
of the cup of death.

CONFERENCE XVII. On BROTHERLY LOVE.
UNDER an hourly apprehension of death, I am astonished to find myself again
conversing with you. Who can less reckon upon the return of tomorrow, than
one, who is already reduced to a skeleton? It is the will of heaven, that the
undue attention, which I have formerly paid to this wretched body of mine,
should be recompensed by my being an eye witness of its total decay: Wherever I
turn my eyes, I see nothing but the sad tokens of my approaching dissolution.

THERE are however some instructions, which I yet wish to give you; and that
which I intend for the present is not one of the least important. It relates to
the harmony which ought to subsist betwixt you all; and without which, you must
never expect any peace or comfort in each other. I have therefore called you
ALL together, because the present subject of my instructions equally concerns
you all: This union only can repair the loss you will sustain by the death of
your parents, and it will deliver you from a thousand inconveniences and
embarrassments.

ALL families go to decay, when they are distracted by lawsuits; they are torn
asunder, they devour each other, they mutually wish each other's ruin: Where a
cordial affection does not subsist, there is nothing but confusion. I have seen
some great families reduced by this to indigence: A wretched self-interested
spirit had sowed tares in the heart of each individual belonging to them.

IT is covetousness, which embroils the nearest relations; for the sake of a
little pelf, men are contented to break the bonds of consanguinity and
friendship: Whereas the treasures of the whole universe are not worthy to be
compared with the happiness of living in peace and unity. Alas! poor mortals of
a day! How solicitous are they about their earthly concerns, as if they were to
dwell upon the earth forever!

WITH what deep concern should I be filled, if I foresaw that my property could
possibly be the occasion of strife betwixt you! I should in that case wish,
with all my heart, to have no other inheritance to leave you, but peace and
virtue; but I flatter myself, MEUM and TUUM, that wretched distinction which so
often separates chief friends, will never be allowed to interrupt your
friendship. Nothing upon earth should be permitted to violate the bond of
brotherly love.

SPRUNG from the same parents, brothers naturally contract the most intimate
union from their very birth. This friendship often grows up amidst their
exercises, and their sports; and increases as their hearts unfold themselves,
and their affections are enlarged. An husband has not always known his wife;
oftentimes indeed he knows little or nothing of her before marriage. But
brothers and sisters have had the same cradle, the same examples, the same
instructions, and have lived in the same way; so that they are doubly to blame,
if any matter of interest is suffered to divide them. The more inducements we
have to live in union, the more clearly do we demonstrate the evil disposition
of our hearts, when we give the least encouragement to dissension.

IF ever you should be tempted to disagree with each other; you will do well to
estimate, what it would cost you to support your animosity, through the forms
of a tedious and expensive lawsuit: And I will answer for it, that you will
never be induced to carry matters to this cruel extremity. -- Alas! the voice
of consanguinity is not suppressed with impunity: She always maintains her
rights; and a generous mind can never forget them, without doing the utmost
violence to itself.

I HAVE ever observed, with the utmost satisfaction and delight, your
affectionate disposition toward each other; and I am persuaded that the
harmony, which has hitherto prevailed betwixt you, has been as much the effect
of congenial sentiments, as of your own good sense. I thank heaven for it; and
earnestly beseech you to preserve this concord uninterrupted. Remember, that if
it is conducive to your present advantage to be united, it will not less
contribute to your future satisfaction; the longer such an union continues, the
firmer it will become, and the more sensible you will be of the blessings which
attend it.

ALAS! how many unhappy families are there, who, having broken the bonds of
friendship, are restrained, by a false shame, from mutual concessions, for the
sake of restoring peace! Self-interest must have a strange ascendency over our
hearts, before the early impressions of love and friendship can be thoroughly
effaced, so as to cool our affections toward those whom we once cordially
loved.

I DECLARE to you, I feel in my heart so many reasons for (...) of a brother,
that it does not appear to me possible to entertain any sentiment like aversion
toward him: If I am mistaken, I hope you will always be in the same error with
myself.

O! IF you once taste the pleasure of an intimate union with each other,
nothing can be equal to your satisfaction: Your harvests will be crowned with
peace; your property will be in a manner common; there will be only one heart,
and one soul, betwixt you. We despise brothers who quarrel with one another;
and chicanery employs all her arts to ruin them both.

VIRTUE is only to be found in the regions of peace and love: Every kingdom,
divided against itself, will be brought to desolation. Rather give up a portion
of your goods, than forfeit the blessings of peace: This example was set you by
your father. He chose rather to recede from his just rights* than to engage in
a lawsuit with his near relations: Such conduct is highly worthy of your
imitation.

WE are all ready enough to bewail the dismal effects of those wars, which, for
the sake of an accession of territories, plunge whole nations into the depths
of misery and destruction. And yet for a few yards of land, we persecute each
other without remorse: Can there be a greater inconsistency than this?

THE world abounds with persons, who, inheriting the estates of their friends,
neglect to discharge the most sacred duties, in order to gratify their
boundless desires. The departed friend is no sooner interred, than they seize
on his effects with the utmost eagerness, and insist on the privilege of
plundering his house. Could I think you capable of such rapacity, I would
rather wish that you should take possession of every thing I have, while I
live, than dishonor both yourselves and me by quarrels after my death. My
riches are yours; and I should really be pleased to have you make an immediate
division of them among yourselves: I shall want very little, for the short time
I have to live.

THERE is something horrible in the love of money: It breaks the longest ties;
it is utterly regardless of the cries of the wretched; it despises the censures
of the world; it leads us into the greatest crimes. When we thirst after
riches, we despise virtue as a thing of naught: Even the soul itself is
disregarded, when this passion is predominant; hence so many estates indirectly
obtained! Hence so many instances of inhumanity to the distressed.

BUT what is a palace, however brilliant, in which there is neither peace nor
virtue? It is the seat of tumult and wickedness, in the eye of reason; how much
better it is to dwell in an humble cottage, and enjoy the blessings of concord
and tranquillity!

THE riches, which we acquire by dishonest means, are seldom of a long
duration. Heaven oftentimes, no doubt as a punishment for the possessors,
causes them to pass away like a vapor: Every inheritance becomes in some sort
unlawful, when we only possess it by dissolving the ties of family affection.

I THANK GOD, that covetousness never took possession of my heart; I always
considered that vice, as the portion of a base mind. If your sentiments are not
sordid, you will think the same: The love of your relations will appear in your
eyes far preferable to all the treasures in the world; and you will never think
yourselves truly rich, but when those who are nearest allied to you are your
BEST friends. What a comfort is it to live in the midst of those of our own
family, without discord, without mistrust; and to be able to find, within the
circle of our own relations, all the assistance we stand in need of! This
indeed deserves the name of true happiness.

WHAT can I do more, my dear children, to inspire you with the love of unity
and peace; except it be to desire you will approach the couch on which you see
your mother almost expiring? In this very room it was, that I implored the
mercy of Heaven toward you, the moment you were born; that your souls might be
filled with wisdom and benevolence: And hither must you direct your eyes, that
you may incessantly recall the powerful motives, which ought to unite you to
each other. Consider these walls, as ready to witness against you, if you
should ever presume to violate the bands of fraternal affection.

AS for you, my beloved Daughter, I recommend you most earnestly to the kind
attention of your brothers; who, I trust, will pity the dangerous situation of
your tender youth, and always continue inviolably attached to you. And do you,
on your part, never forget that your happiness may greatly depend on
cultivating their friendship. -- Reject, with scorn, the advice of such as
would -- But I must cease; a cloud this moment overspreads me, which darkens
both my visual and intellectual sight. Adieu! -- my anxiety for you will prove
more fatal to me than the disease under which I labor: It urges me to speak,
at a time when the extremity of my weakness will not suffer me to proceed! What
a struggle betwixt them both!

CONFERENCE XVIII. On RELIGION.
A DAY in my present weak state is too precious to be passed over by me,
without employing it in discoursing with you on the subject of religion; in
explaining to you what it is, and what are the demands which it makes upon you.
I am thankful for that measure of divine knowledge which has taught me, that
nothing can equal the happiness of being engaged in the service of GOD. Be
assured, you will never be happy, but while you live in obedience to His laws.

ALL the instructions, which I have hitherto given you, would be very defective
indeed, if they did not lead you to Christianity. An honest and an amiable man
are only sketches of virtue: Religion must fill up, and finish the picture.

I WILL not enter upon a discussion of the several kinds of religious worship.
It is sufficient to say, that we believe Christianity to be established on the
foundation of reason, scripture, and truth; and that they, who have presumed to
level their attacks against it, are scattered as the dust before the wind. This
is a fact which history will sufficiently attest, and of the truth of which you
will be thoroughly convinced, if you read it with attention: It is only the
strength of our passions which blinds our sight in this matter.

I NEVER knew a man of real virtue decry religion; men only attack its precepts
and ins^uctions, because it prescribes mortification and self-denial. The
libertine condemns religion, only to revenge himself on it, for the restraints
which it lays upon him. He is like a man who, having been cast in a lawsuit,
endeavors to defend himself, by accusing his judges of partiality and iniquity.

IF ever you listen to such people, and adopt their idle objections to the
truth, you are undone: Your hearts will soon be corrupted; like the heart of
that fool upon sacred record, who presumed to say in it, "There is no God." We
begin with listening to blasphemy, and we finish with uttering it ourselves.

WHEN I am tormented with frightful apprehensions on this subject, my comfort
is, that you have had the blessing of a Christian education: I recall to my
remembrance those holy sacraments, whereby you have been initiated and
strengthened; those resolutions, by which you have so often engaged yourselves
to serve your GOD with fidelity. All these considerations fill me with a
confident assurance, that my children will continue faithful members of the
church in which they were born and educated; and never dishonor the religion
of their Savior, by an immoral or irreligious conduct.

INDEED if I had any doubts in this matter, I should weep incessantly for you;
my soul would be cast down with the most horrible inquietude: And I should be
ready to curse the very day, in which I brought you into the world. I should no
longer be a mother, most tenderly attached to her children: But a wretched
woman, that had give them up, to vindicate the honor of GOD. O! how infinitely
are both you and myself indebted to Him! How wonderfully does He vouchsafe to
comfort and support, even me, who am but dust and ashes. How, good heavens! can
I sufficiently acknowledge this great mercy!

IT is the Christian religion alone, which intimately unites us with the Deity.
While we walk under the direction of her light, we are in no danger of losing
our way; we find her present in all our necessities. She never forsakes us in
any of our distresses; she makes us amends, for all the losses we sustain; she
attends us, even to the grave; in her bosom we live, in her arms we expire.

RELIGION sanctifies our actions; and furnishes the soul with infinite
consolation, by setting before it the hope of an Everlasting Recompense. In
what deep distress should I now be involved, if, being about to lose you, whom
I love more dearly than myself, I had no resource in the treasures of heaven! A
fatal despair would seize upon my soul; I should sink into the horrors of
annihilation, and should expire, full of rage and fury.

BUT, O my GOD, the confidence which I have, that I shall see and enjoy Thee,
calms my grief; and assures me, that in Thee I have what is much more precious
to me than the whole universe, even more than my children themselves, though so
exceedingly dear to me.

THUS it is, that our holy religion flies to our succor in the midst of evils;
the more afflictive they are, the more abundant are her consolations. How happy
will you be, if you observe her maxims! Nothing can then render you miserable.
-- You will perceive the hand of GOD in every occurrence of your life, however
trivial in appearance: You will acknowledge his wisdom in every leaf that
shoots, in every insect that creeps, in every grain of dust that you tread
under your feet. You will know that, He is the Author of life and death; that
He directs our thoughts, listens to our sighs, enables us to behold and to
declare the wonders of his providence.

HOW many days, alas! have I passed without reflecting on these truths! The
world is a stream, which always carries us away, far from GOD, and from
ourselves.

IN the eyes of the man of this world, religion is a mere engine of state
policy: The profane wit treats it as a fable. But to him who listens to its
dictates, and learns from it to renounce his passions, it is no other than
truth itself. Consider it as your duty to become acquainted with religion; she
fears nothing, except that men should be ignorant of her excellence.

IN vain has imposture painted Christianity in the falsest colors; it cannot
name a single error, which she approves; or point out a single truth, which she
condemns; nor can an instance be produced of any one who ever repented of being
a Christian. Self-reproach is the portion only of those perverse men, who scoff
at religion: Scarce does a fit of sickness seize them, but they smite upon
their breasts in despair, and bewail their impiety. The moment of death, is
that of truth. If religion would tolerate vice, they, who are now her bitterest
adversaries, would represent her as lovely and delightful, and earnestly
espouse her cause.

I NEED not tell you, that it is not necessary to practice works of piety, in
order to procure the character of an HONEST man; it is sufficient for this
purpose, merely to abstain from injuring your neighbor: But honesty is always
in danger of being lost, when it is not supported by religion. When we do not
admit into our system, a Deity, who takes cognizance of our actions, and who
will either reward or punish us; we live like brute creatures; we give the
reins to our lusts in every action, which we hope will escape the eyes of men.

ONLY observe those unbelievers, who live without faith and hope; attend a
little to their words and actions: Their system of morality is abominable; and
if their manners are corrupt, this is only a necessary consequence. The fear of
man is not a sufficient bridle to restrain us; it may sometimes hinder evil
actions, but it lays no restraint on evil desires.

IRRELIGION leads to all kinds of excess: In her estimation, the most horrid
crimes are softened into gallantry. And the soul itself, O! dreadful
imagination! that soul, which was created in the image of GOD (...) only a
particle of matter, which death is about to annihilate! See to what height this
new philosophy raises us! You cannot consider it without horror.

IS it possible, LORD, that my mind should be filled with such exalted ideas of
thy perfections, with so ardent a desire of being forever united to thee; and
that after all, my lot should be that of a crawling insect? Is it possible,
that religion, the practice whereof is so holy; whose outward appearance is so
amiable; which has filled me with so much comfort; which inspires me with so
much resolution, in the midst of my sorrows and afflictions: Is it possible,
that such a religion should be a mere illusion and chimera? Away with such
deceitful dreams! My flesh may decay, and my tomb open itself to receive me;
but I foresee a never-ending life awaits me: And the GOD, whom I adore, will
crown me with unspeakable joy, if I am so happy as to depart this life in his
fear and love.

O! MY dear children, this idea already fills my soul with transport; methinks
I already see time end, and Eternity -- But suffer me, a moment, to give up my
whole attention to this sublime subject; suffer me for a while to forget the
world and to think only of Heaven. --

HERE she continued lost for some time in the depth of her reflections; but
afterward, recovering herself, she resumed her discourse.

NATURE has certainly made YOU more dear to me, than any other creature in this
world: But religion is an additional tie of affection, by which you are still
more strongly united to me. When I reflect on our alliance by consanguinity, I
consider you as children fashioned and formed within me, of whom death will
very soon ^^prive me: But, by the light of faith, I behold you as children
stamped with the image of GOD himself, and destined to live with me forever in
the regions of eternal happiness.

WITHOUT such ideas as these, so capable of raising and comforting the soul, a
mother knows nothing superior to that sort of fondness, which the brute
creature shows toward its young: Affection, which is merely earthly, is
nothing more than pure instinct. Whereas religion purifies parental love, and
gives it a continuance which will never have an end.

LEARN hence, my dear children, that your behavior, unless you have heaven in
your view, will be mean and unworthy. Earth has not a point, on which an
immortal being can rest: Whatever it has to offer, must needs perish with it;
and whatsoever perishes, is as nothing.

WHEN a soldier is thoroughly persuaded of this truth, he is a thousand times a
better officer for it. He does not wait to be seen by men, in order to acquit
himself with valor: he knows that he is seen of GOD, and that is sufficient
for him. A true Christian is never faint-hearted, when he is doing his duty: he
is persuaded that religion has placed him in his post, that she requires him to
hazard his life for his King and Country, and he is prepared to obey her
commands.

ALL my comfort, amidst the ravages which infidelity is making, is, that you
are of such rank, as only to associate with persons of quality. Liberal minds
seldom protest openly against religion; it is chiefly in the company of low
persons, or those who have had no proper education, that impious conversation
prevails.

GOOD GOD! what pleasure can a Christian find, in ridiculing the sacred truths
of Christianity? What credit can he gain, in reviling the religion of his
fathers; in which he lives, and in which he expects to die? We admire those
letters, in which the Jew, the Turk, the Persian, speak of the worship of their
respective deities, with transport and enthusiastic reverence. And do WE
ridicule a work, on the authority of which the Christian's faith stands
supported? What an inconsistency! what monstrous absurdity!

O! MY dear children; if you could look into my soul, you would see how
earnestly I desire that you should render unto GOD the things which are GOD'S;
that you should observe his law, respect his ministers, and not tamely suffer
wicked raillery to be levelled against any thing which relates to divine
worship. The least pleasantry, upon so sacred a subject, is almost always
blasphemy.

WHENEVER YOU approach as near to the end of your life, as I am at this time,
you will, I hope, have as lively a sense of that awful Deity, whom we are too
apt to forget in the days of health, and in the vigor of life: his justice on
one side, and his mercy on the other, will then engage all your thoughts, and
all your admiration.

WHENEVER you can truly say you fear nothing but GOD, you will consider the
approach of my death, only as an entrance on a state of happiness. A life full
of crimes, and even a life that has been unprofitably spent, is a dreadful
object to the eyes of a Christian, at the point of death. But observe, that the
piety, which I am at present recommending to you, is only such as is manly,
rational and solid; founded on the authority of the Gospel, and recommended and
enforced by the Christian church, in every age and nation, in which
Christianity is known. Superstition never yet made a good Christian. It only
exposes religion to contempt, to make it consist in those frivolous ceremonies,
which true piety disclaims.

O! if I had but the knowledge of those great and holy men, whose names we
justly venerate; I would paint true religion to my children in colors the most
lively, and represent it in terms the most endearing that can be conceived. I
would show them, that the beauteous firmament itself is but a faint image of
the spiritual purity of religion; and that the soul, which it enlightens, is
far superior to the material heavens. -- O thou Spirit of truth! descend into
the hearts of my children; convincing them so thoroughly of the vanity of the
world, that they may be attached to Thee alone! I would rather wish they should
expire in my presence, than they should ever renounce their religion. It is
their happiness to be born within its influence: their ancestors were firm
believers of the truths of Christianity; and with my latest breath I pray,
that, above all other riches, they may possess the inestimable treasures of
substantial piety.

EXCUSE, my dear children, the irregularity of this conference: my language is
the effusion of a heart, which utters its sentiments in a desultory manner. The
desire I have, of saying a thousand things at the same time, creates a
confusion of ideas; and this desire terminates only in weak endeavors.

INDEED I have the most dreadful conflicts within myself: my bod^ though little
better than an empty shadow, swallows up my soul, and abaseth it to the earth;
it gives me no other proof of its existence than my sufferings; the pains I
feel have an influence on every thought and expression. But I comfort myself by
reflecting, that this state is only a passage to a better; and that the hour is
at hand, when my gracious GOD will receive me into the arms of his mercy. How
dear to me is that religion, which presents such happiness to my view! What an
enemy to his own peace is the man, who would discard his best friend, his
supreme consolation in this world!

WHAT I have said to you on this important topic, deserves to be made the
subject of your most serious reflections; as well because it is the language of
truth itself, as because it is the exhortation of a dying parent. How meanly
would you think of me, if I were so regardless of your FIRST concern, as, in
these my last moments, to exhort you to be careful only to secure the blessings
of the present life! The sight of my pallid countenance, which is the very
image of death, would show you, that I should be equally weak and wicked in
wishing to deceive you; and that the world, with all its charms, is in reality
nothing more than a dream which deceives us, and which passes away with
incredible rapidity.

A LITTLE reflection will convince you that there is nothing but GOD and his
religion, the continuance whereof we can ensure; and that every thing has an
end, except the dominion of virtue. Good heavens! in what a situation should I
find myself, if I had only reckoned upon this mortal life; if all my happiness
had centered within the circle of a few years! I should see nothing before me
but annihilation, or something far more terrible. But, by the help of religion,
my mind is raised up to GOD, and from the mansions of the grave I perceive a
light arising, diffused by the mercy of that GOD, whose goodness is the source
of my delight. This is my consolation, and that of every Christian: this also,
my dear children, will be your comfort, if you faithfully observe the divine
commandments.

YOU are by no means left at liberty to follow the dictates of your own
passions, or to walk in the paths of unbelief. The education which you have
received, the advice of your father just before his death, and my admonitions
under the same circumstances, make you accountable for your conduct to your
country, and to all mankind. They will listen to you, they will watch you; and
if your behavior is unsuitable to the advantages with which you have been
distinguished, you will be universally despised.

THUS it is that the world itself can take its revenge of you; and, indifferent
as it may appear about religion, it will always be ready to take her part
against you. Every one will be ready to cry out, how is it possible that
persons, so virtuously educated, should give themselves up to such
licentiousness; surely their hearts must be more than ordinarily corrupt.

BUT you will not, I hope, be restrained altogether by this consideration; an
earnest desire to please GOD, and not to degenerate from the honor of your
ancestors, will, I trust, engage you to persevere in the practice of your duty.

YOU have too just a sense of this, to forget him who has made you; or to
neglect to offer him, every morning and evening of your lives, the tribute of
adoration and love; or to forsake the assemblies of those holy persons, who
never fail to implore the assistance of heaven. It is only by debasing
ourselves to a level with the brute creation, that we lose the idea of GOD. How
can we forget Him; in whom we live, and by whom we have our being? How can we
fail to delight in the service of Him, who is the author and fountain of all
our honor and happiness? How richly do they deserve the ^ame of fools, who are
regardless of the worship of GOD, and who affect to despise the ordinances of
religion?

I AM not afraid that you will be prejudiced against the true religion, by
being told, that it abounds with incomprehensible mysteries: common sense will
inform any one, that an infinite being is a fathomless abyss; and that his
nature is unsearchable. But I fear lest your passions should seduce you ^ these
only can persuade you to believe, that Christianity is not the work of GOD.

BUT let us draw the veil over an event, the very possibility of which is so
dre^s^^^ I had much rather persuade myself that, like your forefathers, you
will live in the fear of GOD; and that, like them, you will die in an humble
hope of being admitted into his blessed presence. If you waited only for my
death, before you declared in favor of infidelity; alas! how little would you
gain by it! Will not your heart be equally open to that GOD who sees you now,
when I am removed out of your sight? It is He, and not such a poor worm of the
earth as I am, that you ought to regard; that Being who is merciful to the
good, but terrible to the ungodly.

O! HOW often has the idea of his justice affrighted me! Even at this time,
when I have a deep sense of his mercy impressed upon my mind; the thoughts of
my dissolution, and circumstances which will attend it, make me afraid: the
profusion of tears, which my friends will shed, the solemn procession, the
profound respect of my attendants, all serve to fill my weakened mind with
awful apprehensions. One while I see nothing but the Majesty of the living GOD,
and the insignificance of the creature, which he is about to sacrifice: at
another time, with most dutiful submission I await the blow which shall reduce
me to my original dust, as a tribute due to his sovereign Majesty.

HOW wonderful will be the instantaneous change in our ideas! How far beyond
the power of reason to comprehend! It stands astonished at the view of that
immensity, into which I am about to enter! Yet a moment -- and GOD alone will
either fill me with His glory, or overwhelm me with the terrors of His justice.
What an alteration! All the kings in the universe must experience the same fate.

IT is not the terror of the grave, nor the horrible corruption which this body
of mine is about to experience, nor that eternal oblivion to which I shall be
consigned, which affrights me: but that new world, which I see only as through
a glass darkly, and of which we only know in part, even when we are dying; that
strange land, to which all generations are destined to go, and from which no
one is permitted to return.

THIS, my dear children, is the object which ought to engage your principal
attention, and not altogether the renown which you may acquire in arms, or the
rank to which you may be advanced at court.

AS for your mother, while you are all of you deeply engaged in the tumult of
worldly affairs, she, perhaps -- but why, gracious SAVIOR! should I disquiet
myself with uncertainty? I cannot be ignorant that Thy mercies are infinite;
and that heaven is open for the admission of all, who sincerely love and trust
in Thee.

O! MY children, the dearest objects of my affection! It is to GOD himself that
I recommend you: His Providence will guard your youth: It extends itself even
to the most inconsiderable part of the creation. His love toward you will
supply the loss of your relations, which are now no m^ No one can be so much
your father, as He is: You will ^^d ^^im to be such, while you live; you will
also experience His mercy in the hour of death. -- He is every where present;
and on ^l occasions; yet will He be no longer yours, but reject you for ever,
if you forsake Him.

CONFERENCE XIX. On the VANITY of the WORLD.
FOR three weeks our exemplary mother had found herself somewhat better; at the
end of which, her appetite failed her, all at once; this, together with her
loss of sleep, reduced her to the lowest state of weakness imaginable. Yet she
wished to have one other opportunity of conversing with her children; though
the instructions which she had already given them were so full, as to leave
hardly any thing, that was necessary, unsaid.

THE extreme weakness of my present state, says she, affords me an occasion of
speaking to you on the vanity of all things in this world. Look at me with
attention; see how dim my eyes appear; how emaciated my person, and what
possession death has already taken of me! This was the woman that appeared not
long ago with such eclat; that was celebrated for her amiable qualities, as
well as for external accomplishments. Here are the only remains of what she
was; a mere shadow -- a nothing.

THIS situation has rendered me much more of a philosopher, than all the books
that were ever written on the subject could have done. Alas! whilst I suffer,
and even am dying by degrees, I have seen all those objects gradually lose
their value, which my imagination raised far above their real worth. Pleasures
now appear to me only as mere illusions, and honors as an empty vapor. --
Truth seems every day to take me by the hand and show me the vanity of this
world, and the emptiness of every thing which it possesses.

THE same effect is produced in me, which the autumn every year exhibits to our
view: Just as we then see the beauties of nature gradually disappear, I have
seen the grandeur of this world diminished; its most valuable possessions
debased, and all its ornaments stripped off, as leaves from the trees by the
winter's blast.

FALSE appearances dazzle our eyes, while we enjoy perfect health; every thing
then bewitches us; every thing seduces us; every thing appears to us eternal in
its duration. Scarcely has a fit of sickness seized us, but truth dispels the
charm, and recals us to ourselves; leaving us to behold nothing but a veil of
darkness, drawn over all that heretofore excited our admiration.

IN proportion as I draw nearer to my grave, the horizon grows darker; and
those entertainments, which once enchanted me, those balls which charmed me,
those assemblies which intoxicated my mind and my senses, seem only phantoms,
of which I have been the dupe, which, on a moment's reflection, disappear.

IT is wonderful to observe, what an indifference for life a tedious illness
gives us: How it detaches us from those false pleasures, which have no other
reality in them, than the remorse and wearine^ which they occasion. Providence
almost always interposes i^^elf to undeceive us; and to convince us, that in
Him alone all our admiration, and all our researches, ought to center.

CODED you have thought, my dear children, that I should in the space of a few
months, become an object so different from myself; an emblem of all human
miseries, and even a frightful spectre! Perhaps, indeed, you have not courage
enough to behold me: At least, look beyond those shadows of death, which
surround me. Dwell not on those melancholy objects, which offend the sight; but
amidst those sad ruins, which my body has undergone, separate that heart which
is still entire, and loves you with inexpressible tenderness; that alone has
not yet felt the ravages of death. But alas! like the wretched skeleton that
surrounds it, that also must soon return to the dust, from which it was
originally formed.

IT will only be my immortal spirit, of which we are regardless amidst the
bustle of the world, that will constitute the whole of my existence; 'till the
time, when my body shall be re-animated. Alas! the only part of me, which has
any stability or duration, is that, which I so long suffered to be utterly
forgotten: And all those flattering objects, which heretofore soothed my
vanity, are now departed as a dream.

WHAT folly is it, my children, to be so strongly attached to objects of such a
transitory nature! To put one's confidence in things, which have only the
appearance of good! Alas! if all the most captivating scenes in the world could
be now exhibited to my view; had I now the disposal of crowns and treasures
what advantage could I receive from them? Could they one moment arrest the hand
of death? Could they give the smallest degree of strength to my body, or beauty
to my person? And, even if they were capable of producing such wonders, would
they be of any continuance? Every thing here below, not excepting even life
itself, is but a dream. How many great men have you seen pass away! Though
their glory appeared immortal, we now scarcely remember that they ever existed.
Death has destroyed not only their bodies, but their very name and their
remembrance.

O! HOW low does human greatness sink, when the curtain is drawn up, and we see
only the Majesty of GOD! It is nothing more than an imperceptible point, lost
in the abyss of immensity.

I HAVE lived in the society of persons, among whom my fortune, rank, and
dignity, attracted many admirers; when the vivacity of pleasure intoxicated my
heart, and charmed my senses: But all that glory is departed as a shadow, and
the societies themselves are sunk into nothing. A few years have effected this
strange revolution: Time is a pitiless destroyer, which is daily consuming
every thing that is mortal, and by degrees annihilates itself.

O HEAVENS! what a vacancy appears before my eyes, when I review the number of
persons within the circle of my own acquaintance, who are now no more; enough
almost to form a world! You will very soon add to the number: My slender voice,
my emaciated figure, my exhausted frame, all unitedly declare, that I have
nothing to expect within the compass of the universe, but five or six feet of
earth.

THE same lot awaits you all, at some little distance of time. Your youth will
pass away like a rose; and, for ought we know, you are this moment on the brink
of destruction. The grave receives as many young persons as old: Every creature
is tributary to death; he is an unrelenting creditor, who suffers no one to be
at rest.

HOW strangely should I have been deceived, if I had reckoned upon threescore
or fourscore years! By the blast of the Almighty the bloom of my life is faded
away; and I am brought to contemplate my death, in a state of extreme weakness;
and ought I to complain of this state? I, who, like other human creatures, was
born to die, and whose dissipation and folly have deserved a large portion of
the cup of bitterness and sorrow.

IT is only by the tenderness of my affection that you can know me to be your
mother. Sickness has so entirely effaced every line of my person, as to render
me quite a stranger to my own family, and to all my attendants; they look shy
upon me; they are afraid to come near me; and it is only their exceeding great
affection for me, that gets the better of their unwillingness to approach me. I
am very far from blaming them; for I have much ado even to remember myself.

IT is only this perspective, that discovers truth to us: while we see nothing
but the gaudy splendour of the world, we live in the midst of error and
delusion. But as soon as we reflect upon our frailty, we turn toward
ourselves, and toward heaven; we penetrate even into the reality of things,
and do not suffer ourselves to be dazzled by appearances.

HOW thankful ought I to be, that death approaches me so gradually, as
insensibly to reconcile me to it, and withdraw my attention from every seducing
object! I pass my days in reflecting on the sources of my life, which are
exhausted; in reading those books, which remind me of my latter end: for it is
right that you should know, that I never spare myself on this subject. Every
morning I take my looking-glass, to see to what state death reduces us; and
often, very often I am reminded, that my coffin is just ready to receive me.

THERE it is, my children, that very soon your fond mother, without either
sense or motion, and without any prospect of returning to this world again,
will be destined to moulder in the bosom of corruption. O! fearful thought! --
But I will spare your tenderness on a subject too affecting for you, as well as
for myself. You are not ignorant, (indeed who is?) that this dismal end is the
lot of all men; and that in spite of the pleasures, which delude them, in spite
of the false glory which dazzles them, they must fall into the depths of horror
and oblivion.

DREADFUL as the darkness of the tomb may appear, it has enlightened me more
than the brightness of the sun: This only shows me perishable objects, that
discovers to me the excellence of my spiritual part, and the Majesty of my GOD,
which before were in a manner concealed from me. By the help of the light which
that imparts to me, I have gone through the whole world, and have discovered much
vanity and misery; I have seen nothing more effectually instructive than death
and dying persons, burials and epitaphs.

SEE all that remains to me of earthly greatness: A short inscription serves to
inform others, that we once lived, and are now no more; and even this is
effaced by length of time. The marble itself decays; and the eternity of the
supreme Being triumphs over the nothingness of man.

I HAVE said enough, I hope, my dear children, to convince you, that I do not
wish for inscriptions, or magnificent titles on my tomb: I am nothing more than
dust, and to the same element am I returning, from which I was formed. And can
dry bones reduced to dust, and mouldering in corruption, deserve a panegyric?
O! where shall we set bounds to our vanity, if it does not sink into nothing at
the very ^ight of a grave!

I THINK you must have opportunities enough of discovering, that I am too
thoroughly sensible of the vanity of the world, to wish to survive myself, in
wretched praises inscribed on my monument: Rather let me atone for my errors
and my follies by an eternal oblivion. Heaven would arm itself against me, if I
thought of decorating a miserable sepulcher; it would only serve to perpetuate
my pride beyond the limits of this present life, if I should attempt by
improper ornaments to alter the very nature of that, which in itself is nothing
but misery and corruption.

ALL that I require of you, my beloved friends, is to come sometimes to the
place of my interment; not merely to shed a few tears over my cold and
senseless ashes, but to recall to your minds the instructions which I have given
you. That awful solemnity, that mournful silence, which prevail in the
neighborhood of sepulchers, will give you leisure and inclination to meditate
seriously on all that I have said to you. The representation of death is the
best school, wherein we can learn to live as we ought; to raise the soul from
earthly things and to fix it upon GOD.

PROMISE me, that you will sometimes visit that instructive spot; I invite you
thither: And if you love me well enough to have your minds properly stored with
the precepts which I have delivered to you, you will consider me as actually
present with you there; I shall have no other method of appearing to you, or
conversing with you.

ALAS! my poor children, what a melancholy task am I imposing on you! if the
world knew it, it would be silly enough to treat it with contempt: But my
affection prompts me to communicate to you this useful and important secret.
Leave the world to act for itself; and never listen to it in any matter, which
concerns your duty. It is fond of nothing which does not contribute to its
amusement; and esteems nothing but what flatters its taste for vanity and
pleasure.

WHAT an impassable gulf is about to interpose itself betwixt the world and
me! Yet a little while and I shall neither know what scenes of entertainment
are exhibited; nor what revolutions take place in it: Yet a very little while,
and all ideas of the succession of months and years will be utterly lost. But
that which gives me some concern is, that this spot of earth on which you
remain, will be lost in that immensity which awaits me; so that I shall be
totally unacquainted with your conduct or your destination. What a change must
be wrought in my existence! What a revolution in my sentiments! Is it possible
to conceive, that an instant should produce such astonishing effects? At
present I cannot properly be said to belong either to this world or the other:
I am like a traveller divided between two different ways; and death, in the
twinkling of an eye, will put an end to my uncertainty. One while I feel myself
reluctant; at another time I desire the stroke: Strange alternative! on one
side, is the prospect of supreme felicity; on the other, the pain of being
separated from that which is most dear to me.

I DOUBT not, my children, but my love for you will be considered as romantic;
and indeed, I believe it rises to an uncommon height. But this at least I am
sure of, that I am not mistaken in the advice which I have given you: It is the
language of truth; it is the voice of a dying friend that you have heard.

WE are continually running with eage^ (...) to a new tragedy: We are filled
with the sad scenes which it presents; and we find a degree of pleasure even in
the tears which it excites. Here, my children, is a scene yet more affecting;
we have no resource to fiction here: The chief character in this tragedy is a
mother really expiring; the sentence is pronounced, and is on the very point of
being executed.

I HAVE for some days felt myself more weak than usual, and find that life is
now making its escape from this tottering frame; nothing indeed supports me but
my tenderness for you: Hitherto it has detained my fugitive spirit, but at
length it will be forced to yield.

COME hither, that I may embrace you; if you have the courage to join your lips
to an expiring body, and to bathe in a flood of tears. Alas! I have nothing but
tears to give you; the weakness of my body and the strength which yet remains,
destroy my powers of utterance.

HOW sad the separation! What a mournful farewell! The tenderness of my
affection reminds me of the hour in which I brought you into the world; but
there is this sad difference, that I this day behold you to see you no more.
Support me, gracious Father, in this dreadful trial: Suffer me not to sink
under the burden of maternal tenderness. I know that I ought to forget every
thing for thy sake; and yet my heart never ceases to think of my children. Dear
as they are to me, efface them for ever from my memory, if this love either it
or will be imputed to me as a fault.

BUT, what am I saying? Good GOD! thou know that I only love them for thy
sake, and that I wish them no other happiness than that which arises from
obedience to thy law. My only reason for wishing to live among them a few
years, had it been thy gracious will, is to establish in them the love of that
which is good: This it is, which makes my separation from my children a
thousand times more painful than the approaching separation of my soul from my
body. See! there they are! Yet do I see and hear them! Yet (...) they --

BUT what pain and distraction is this which seizes me? the pleasure I now have
in them is but a momentary gratification; yet a little while, and there will
not be a person on earth who will love them with a thousandth part of the
tenderness with which their mother loves them. O! how I am lost in the depth of
such reflections!

CONFERENCE XX. On RELATIVE DUTY.
OUR excellent mother, having received a visit from her brother in law, and
having conversed with him for half an hour, desired he would permit her to
introduce her children to him: When in the language of the tenderest affection,
she thus addressed them.

THIS, my dear Children, is the person whom henceforth you are to consider as
your parent: As you are connected with him by the ties of consanguinity, I
beseech you to attach yourselves to him by the obligations of inviolable
friendship. The love you have for me, which is about to expire, when I shall no
longer exist in this world, ought to be transferred to your uncle: To his
favor I recommend you; no one can give you better advice than he can.

THEN turning herself toward her brother, she addressed him thus: O my dear
brother, you who continually remind me of my excellent husband, and in whom I
have always found such sentiments as one so nearly related to him may easily be
supposed to entertain, have pity on these children. Pity their tender age; pity
their orphan state, when I shall be taken from them. My days are ended; my life
is but a blast, and nothing remains to me but the regret of having wretchedly
misspent it.

O! THAT I could now be assured by you that my wishes would be accomplished:
What would become of these unhappy creatures in the midst of a most dangerous
world, if they were not blessed with your friendship! In them, my dear brother,
recollect both their father, whom you affectionately loved, and their mother,
who has no power of utterance beyond sighs and tears.

MY heart is inexpressibly affected at this dreadful separation, even as it
were, from myself: As I before observed to you, it is more terrible to me than
the horrors of the grave.

FORGIVE me, gracious LORD! Thou know, that even in my dreams, even in the
most solemn acts of devotion, even in the prayers addressed to thy heavenly
Majesty, the remembrance of my family continually interposed itself, to
distract my mind: In vain have I wished to have my whole attention fixed upon
Thee: In vain have I endeavored to become wholly absorbed by the contemplation
of Thine infinite perfections. My thoughts perpetually recur to those objects
of my love; which Thou have given me, and art now about to separate from me.

ALAS! my dear children, I feel that I have much less fortitude than I appear
to have: One moment's reflection on your sad condition, one single thought on
the subject of our separation, overwhelms my soul with the deepest sorrow. O!
Heaven! my mind has but too much sensibility at present: Ere long, no visible
object will affect it. These, my dear children, are the last struggles of my
affection: My heart at this moment seems to collect every thing that is most
tender and affectionate, in order to bid you an everlasting farewell.

AT these words she melted into tears, when her brother-in-law answered;

"NO, my sister, GOD will not be offended with that tenderness for which you
blame yourself: He is goodness itself; and the holy scriptures dwell
particularly on the subject of his love. If your affection for your children
were merely carnal and earthly, the case were different; but your love for them
is that of a Christian parent, who is chiefly solicitous for their eternal
salvation.

"MAKE yourself as easy as possible on their account; you entrust them to my
care, and I will not be regardless of their welfare. I shall consider them as
my own children; in me they shall at once experience the authority of a father,
and the affection of a mother; and I verily believe we shall none of us forget
the confidence you repose in us. Comfort yourself, therefore, with reflecting,
that you leave us only preparing ourselves to follow you; since this life,
however long it may be accounted, is in reality no more than a state of
momentary existence."

CONFERENCE XXI. On KINDNESS to DOMESTICS.
THOUGH our exemplary mother appeared to have exhausted her whole power of
utterance in these admonitions to her children yet one subject remained,
arising from the care she took to recommend to their kindness her family and
dependents.

WHEN they were all together, she said to her sons, in a voice that could with
difficulty be heard: I charge you to be kind to these my domestics, who have
always been strongly attached to me. -- Some of them served your father, and
others have given me every proof of the most dutiful regard. I have not
forgotten them in my will; but that is not sufficient. They have a demand on
you for kindnesses, as friends in distress; for it is in this point of view,
that I would have you consider them: They are sprung from the same origin and
are destined to the same end with ourselves.

O! HOW unreasonable is that pride, which the world affects; and which makes us
look down with contempt on persons, in every essential respect, like ourselves!

NEVER forget, that we dishonor and debase human nature whenever we treat any
person with disdain, merely because his external appearance is meaner than our
own. Your names, when you were baptized, were entered in the same register with
those of the poorest; and the dust, to which you will one day be reduced, may
assure you that the same destiny of mortality awaits us all.

AM I not going to be mixed with the lowest and meanest of my fellow creatures?
Shall I not be reduced to a level with the humblest slave? Thus does death cast
down the high looks of the proud.

YOU will indeed act agreeably to my wishes, when you treat your domestics with
kindness; when you watch over their morals and take care of their health. GOD
knows that even at the time, when pride and a love of the world fed my vanity,
I was never altogether unmindful of them; nor ever spoke to them in a haughty
style: If I ever did, here they are, let them witness against me."

TO these words her domestics could only reply with sighs and lamentations; and
her children, overwhelmed with grief, with interrupted accents, said:

"O! THAT your days could be prolonged, in proportion to the ardency of our
desires! You should acknowledge, in our sentiments, a perfect copy of your own.
You should then see and know, that nothing can ever remove from our hearts the
love with which they are filled toward you, or the maxims with which you have
so richly stored our minds.

"OUR life will from this ^^^e be a life of bitterness and sorrow; the blow,
with which we are about to be overwhelmed, threatens us -- O! heavens! spare."
--

LET us, my dear children, for the last time, mix our tears together. The
moment approaches, when, insensible to your cries, I shall no longer behold
this earth, or he interested in what is passing on it: I shall not even have
the consolation of feeling that tender anxiety, that pleasing pain, which I now
suffer on your account.

YOUR uncle will communicate to you the contents of my will. I have too good an
opinion of you, to think you will disapprove of the legacies which I have
bequeathed to the poor, and to some persons with whose merit I am well
acquainted.

A FEW days after this last interview, her disorder made such a progress, that,
being at the very point of death, she received a visit from her children, who,
with the tenderest effusions of grief, requested her last blessing.

THEN, just opening her dying lips, she with the utmost difficulty said:

"THE hand of death is upon me; your mother is no more. -- May the Lord receive
you under his protection! With my last breath I earnestly beseech him to PARDON
ME, and BLESS YOU. -- You now see little more of me, than a particle of earth,
about to be re-committed to the earth! Such is the end of human greatness:
Adieu! my dear, my affectionate children, adieu for ever.

MY grave is opening -- eternity commences -- Gracious LORD, receive my spirit.

HER eyes still looked for her children, 'till she expired. -- Thus died this
incomparable mother, the remembrance of whom religion will long preserve.

HER daughter survived her only a few days. But her sons, not regardless of the
instructions which they had received, did honor to the memory of their
parents, by lives worthy of their birth and their education.

FINIS.

