AN ORATION: DELIVERED, AT THE COLLEGE CHAPEL, HANOVER, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY FOURTH, 1795.

BY SAMUEL WORCESTER, Member of the Senior Class, in Dartmouth University.

HANOVER: FROM THE PRESS OF DUNHAM AND TRUE. M, DCC, XCV.

AN ORATION, etc.
THE universe consists of a vast gradation of beings. From the lowest instinct
to the highest created intelligence are intermediate orders, in a regularly
graduated succession; each order constituting a distinct link in the great
chain, and all together composing one stupendous, systematic whole. At the head
of this gradation, on earth, is man. Raised by the fiat of Omnipotence to
preeminence in this lower creation, he is invested with a dominion over all the
tribes of animated nature. Earth, air, and sea, with all throughout this wide
domain, lay their homage at his feet, and move in subserviency to his purposes.
The whole race, however, occupies but a single grade in the general scale; and
they drop from the all creative Hand into a state of perfect equality. Every
individual, upon whom the GOD of nature has impressed the stamp of humanity* is
entitled to all the rights and prerogatives of man. All, therefore, being
naturally in a state of equal freedom and independence, ought to regard each
other, as brethren, and fellow sovereigns of the world.

Yet such has been the prevalence of ambition, such the lust of domination,
that man has, time immemorial, invaded the rights of man, assumed prerogatives,
in defiance of the laws of nature, and arrogated a sovereignty over his
fellows; a sovereignty, which belongs only to the supreme Governor of the
universe. Hence originated imaginary gradations among men -- hence the
distinctions, lords and vassals, masters and slaves; hence the doctrine of
servile submission of the many to the few.

This assumption of power, this violent invasion of imprescriptible rights,
laid, at an early period, a foundation for all the revolutions, which, during
the progress of humanity, have deranged the features of the social and
political world. Nature has made provision against the violation of her laws,
and the confusion of her system, by inspiring her whole offspring with
invincible abhorrence of degradation from the rank, in which she has placed
them. Usurpers, therefore, have, in all ages, met with opposition; an
opposition founded on the eternal principles of right, and the feelings of the
human heart. Ever since the standard of tyranny was erected on the plains of
Shinaan, the contest between right and prerogative has been agitated, with
unremitting violence and devastation. This contest has involved the most
tragical scenes, which have ever been exhibited on the theater of nations. By
this, the garden of nature has been converted to a field of blood! --

To support their usurpation, and advance the cause of arbitrary sway, the
despots of the world have exhausted all the resources of artifice, as well as
force. Too well have they known, that science and the religion, which is
delineated in the volumes of nature and revelation, ever range themselves under
the banners of liberty* and that ignorance and superstition furnish the ground,
upon which the foundations of tyranny are consolidated. Hence they have
employed every possible mean to darken and terrify the world. The mysteries of
paganism, the doctrines, of the Koran, and the thunders of the conclave, have
been plied, as engines of despotism, till mankind was reduced to a state of
meanness and servility, infinitely below the dignity of the human character,
and the way prepared for the establishment of the tyrannical system, in a great
part of the globe.

The grand contest between right and prerogative commenced in the regions of
the east. Asia, first in every thing, was first to embrace the shackles of
slavery. For ages convulsed, and distracted by perpetual struggles, she at
length gave over the controversy, and bowed to the enormous weight of
consolidated empire. Africa was next prostrated at the foot of ambition, and
forced to resign her rights and liberties into the hands of petty tyrants and
usurpers. The fate of Europe was stamped at the passage of the Rubicon. Here
may we fix a memorable epoch in the history of despotism. It is easy to see,
that all the revolutions, which took place, and all the scenes, which were
acted upon the European theater, subsequent to the extinction of Roman liberty,
compose one connected series of events, which paved the way for the
consolidation of a refined tyrannical system, in that quarter of the globe.
This was a system, which, by cementing a coalition of despots, and artfully
ballancing their respective powers, embraced all the advantages, and rejected
all the disadvantages, of the unwieldy empires of Asia, and the petty regencies
of Africa. This system was consummated in the last century, and continued,
unimpaired, till a late period in the present.

Thus was tyranny established in three quarters of the globe. Asia, Africa, and
Europe, sunk under the weight of oppression, and exhibited a dreary devastation
of humanity. The Genius of Liberty, exiled from the eastern continent, sought
an asylum in the wilds of the new world. Even here, however, the celestial
fugitive found but a narrow residence; for already had the Colossus of tyranny
bestrid the Atlantic, and secured a footing near the western sun. The
Anglo-Americans alone, of the civilized world, retained the spirit and
sentiments of a free people, and they alone promised adherence to the standard
of liberty.

Britain, at this time, held an eminent rank among the nations of the earth: --
Britain the land of our father's sepuchres, the birthplace of freemen -- the
pretended friend and advocate of liberty; but the veriest champion in the cause
of tyranny. Raised by a long series of prosperity to the empire of the main,
she affected to waft the terror of her arms to remotest realms, and awe the
world to submission. Flushed with recent conquest, and plumed with laurels, won
by her prowess from the combined powers of France and Spain, she assumed the
nod of universal decision, and grasped at the power paramount on both sides the
Atlantic. As from this giddy pinnacle of false glory she looked round on the
world, she cast an indignant eye on a people, who presumed to set bounds to her
ambition, and hold in check the tide of oppression. Her American colonies,
though steady in their allegiance to the parent state, had never relinquished
the rights of man, nor bowed the knee to the Baal of tyranny. Notwithstanding
therefore their loyalty, and their zeal for the glory of her empire, she
regarded their sentiments, as dangerous to her boasted prerogative; and the
spirited language of freemen gave her more disturbance, than could the whole
artillery of Europe united against her. She anxiously eyed the sacred flame,
which they kept burning upon the altar of freedom, and foresaw, that unless
speedily extinguished, it would consume the pillars of her own grandeur, and
even the fabric of despotism. Britain, in fine, regarded her Colonies, as the
sole guardians of the celestial standard, as the forlorn Corpse de reserve of
the cause of liberty and equal rights, and presumed, that to bring them to her
feet would at once place her own glory beyond the region of danger, terminate,
forever, the contest between right and prerogative, and establish the
tyrannical system upon a basis never more to be shaken. For this purpose, she
roused and summoned her whole might. To this point she directed all the
politics of her cabinet, all the resources of her finances, and the whole force
of her armament. Well collected and prepared, she raised her arm to deal the
tremendous stroke, which was, at once, to decide the fate of the world.

This was a crisis. -- The colonists were struck with consternation -- the
Genius of Liberty lifted herself from the earth, on the point to revisit her
native skies -- Europe beheld with amazement -- the eyes of the universe were
fixed on the scene -- and nature was anxious for the event! -- Let them be
sovreign states, said a voice from Heaven! -- Let them be sovreign states,
reechoed the colonial Congress! -- The voice reverberated through the world,
and nature felt relief. -- The celestial genius realighted upon earth, and
reanimated freemen rallied, in crowds, around her standard. Under her banners,
and the auspices of Heaven, they arrested the blow -- they triumphed, they
confirmed their independence. Thus the pride of Britain was humbled -- thus the
efforts of tyranny were baffled -- thus the towering hopes of despots were
blasted -- thus the rights of nature were vindicated!

This, my fellow citizens, is the anniversary of that eventful day, which
declared the Independence and sovereignty of United Columbia; -- this is the
day, which arrested despotism, and made a decisive stand for the liberties of
man; -- this is the day, which opened, to the intelligent universe a new and
glorious succession of events; -- this is the natal day of the regenerated
world! The transactions of the 4TH OF JULY, 1776, are registered in the
archives of Heaven, and their influence, in the affairs of nations, will be
felt through the revolution of ages. The voice, which, this day, proclaimed
these states independent, shook the political world to the center, -- the
shackles were loosened from the human mind -- the bulwarks of despotism were
levelled with the ground -- thrones tottered on their bases -- and the Dagon of
tyranny fell, prostrate, before the altar of Liberty.

Americans! the declaration of Independence was the salvation of our country.
It was this, which blew into a flame the almost smothered embers of freedom,
and roused, from the vale of despondence, the genius of Columbia. It was this,
which wrested us from the grasp of tyranny, from the iron hand of oppression,
and promoted us, to an eminent rank, among the nations of the earth. This is
the first link in a grand chain of events, which issued in the establishment of
a constitution, which combines the wisdom of ages, which secures to us the
rights, the privileges, and the blessings, of a free people, and, under which,
this federal republic is rapidly ascending the heights of political importance
and national glory.

Can any thing be wanting to awaken our sensibility to the blessings we enjoy,
as the fruits of our freedom and Independence? Cast an eye over the world --
look at Asia, -- at Africa, -- at a great part of Europe, and America. What a
prospect rises to our view! A scene of oppression -- a waste of humanity -- a
ravage of nature -- a world of slaves! -- Ye ministers of benevolence, draw the
veil. -- But turn, my fellow citizens, to a brighter scene -- turn home! --
Survey these favorite states -- this pleasant land of liberty -- this fairest
district of creation. See here a race of men -- a community of freemen -- a
band of brothers, united upon the principles of equality, by the bonds of
nature, of society, and of benevolence. Here is happiness -- here is dignity --
here is sublimity of character! -- Here benignant Nature smiles on her work,
and rejoices in the advancement of her offspring -- Here the day is active, and
the night secure; while, borne over the turrets of this western world, (...)
the shadowy fleecings of the sky, Peace beams a diffusive radiance on the
scene, and sheds her kindly influence into every soul. Here the forest becomes
a luxuriant field, the desert assumes the blooming aspect of Eden, and the
crude materials of nature are wrought into articles of use, convenience, and
elegance; while Commerce, from every distant shore, rolls to our ports her
golden tides, which flow in ample streams throughout the land. See here the
bright fields of Science, trodden by the frequent foot of Genius, and the
flowery heights of Parnassus thronged by the votaries of the Muses: while even
the peasant lights his flambeau at the hallowed shrine of philosophy, and the
meanest religionist burns incense, upon his own altar, to the God of nature.

The transactions of this day are not, however, confined, in their happy
effects, to our nation, nor to our age. United Columbia is but a miniature of
what the world shall shortly be. Already have the beams of philosophy
irradiated the political horizon of the eastern world; there the public mind
begins to emerge from the gloom, in which it has long been inveloped, and to
expatiate in regions more bright and more congenial to its nature. A spark,
wafted from this land of freedom, has enkindled the flame beyond the Atlantic.
Liberty has again erected her standard, on the shores of Europe, and, from the
brow of the rampart, demands a reestablishment in that quarter of the globe.
Her potent voice, like that, which ran through the regions of primeval chaos,
has, from the confused elements of human nature, called forth myriads of
embattled freemen to assert her cause. These, with the impetuosity of a
torrent, rush upon the empire of despotism and sweep thrones, dignities and
distinctions into one general ruin. In vain does the world rise in arms against
them. Where is the monarchy of France, where the despotic race of the Capets?
-- Where is the aristocracy of Holland? Where the tyranny of the house of
Orange? Where are the impregnable fortresses of Flanders? Where the ancient
boundaries of Spain and of the German empire? Nay, where is the threatening
front and the boasted arm of the tyrannical coalition? And still the tocsin
sounds -- still the flame rages -- still liberty is mounted in the car of
victory. And thus shall it be, till tyranny has measured back the course, by
which it advanced over the globe, and till the tree of liberty be planted in
the place of every throne in the universe. The subversion of the Gallic
monarchy, the abolition of Belgic aristocracy, and the general convulsion of
Europe, are but a prelude to the final catastrophe of the tyrannical system.
Scene opens after scene, in great and rapid succession. The grand consummation
is at hand -- the conflagration of the political world; that conflagration,
which this day enkindled, and from its ashes is arising a new and more glorious
fabric -- a fabric founded on the eternal principles of virtue and of reason.

Hail the auspicious day! Well may it be celebrated as the festival of man, as
the jubilee of nations. So long as virtue shall warm the patriot, so long as
benevolence shall enliven the universe, so long may the FOURTH OF JULY be
solemnized, as a sacred anniversay, throughout the world. This day, let
creation assume her brightest glories: -- May those morningstars, which sang
the birth of time, with sweetest music, usher in the dawn: may the slowly
advancing Sun, as he traverses the concave of heaven, diffuse his mildest
influence, and light all nature into smiles, while every land breaks forth in
songs of joy!

It is for us, Americans! it is for us, as the eldest brothers of freemen, to
lead, in the solemnities of this day. Proclaim it, then, sacred to virtue, to
patriotism, and to the rights of nature! Display the ensigns of freedom, rear
the triumphal arch, blaze upon the regions of despotism, in all the majesty of
a free people! Throw wide the portals of Liberty, throng her sacred temple, --
renew the solemn vows at her altar, and swear eternal fidelity to the laws of
nature, and the rights of man! -- Rehearse the history of American
Independence, -- Hail the rising Republics of Europe, and announce to the
world, the prevalence of reason, the triumphs of freedom, and the downfall of
tyranny! Brilliancy and exultation become the day! But, while each soul dilates
with joy -- while every bosom glows with the patriotic flame, and every tongue
pronounces a health and fraternity to the world, let grateful anthems, to the
GOD of reason, fill earth with harmony, till seraphs catch the rapturous song!
Nor let us, on this joyous occasion, forget, that our Independence was sealed
by the blood of thousands of our fathers and our brethren. Sacred be the memory
of WARREN, of MONTGOMERY, and of all, who bled in their country's cause -- this
day will we celebrate their virtues and recount their achievements -- this day
will we rear monuments to eternize their fame and inshrine their ashes in our
inmost bosoms. And the still surviving patriots, who, either in the cabinet or
in the field, asserted and maintained the rights of man and the Independence of
these States, shall this day be honored, as the saviors and defenders of their
country, and as the ornaments of human nature. Especially, let the man, who in
war was our shield, and in peace becomes our guardian and glory, this day,
renewedly receive the united acknowledgements of his grateful country. It was
virtue like his, my fellow citizens, which ensured success, in the arduous
struggle for Liberty and Independence; and such virtue alone can perpetuate the
blessings of our Federal Union, and support that constitution, which is the
Palladium of our political existence. Let us, then, rouse into activity all
that is great, all that is noble, all that is patriotic in man -- Let virtue be
the stability of our Republic, and patriotism the bond of our political union.
Let us prize, as invaluable, the privileges of a free people, and hold, as
inviolable, the principles of a free government. While we maintain that
vigilance and that spirit of free investigation, which have ever been the
guardians of American Liberty, let us, at the same time, cultivate a reverence
for the laws and the constituted authorities; and detested be the wretch, who
would heap unreasonable odium upon the public functionaries, invidiously
destroy the influence of merit, or wantonly hurl the firebrand of discord into
the bosom of his country. While we enter, warmly, into the cause of humanity,
and rejoice in the success of our brethren in arms, for the rights of nature,
let us be just and benevolent to all nations, and remember, that even the
savages of the wilderness are members, with us, of the great family of man.
And, while, with open arms, our Federal Republic invites, to her bosom, the
distressed of all nations, and promises an asylum from the sword, persecution,
and oppression, shall an unransomed American groan under the bloody scourge of
a barbarous Algerine; or an unfortunate African drag the chains of slavery, in
the very sanctuary of freedom! Nature remonstrates, and Nature will vindicate
her rights.

Americans! we are elevated upon the high places of liberty -- a monument to
all nations, of the natural rights of man, and the attainable sublimity of the
human character; and, forbid it, Heaven! it should ever be said of these
Confederated States, they once were independent, they once were virtuous, they
once were free. For ever may we support the majesty of a free people; forever
may despots tremble at the American name! May we escape the disasters, which
have befallen the Republics of ancient and modern times, and transmit,
inviolate, to remotest posterity, our birthright, among regenerated nations.
And while, aloof from the din of battle, and the ravage of war, we survey the
awful conflict between republicans and despots; while we see kings hurled from
their thrones, kingdoms torn up by the roots, and empires swept from the stage;
may we rejoice in the rapid progress of reason, and the consequent emancipation
of man, and gratefully anticipate the day, when war and tyranny, with all their
horrors, shall cease from the earth, and when uninterrupted peace, benevolence,
and happiness, shall prevail, under the glorious reign of IMMANUEL, throughout
the Universal Republic of the CONFEDERATED WORLD!

FINIS.

